News from the East-Indies
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A52218




Wing N1007



ESTC R36614





ocm 15743983




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
News from the East-Indies
1 sheet (2 p.)   


[London :


s.n.,


1691]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Aurangzeb, --  Emperor of Hindustan, 1618-1707.
East India Company.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-10
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






N1007


R36614


15743983


104593














News from the East-Indies.


THE Committee of the 
East-India
 Company and their Abettors having made so great a noise on the 
Exchange
 last Week, of the advantageous Peace they had obtain'd of the 
Great Mogul,
 by which the 
Notional Stock
 was raised from 112. to 150. 
per Cent.
 And it being declared at the 
East-India
 House, That the Articles by the new 
Phirmaund
 (or 
Patent
) should be Printed for General Satisfaction; It was with great Earnest∣ness expected; in hopes it would appear for the Honour and Advantage of the 
English
 Nation. But in lieu thereof, there only appears in the 
Mondays
 Gazette a simple Intimation, 
That a Peace is made, and that we enjoy the same, 
yea
 and greater Privileges than formerly.


Now, That the Nation may be fully informed of the true State of the Mat∣ter, and that Widows and other honest and well-meaning Persons, Strangers to the Management of the Company's Affairs may not be misled, and for the general Good and Service of all; An Exact Copy of the 
Phirmaund
 for the Bay of 
Bengale,
 which is one of the principal Ports in the 
Mogul
's Dominions, is here presented; as the Translation is sent to the Company from 
Surrat
 in the following Words.


[
'Tis directed to
 Ibrahim Chaune, 
who is one of the
 Mogul
's great
 Governours, 
Dated the
 27th. 
of
 April, 
in the
 33d. 
Year of his Reign.
]




IBRAHIM CHAUNE,


KNow this, That the Good Fortune of the
 English 
hath directed them the Right way to end their Faults, they are sorry and ashamed for what they have done, therefore have sent their Vakeels
 [Factors] 
to our noble Court, with a Petition for a gracious
 Phirmaund 
to pardon their Faults; which the King, out of his great Favour and Mercy, always ready to pardon, doth freely forgive them; therefore his clear and un∣spotted Order is such, which you are to observe as you do his that you pray to, That so soon as this gracious
 Phirmaund 
reaches your hands, you suffer no body in your Jurisdi∣ction to molest, hurt, or hinder the
 English Nation 
in their Business, but suffer them to carry it on in the same manner as formerly. This understand, and act accordingly.




THis is the Instrument that stands upon Record in the Court of that Great Prince, to the Eternal Infamy of the 
English
 Nation; as the Effect of our most unjust and unaccountable War, whereby not only the Honour of the 
English
 (before in the highest Esteem,) but the Interest of the Company in particular, hath suffered an Immense, and irreparable Damage; tho some few Managers) by unwarrantable and indirect Means, have gain'd prodigious Estates. For, as to the Nation and Company, after the loss of six years Trade, and the destruction of many considerable Ships, and the death of many hun∣dreds of our best Seamen: The Condition on which we are now re-admitted to Trade, is, That full Restitution be made to the 
Mogul
's Subjects for all the Ships and Goods the Company have taken, according to the Accounts which shall be given in by the 
Crannies
 [or 
Pursers
] of the Ships taken by the 
English;
 And tho we cannot yet tell the certain Sum which must be made good, We may shrewdly ghess at it from the Evidence given in the Cause now depend∣ing

between Their Majesties and the Company, on account of those Prizes, wherein a great number of Witnesses have deposed to the value of above One Million Sterling; Besides which, they are likewise indebted in 
India,
 at no small Interest, above Three hundred thousand Pounds more, and no less a Sum here at Home, on Bond, and for Freight and Demurrage: Whilst all their Stock in 
England
 will not extend to discharge their late made Dividend; nor all their Effects abroad, to load home one Third of the Shipping, now in 
India,
 besides the great Sums they owe to those Ships for their Service and Demurrage; which is not only manifest by the Liberty and Encouragement they give to private Men to return their particular Estates on those Bottoms, but especially by the general Letter which accompanied the 
Phirmaund,
 written to the Company by their Factors at 
Surrat,
 whereby they earnestly press for a large and speedy Supply to support and carry on the Trade.


In consideration of these exorbitant Impositions on the Nation, and from a true Affection to their Country, there are some Gentlemen and Merchants who have long applied their Thoughts to the restoring this so considerable a Trade, and in order thereto are prepared to lay before our Honourable Representatives in Parliament at their next Session, a clear and ample Account by what ways and means the Credit and Interest of the 
English
 Nation in 
India,
 hath been reduc'd to so miserable a Condition, and in the interim they hope it may not be an unac∣ceptable Service to the Publick, That they offer this brief Advertisement for Caution against the presumptuous Impositions of daring and arbitrary Men, who have of late Years encreased their Estates by the Ruin of their Fellow-Sub∣jects, and have been the Instruments of this great Dishonour and Detriment to their Country.


London,
 
May
 12 1691.









