A narrative of the success of the voyage of the right honourable Heaneage Finch, Earl of Winchilsea, Viscount Maidstone, Baron Fitz-Herbert of Eastwell, Lord of the royal mannor of Wye, Lord Lieutenant of the county of Kent and city of Canterbury, His Majesties ambassadour extraordinary to the high & mighty Prince Sultan Mamet Han, emperour of Turkey, from Smyrna to Constantinople; his arrival there, the manner of his entertainment and audience with the Grand Fizier and Grand Seignior.
Approx. 24 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 7 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A52655




Wing N227



ESTC R214299





99826496




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A narrative of the success of the voyage of the right honourable Heaneage Finch, Earl of Winchilsea, Viscount Maidstone, Baron Fitz-Herbert of Eastwell, Lord of the royal mannor of Wye, Lord Lieutenant of the county of Kent and city of Canterbury, His Majesties ambassadour extraordinary to the high & mighty Prince Sultan Mamet Han, emperour of Turkey, from Smyrna to Constantinople; his arrival there, the manner of his entertainment and audience with the Grand Fizier and Grand Seignior.
[2], 11, [1] p.   


London :


printed by I.R.,


in the year, 1661.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Winchilsea, Heneage Finch, --  Earl of, d. 1689 --  Early works to 1800.
Voyages and travels --  Early works to 1800.
2009-12
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-01
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-11
Leah Yurasek
Sampled and proofread
2010-11
Leah Yurasek
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






N227


99826496


30899












A NARRATIVE OF The success of the voyage of the Right Honourable HENEAGE FINCH, Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 Vicount 
Maidstone,
 Baron 
Fitz-Her∣bert
 of 
Eastwell,
 Lord of the Royal mannor of 
Wye,
 Lord Lieutenant of the County of 
Kent
 and City of 
Canterbury,
 His Majestjes Ambassadour extraor∣dinary to the High & Mighty Prince 
Sultan Ma∣met Han,
 Emperour of Turkey, from 
Smyrna
 to 
Constantinople;
 His Arrival there, the manner of his Entertainment and Audience with the 
Grand Vi∣zier
 and 
Grand Seignior.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
I. R.
 in the year, 1661.














A Narrative of the Success of the voyage of his Excellency the Lord 
Heneage Finch,
 from 
Smyrna
 to 
Constantinople;
 his arrival there, the manner of his entrance into 
Pera,
 and of his audience with the 
Grand Vizier
 and 
Grand Seignior.


O
N the sixt day of 
January,
 early in the morn∣ing, returning aboard with our own Com∣pany, and six Merchants appointed by the Factory of 
Smyrna
 to attend us; we set sail immediately with the wind at East, having the 
Smyrna
 Factour and the Catch in our Company, which arrived with us on New years day. As soon as we had sailed without the command of the Castle, it became totally calm, without the least breez or breath of air, which enforced us to cast our Anchour, and expect untill a fa∣vourable or a brisker gale did present: The next day a flat∣tering air from the shore at South-east, perswaded us to weigh our anchours, and set our sails; but this continued no longer than it had brought us out of the Lands protection, and had

exposed us to our own arts and the strength of our vessel, to encounter with those many shocks and violences of a storm which suddenly ensued: for in a moment the wind altered, coming about to the North-east, so that with a strong gale we weathered the Cape 
Caliberno,
 and standing for the Island of 
Mitylene,
 we intended under the shelter of that Land to spend our tedious time of the following night. Our Ship lying a drift under her main course and fore-sail by the mast, the storm by degrees more violently increased, that by the morning it was become compleat in all points of its growth and terrour; the Sea was all in a breach, the skie was black and thick, the Sun so lowring and red, signified the continu∣ance of it: the spray of the Sea so forcibly carried by the wind over the Ship, that Masts, Yards, and Decks, were cove∣red with a white salt. This extremity of weather made us think of some port or harbour to secure our Ship. The Island of 
Ipsera
 lying South-east eight leagues from 
Mitylene,
 was supposed by our Master a safe place to spend the fury of the storm, as having formerly afforded him a kinder entertainment and defence upon the like occasion of distresse and fury: Thus steering for this Port, our main sails in the brails and our fore∣sail set, it was like paper blown away; and bringing another to the yard, it had the misfortune to be foul of the flook of the anchour, and so became as unserviceable as the other: Being thus deprived of the benefit of our commanding sails, we set up our sprit-sail and main course, steering in between the I∣sland 
Ipsera
 the greater and the lesse, where keeping too near aloof towards the shore, we unfortunately struck upon a rock, which astonished us all with a strange amazement; the poor Ship struck five times, endeavouring to clear her self from a totall wrack and ruine, which all of us began to despair of; and with cast up eyes, and stretched out arms, thought now of no other but of our last and final port: And yet in the midst of this horrid consternation and distresse, it pleased God, who was our best Pilot, to bring us clear from our rock, with some, though (as we hope) with little dammage to our Ship.

An escape so miraculous and wonderfull, considering the vio∣lence of the storm, the carere and weight of our Ship, as ought to make the 8. day of 
January
 for ever to be recorded by us to admiration, and anniversary thankfulnesse for God's provi∣dence and protection: The Ship having thus depth of water again, and come into a place of some convenient anchourage, our first anchour not holding us, we let fall our sheet anchour, the 
Smyrna
 Factour following us. The Catch being again se∣parated by the night's tempest, came not to anchour, and fearing that being not furnished with so good ground-tackle as we, she was not able to endure and ride out so excessive a gale; the 8. & 9 day & night the wind continued still violent; the 10 it be∣gan to abate, so that we could send ashore, and enjoy some kind of satisfaction, though detained with a contrary wind: The greatest part of the 12. day proved with little wind, and the 13. a calm, the 14. day between one and two of the clock in the morning, the wind sprung out of the West South-west with an easie gale, with which we weighed our anchour and put to the Sea, the wind still continuing favourable and gentle; and the 15. early we came to the Island of 
Tenedos,
 and soon after entring the 
Hellespont,
 passing the new Castles, from that on the Asian side came off a boat sent by the Captain of the Castle, signifying the day before that he had received advice from the 
Vizier
 that we weresuddenly to arrive, and that both for our selves and Ships that accompanied us, free passage should be given without any hinderance or molestation: pas∣sing further up the River about five leagues, being about three of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, we came up to the Castles of 
Sestos
 and 
Abydos:
 from the latter, being on the Natolian shore, came off a boat with a 
Janizarie
 and 
Drugerman,
 to welcome us with Letters from Sir 
Thomas Bendish,
 and to return with news of our safe arrival: The night following, and likewise the 16. day continued there a gentle and favourable gale; so that passing the Island of 
Mar∣mora
 (about noon of the same day) scituate at the entrance of the Propontick Sea, formerly called 
Proconnesus,
 we pleasantly

passed forward that night, and on the 27. day, being that day three moneths since we embarqued in the Downs, we came to an anchor for some few hours near the seven Towers, until such time as Sir 
Thomas Bendish
 could receive notice of our arrival. And thus giving time for that intelligence, the anchour was again weighed, and we stood in for the Port with a fresh gale. Notice being given, that the 
Grond Seignior
 was seated in a Summer-house on the corner wall of the 
Seraglio:
 our Flaggs and Ensigns were displayed, our Cuns and Wastcloths out; and being opposite to the point of the 
Seraglio,
 a 
Bostangee,
 or one belonging to the Gardens of the 
Seraglio,
 came aboard to acquaint us, that the 
Grand Seignior
's pleasure was that we should rejoyce with Guns, (for that was his expression) after which were fired 61 Guns, and so came to an anchor on 
Topa∣na
 side, where we received Sir 
Thomas Bendish
 aboard, congra∣tulating our safe arrival. Against next day things were pro∣vided for our entrance, being the 18. day; and indeed with that handsome State and Equipage, that I believe none of his Predecessours, nor yet the Emperours Ambassadours, can boast of a more honourable, nor a more noble reception. The 
Grand Seignior
 sent several of his officers to attend and re∣ceive him at his first landing; and the multitude of people that flocked from all parts, made the businesse of more wonder and expectation. Assoon as we descended from the Ship into the boat designed to carry us ashore, the Ship fired 51. Guns, with that deliberation, and so leisurely, as continued until his landing; where being met by his own Servants, the Merchants of the place, and those brought with us from 
Smyrna;
 with the Officers of the 
Grand Seignior,
 my Lord's Horse being co∣vered with a Crimson velvet foot-cloth richly laced, and being mounted thereupon, and his Ladie in the Coach, we marched in this order.




1. 
The
 Vaivod 
of
 Gallata 
and his men.


2. 
The Captain of the
 Janizaries 
with his
 Janizaries.


3. 
The
 Chouse Bashaw 
with his
 Chouses.




4. 
The English Trumpeters.


5. 
The English horsemen, and Merchants.


6. 
My Lord's own Janizaries.


7. 
The Druggermen.


8. 
My Lord himself with Pages and Footmen by his side.


9. 
My Lord's Gentlemen.


10. 
His Ladies Coach, and three other Coaches following with her women, made almost after the manner of Holland waggons.


11. 
The Officers and Reformadoes of the ship.




As we marched all the streets were crowded with people, and the windows with spectatours, as being unusual in this Coun∣crey to see a Christian Ambassadour attended with so many Turkish Officers. The presse was also the more augmented, and the passage obstructed, by casting 550. five foll. pieces, which My Lord commanded to be disposed of amongst the people. And thus being arrived at his house at 
Pera,
 he was immediate∣ly saluted by the Secretary of the Emperours Resident, in behalf of his Master; and soon after by the Secretary of the 
Excellen∣tissimo Ballarino,
 and 
Capello,
 who negotiate the affairs of the Venetian Republique, and the next day by a messenger of the French Ambassadours, and Dutch Agent. On that day the 
Grand Seignior
 sent him a present of ten sheep, and fifty hens, a hundred loaves of bread, twenty sugar loaves, twenty wax candles, a favour extraordinary, not usually conferred on any Ambassadour. On the 20. day of this moneth he had audience of the 
Grand Vizier,
 and being attended thither with the same solemnity as at his first entrance; onely that untill he came unto 
Constantinople
 side. He had not the attendance of 
Chaus Bassa
 who met him on the other side of the water, and thence conducted him to his 
Viziers
 pallace: At his first en∣trance he was led in between two of his Gentlemen, very few of his retinue being suffered to follow him into the presence of the 
Vizier,
 who sate in a little room upon Cushions and his feet covered, a fire in the room, and upon a Sapha were se∣veral

Bashaws
 and 
Chauses
 standing by him: Two Crimson Velvet stools were fetched out; one for my Lord, and the other for Sir 
Thomas Bendish,
 on which being sate, he presented the Kings Letter to the 
Vizier
 by the hand of the Chancellor, who was there present by him; the Letters were wrote on parch∣ment, and put in a bagg made of cloth of Gold. As soon as they were delivered, my Lord 
Bendish
 began to inform the 
Vi∣zier,
 that this was that honourable person he had formerly ac∣quainted him was coming Ambassadour; rhat he was of that Nobility and Alliance to the King, that had not his Majestie highly and in an extraordinary manner intended to honour the 
Grand Seignior,
 he would not have exposed his kinsman to so long & dangerous a voyage. Then my Lord began to tell him the Restauration of the King, of his greatness and power, of his Clemency in pardoning all but such as were engaged in the bloud of his Father; That in his passage to this place, he had by the command of the King touched at 
Algier,
 endeavouring to renew the former articles of peace, and to release an English Lord which was there a captive, enslaved contrary to the a∣greement of peace, but was foiled in the Treaty, and could re∣duce them to nothing of reason or justice, and therefore de∣sired to know of the 
Vizier
 what should be done in this case. To which he replied, that he would have a care of it, and see to do him justice: My Lord further assured him of the friendship that the King his Master desired to preserve with the 
Grand Seignior;
 and therefore desiring to honour him, hath sent him his first Ambassador to salute him, before he had appointed or designed any for the Christian Princes: To which the 
Vizier
 proudly replied, that that was but reason, since the 
Grand Seignior
 was an Emperour and they but Kings, and he the greatest & most Soveraign Potentate of the world. He fur∣ther told him, that being now come upon a business of Cere∣mony and Complement, he could not insist upon much business whereby to over burthen him with a tedious discourse, but should referre that to be intimated to him by his Drugerman, at some other convenient time of Treaty and discourse. This

being passed, two bowls of 
Sherbet
 were brought forth, which we drunk one to another, but not the Turks. This being done, the English present was brought forth and laid before the 
Vi∣zier,
 consisting of twenty Vests, four of them being of fine English cloth of several colours, four Velvet, of several flow∣red Stuffs of gold and silver four, of watered Tabbies four, of several Sattins worked gaudy and gay after the Turkish fashi∣on. In recompence we received thanks, and my Lord himself with Sir 
Thomas Bendish,
 and six of those that attended were vested; which vests had nothing of value more, then that they came from the 
Vizier,
 as usual Liveries and Badges of their favours. After this my Lord departed, wearing this paint∣ed vest untill he came without the gates of the Pallace, and then delivered it to the hands of his Page, and so likewise did those that followed him to their Servants; and thus in the same manner returned back again to his house at 
Pera,
 with an ap∣pearance of fair correspondencie of a maintainance of the former Capitulations, with an amendment of the afore passed abuses.


On the 26. 
Feb.
 my Lord had audience of the 
Gr. Seignior,
 which was purposely deferred until that day of payment of the Janizaries, that so the Ambassadour might see more than an usual solemnity, and make a good report in his own Countrey of the glory and magnificence of the 
Ottoman
 Emperours. We being attended as formerly when he had audience of the 
Vizier,
 he departed from his house upon the first break of day, and ha∣ving passed the water, was on 
Constantinople
 side met by the Chouse Bassaw and his Chouses, which conducted us to the 
Seraglio,
 where being entred, and riding through the first spa∣cious Court we alighted from our horses, and walked through another Court untill we came to the 
Divan,
 where at the upper end was placed the 
Grand Vizier,
 on his right hand were five other 
Viziers,
 of which the Captain Bashaw was one, on his left hand were the two Judges or Chief Justices, one of which wore a great Turbant of green, being of the family and kin∣dred of the Prophet; near to whom was placed the Toftardar,

or Lord Treasurer, with three other Bashaws, being under Treasurers. The floor of the Divan was spread with Carpets, and on them a rich covering of bags of money to pay the Soul∣diery, there being in all an hundred and fifty heaps, every one of which consisted of ten purses, and every purse five hun∣dred dollers, so that the summe by computation amounted to an hundred and fifty thousand pounds. Being come to the door of the 
Divan,
 none were admitted in besides my Lord, Sir 
Thomas Bendish,
 and about six or seven more; being entred, Sir 
Thomas Bendish
 and my Lord approched towards the 
Vi∣zier,
 others remaining at the lower end of the room; where for them were set two small red Velvet Stools, on which being set, there passed some discourse of kindnesse and civility, which being done, they retired to another part of the room: In the mean while the payment of the Souldiers went forward; eve∣ry Colonel and Captain receiving the pay of his Regiment and company, which having done, every one of them came up to the 
Vizier
 and kissed the hemme of his vest on his knees, and so retired with great humility, making haste away from him, passing with one side towards him, so as not to turn his back: The payment being over, three small Tables were brought in (the 
Grand vizier
 retiring by reason of his indi∣sposition of body) on which were set a large capacious Voider for a Table; that on which they dined being of silver oar, other of mixed metal: Being set at these Tables, their meat was served in one dish after another, where they had no knives laid for them to cut: for supposing the sharpness of their stomacks would make amends for the want of knives, they fell too after the Turkish fashion and tore it in pieces; but scarce was any dish upon the table, sometimes almost before they had tasted it. but immediately was snatched off, and another set in his place; having thus superficially proved every dish, of which there was about two Courses, the Table was taken away, and the Chouse Bashaw advised them to accompany him, where they should re∣ceive the Honour of the 
Grand Seigniors
 Vests, according to the usual custome upon like occasions. Eighteen Vests were be∣stowed,

and one more above the number, as a mark of more honour and favour: Whilest this was doing, the present made to the 
Grand Seignior
 by the Turkey Company was displayed in open Court, consisting of fifty Vests, ten being of Velvet, ten of Sattin, ten of Cloth of Gold, ten of Tabbies, ten of fine English cloth; every one of which Vests was held by a se∣veral person, so that fifty men were rancked in order for the better appearance, and four English Mastiffs were also given as an addition to the Present. In this Court were also drawn up the whole body of the Janizaries that were then paid, con∣sisting of five thousand men, amongst whom there was that silence, that not one whisper or noise, or the least motion was understood: And as the Janizaries Aga and other Com∣manders passed, the bowing and salutations that they made were also regular at the same time, as may well testifie the ex∣actnesse of the Discipline and admirable obedience, which hath been the sole cause of their Conquest and enlargement of their Empire. Being thus vested, and the 
Grand Vizier
 gone into the presence of the 
Grand Seignior,
 to whom we bowed as he passed, two Cappagee Bashaws with Silver staves con∣ducted him to the Audience, none being permitted to follow him, but Sir 
Thomas Bendish,
 his Brother the Drugerman, the Captain of the Ship, the Treasurer, and his Secretary, who car∣ried the Cloth of Cold bagg, in which were the Kings Letters. The Gate we first entred was set vvide open, vvithin it vvas paved vvith vvhite Marble, vvhere attended some fourty Eu∣nuchs, all clothed vvith divers Colours of silk and Sattin Vests, coming near the Presence door, vve made a stand in the Porch, vvhere runnes a pleasant Fountain of vvater, and trode very softly, so as not to disturb vvith the least motion that great Majesty, vvhere vvas so profound a silence, that no∣thing vvas heard more than the murmuring of the Fountain: Just at the Entrance hung a Ball of gold studded vvith Dia∣monds and precious stones, and about it great Chains of rich Peail. The Chamber vvhere the 
Grand Seignior
 sate, vvas covered vvith a Carpet of Crimson Velvet, and embroidered

vvith Gold vvire; and so likevvise vvas an open Gallery be∣fore the Entrance, through vvhich vve first passed, and many of them beset vvith small seed-pearl. The 
Grand Seigntor
 himself sate in a Throne raised a small heighth from the ground, supported vvith four pillars plated vvith Gold, from the top hung great Balls of massie and vveighty Gold: The Cushions he sate upon, and those also that lay by, and the Carpets spread upon the Throne were all beset vvith Jevvels; on his Right hand stood the 
Grand Vizier,
 the tvvo Cappagee Bashavvs took him by each hand and brought him into the Presence, about the middle of the room, laying their hands upon his head, made him bovv untill he had almost touched the Carpets vvith his fore-head, and then raising him again, they retired vvith him backvvard unto the furthest part of the room; in like manner they did unto the rest of his company. The Kings Letters being presented, they vvere appointed to be carried to the Lord Chancellour, and the Drugerman by his order in the Turkish Language, read in his Paper to this ef∣fect. First declaring hovv the King of 
England
 vvas resto∣red again vvithout War or any Conditions, and the great Clemency of the King in pardoning all, but such as had a hand in the murther of his Father. Secondly, to recommend to his Majesty the continuance of his protection to our Merchants. Thirdly, to beg all English slaves, as a Testimony of his Maje∣sties gracious acceptance of him. The Ceremonies being over, and the paper read, vve immediately retired avvay; and so pas∣sing along by the Janizaries unto our horses, and being mount∣ed, vve stood out of the vvay to see those Souldiers march by us, vvhich indeed seemed a very flourishing Militia of young men, strong and vvell cloathed; about tvvo or three thousand first marched vvith baggs of money upon their shoulders, after∣vvards follovved about as many more running vvith much haste after the money, next follovved their Commanders vvell mounted, vvith brave feathers of a yard high upon-their heads; next follovved the Chouses and their Commanders, vvith seve∣ral Bashavvs of great quality. Last of all the 
Grand Vizier,


vvho being gone, my Lord and his attendance proceeded for∣vvards, and so returned to his house. It is observable, that there vvere admitted to eat in the Divan many of his Retinue, vvhich never before vvas admitted, onely for the tvvo Ambas∣sadours; and also that none had access to the presence of the 
Grand Seignior,
 but onely the tvvo Ambassadours and the Drugerman: 'Tis observable, that the dishes in vvhich the meat vvas served up vvere of a greenish colour, made of earth very ordinary to the eye, yet such as Cost the 
Grand Seignior
 an hundred and fifty dollers apiece, brought from 
China;
 vvhose virtue is such, that as soon as any poyson comes into them they break immediately, and therefore the most necessary for the security of the Emperour.


FINIS.









