News from New-England being a true and last account of the present bloody wars carried on betwixt the infidels, natives, and the English Christians and converted Indians of New-England, declaring the many dreadful battles fought betwixt them, as also the many towns and villages burnt by the merciless heathens and also the true number of all the Christians slain since the beginning of that war, as it was sent over by a factor of New-England to a merchant in London.
Approx. 16 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A53149




Wing N983



ESTC R29243





ocm 11054052




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
News from New-England being a true and last account of the present bloody wars carried on betwixt the infidels, natives, and the English Christians and converted Indians of New-England, declaring the many dreadful battles fought betwixt them, as also the many towns and villages burnt by the merciless heathens and also the true number of all the Christians slain since the beginning of that war, as it was sent over by a factor of New-England to a merchant in London.
[1], 6 p.   


London :


Printed for J. Coniers,


1676.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
King Philip's War, 1675-1676.
Massachusetts --  History --  Colonial period, ca. 1600-1775.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-12
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-01
Anne Simpson
Sampled and proofread
2014-01
Anne Simpson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






N983


R29243


11054052


46168












NEWS FROM New-England, BEING A True and last Account of the present Bloody Wars carried on betwixt the Infidels, Natives, and the English Christians, and Converted Indians of 
New-England,
 declaring the many Dreadful Battles Fought betwixt them: As also the many Towns and Villages burnt by the merciless Hea∣thens. And also the true Number of all the Chri∣stians slain since the beginning of that War, as it was sent over by a Factor of 
New-England
 to a Merchant in 
London.




Licensed by 
Roger L' Estrange.




LONDON,
 Printed for 
J. Coniers
 at the Sign of the 
Black Raven
 in 
Duck-Lane,
 1676.














A True and Last Accompt of the Present Bloody Wars carried on betwixt the Infidel Natives and the English Christians and converted 
Indians
 of New 
England,
 &c.


THOSE Coals of Discention which had a long time lain hid under the ashes of a secret envy; contracted by the Heathen 
ndians
 of New-
England,
 against the En∣glish; and Christian Natives of that Country brake out in 
June
 1675. both Armies being at a distance without doing any thing remarkable till the 13 of 
December
 following; at which time the 
Siath
se
s
 and 
lymouth
 Company marching from 
S
co
k,
 sent out a cons derable number of Scouts, who kill'd and took 55. of the Enemy, returning with no other loss but two of our Men dis∣abled, about three days after came a perfidious 
Ind
a
 to our Army pretending he was sent by the 
Sachems
 to treat of Peace, who was indeed no other but a Spy and was no sooner conducted out of our Camp but we had news brought us that 22 of our Strag∣ling Souldiers were Slain and divers barn
 and out houses, with 
Mr. 
er. 
ulls
 dwelling house burnt by him and his Trecherous confederates which wai
ed for him. The next day as the 
on e
ick
 Army under the Condu
t of Major 
 was Marching to Joyn with the 
Ma
uset
,
 and 
lymouth
 Company; they were assaulted by the 
n
ians,
 but without any los, they taking eleaven of the Assailants Prisoners.


The 8
. of 
De
ember,
 our whole Army being united under the Conduct of Major, 
 
W. s
,
 w
nt to seek out the Ene∣my whom we found (there then hapening a great fall of Snow) secur∣ing themselves in a dismal Swam
, so hard of access that there was but one wa
 for enterance which was well lin'd with Heathen 
In 
ans,
 who presently went out to assault us▪ but we falling in Pel-mell with them; with much difficulty gained the Swamp where we found above 1500 Wig
wams and by night, had pos∣session

 of the fort; of which we were dispossest soon after by an unexpected recruit of fresh 
ndian
,
 out of an adjoyning Swamp, but our Noble Generals insatiable desire of victory prompted him to such brave actions, that we following his example to the enemies cost, made our selves absolute Masters of the fort again, Although we purchased our success at so dear a rate that we have small cause to r
joyce at the victory; yet when we consider the vast disadvantage they had of us in number, whom we collected to have 4000 fighting men, and we no
 much more than half so many, we have great reason to bless God we came of so well, our dead and wounded not a Mounting to above 220, and the enemies by their own Confession to no less then 600. the chief officers kild on our side were Capt. 
Dav nport,
 Capt. 
Johns
n,
 Capt. 
Marsh
l,
 Capt. 
Gardne
.
 Capt. 
Gallop.


Captains Wounded were 4 
vi
t, Sealey,
 Major 
Wats,
 and 
B
ad
o
d,
 Leiutenants wounded were 4 
v
z. Savage, T
n
, Ʋpham
 and 
Wa
.


In this bloody Battle we gave so bitter a Relish of our English valour and our converted 
Indians
 resolutions, that they dreaded our neighbourhood and thought themselves unsafe ti
l secur'd by six or seaven miles distance from our remaining Army, where they remain'd near a month not attempting any thing consider∣able till the first of 
Feb.
 at which time a certain Number of them made desperate through hungar came to 
Fal
k
e,
 a Little Town near Providence, and attempted the house of one Mr. 
C
rpen
e
,
 from whom they took 20 horses 50 head of Cattle and 180 sheep And set fire on a house at South-bury wherein were two Men, one Woman and seaven Children, on t e 41
. of 
Fe ruary
 the Christians received private intelligenc
 from the 
nd
a
 who had Sculked ever since the last Battle in certain woods scituate a
out 30 miles from 
Mal
u
,
 that they were drawn up into a body and encamped in a well fortified Swamp, where, notwithstand∣ing the 
Indi
n
 a saulted the Rear, wounded four of our men, and we killing so many of theirs that they thought fit to forsake their r fuge and leave both it and their Wigwams to our disposal, who lodging in their Rooms that night set fire to a 150 of their Wigwams next morning, and by this light pursued them so lose that we 
ill'd divers of them whom age or Wounds rendred inca∣pable

 of keeping up with their Companions, and resolving to con¦tinue the quest with all the celerity immaginable, they led us to another Swamp whose Rocky ascent propounded so great 
 difficulty to attain it, as would have Staggar'd the resolution of any but a resolved Mind; but we attempted it with the like resolu∣tion and success as we did the Last; the enemy by a speedy flight leaving us in full possession of all they left behind them.


We Persued them two dayes after this encounter, but then (which was on the 18th 
Febr.
) finding our men wearied with speedy marches, our provision scarce through continual expence and no recruit, our horses tir'd, and our selves hopeless of overtaking them who had great advantage of us in passing over Rocks and through Thickets, which our Foot not without much difficulty could, and our horse were altogether incapable to do; our Commanders after a Councel of warr, resolved to fend the 
Massathusers
 and 
Plymouth
 Company to 
Mal
ur
 and the 
Con∣nect
cks
 Army to their own homes which was accordingly done. And Major Genr. 
Wins
ow,
 only with two Troops to 
Boston
 leaving the foot at 
Malbury
 and 
S
ut
bury,
 who came home on Munday following and were all dismist to their several habitations except Capt. 
Wadworth
 who was left at 
Mu
bury
 in persuit of the E∣nemy, of whom he destroyed about 70 Old Men Wom
n and Children who wanted strength to follow the fugitive Army.


The Desperate heathens takeing advantage of the dismission of three Disbanded Companies, studied nothing but Massacres out∣rages, and trecherous hostillitie, which within two days after those said Companies were dispers't they found opportunity to commit in a Town called 
Nas
away
 which they set fire to and burnt to t e Ground taking no less than 55 Persons into their Merciless captivity, and because the reader shall understand the Damnable antipathy they have to Religion and Piety, I would have him take notice how they endeavour to Signallize their Cruelty and grati
ie their enraged Spleen chiefly on the promoters of it; for of these 55 Captives the Minister of the Towns relations made no less then 19 of them 
viz.
 Mrs. 
Ro
lo
son
 the Ministers wife and three of his Children, her sister and sea
en 
hildren, and her sister 
Dr
w
 and four Children. The Minister himself with his sisters husbands returning from 
Bo
ton
 a little after the engage∣ment

 to their infinite grief found their houses burnt to the ground, and their Wives and Children taken Captive, nor was this cruel∣tie commited, as the extent or 
N
polus Ʋltra
 of their vengance, but rather as an earnest of their future 
Bearba
ity
 For no longer than the next day after three men Going out, with the Cart were seiz'd on by these 
Indians,
 one of them killed, and the other two not to befound, the day following at 
Cox
ord,
 they burnt one house and murder'd three persons.


In short, their outrages are so many and different, that I must intreat the reader since they will not be brought into afluent Narration, to accept them plainly and dyurnully according to the time, place, and manner as they were committed, which is the only way to avoid omissions, and consequently to Satisfie the in∣quisitive, who I suppose would willingly hear of all the extremi∣ties have happened to the suffering Christians in this New 
En∣gland
 War.


On the 17 of 
Febr.
 therefore ye must know that the Town of 
Medfei'd
 was begirt with a regiment of resoleut 
Indian,
 who assail'd it so briskly, that maugred all the resistance made by Capt 
a∣cobbs
 who was then Ingarrison'd there with a hundred Souldiers for its security, the enraged Heathens never desisted their des∣perate attemps, Battering the Walls, and powering showers of Ar∣rows into the bosome of the Town, they had distroyed above 50 of her inhabitants and burnt 30 of her houses.


The 7th. of 
March
 following these bloody 
Indians
 march't to a considerable Twon called 
Croa
on
 where first they set fire to Major 
Willards
 house, and afterwards burnt 65 more there be∣ing Seaventy two houses at first so that there was left standing but six houses of the whole Town, the next day after two men coming from 
Ma
bury
 to 
Southlury
 were slain: 
nd the Sabboth day ensuing, these destroying 
Ind an
 came to 
Plym
u
h
 where fixing only on a house of one Mr. 
Clarks
 they burnt, and mur∣thered his wife and all his Children, himself Narrowly escapeing their crueltie by happily at that Juncture being at a meeting.


On the second of 
pr l
 1676. Major 
S
vage,
 Cap
ain 
Mosele
,
 Captain 
W
l
am T
r
or,
 and Captain 
V
b pal,
 with 300. men marching from 
Malb
row
 to 
Q
bury,
 where they had ordered the 
Conne
e
 Army to remain in readiness against their 
oming, whi
h being effected, accordingly they joyned forces, and began

 their march towards 
Northampton,
 but by the way were assaulted by the 
Indians,
 whom they repelled without any other damage, then only Mr. 
ue
ly
 wounded, killing about 20 of the Enemies in a hot persuit after them.


The tenth Ditto, about 700 Indians encompast 
Northamp
on
 on all sides where they fought very resolutly for the space of an hour, and then fled, leaving about 25 persons dead upon the place, the Christians loosing only 4. men and 1. woman, and had some barnes burnt, on the 12th instant they assaulted 
VVarwick
 with so unhap∣py a success that they burnt all the Town except four Garison houses which were left standing, six days after Captain 
Peirce
 Bro∣ther to Captain 
Pe rce
 of 
London,
 with 55 men and 20 Christian In∣dians went to seek out their Enemies, the Indians whom accord∣ing to their Intelligence they sound rambling in an obscure Wood, upon his approach they drew into order, and received his onset with much difficulty, being in the end forced to retreat, but it was so slowly that it scarcely deserved that Name, when a f
esh com∣pany of Indians came into their assistance, beset the Christians round, Killed Captain 
Pierce.
 and 48. of his men, besides 8. of the Christian Indians. The Fight continued about 5 hours, the Enemy bying the Victory very dearly, but at last obtained it so absolutly that they deprived us of all means of hearing of their loss.


At 
Mal
row
 on the 12th Ditto, were several houses burnt whilst the miserable inhabitants were at a meeting, and at 
Spring∣field
 the same Lords day, these devillish Enemies of Religion see∣ing a man, woman, and their Children, going but towards a meet∣ing-house, Slew them (as they said) because they thought they In∣tended to go thither.


The 28th, of the same instant 
April
 last, Captain 
Denison
 col∣lecting a Regiment of 500 and 200 
English
 Paquet Nimerass 
Indians
 marcht out of New 
London
 in search of that Grand somenter of this Rebellion. 
Anthony
 the 
Se ham
 whom at last near the Town call d 
Providence
 he recovered, and a
ter a hot dispute wherein he kill'd 45 of the Sechems men, Took him their Com∣mander Prisoner with several of his Captaines, whom they im∣mediately put to death but were at strong debate whether they should send him to 
Boston,
 but at length they carried him to

 New 
London
 and began to examine him why he did foment that war which would certainly be the distruction of him and all the Heathen 
Indians
 in the Country, to which and many other inte∣rogatories he made no other reply but that [he was born a Prince, and if Princes came to speak with him, he would answer them, But none of those present being Princes, he thought himself ob∣lig'd on honour to hold his Tongue] This Answer though it might Challenge their admiration, was not so prevalent as to obtain their pitty.


Notwithstanding the Surviveing Sechems were not long in re∣venging his death, for on the Sixth of 
May,
 they burnt all 
al∣bor
w
 except three Garrison houses, kil'd Capt. 
Jacobson
 and Leiuten
nt 
Prat,
 and two dayes after burnt 24 houses in 
outh∣
ury,
 kill d several of the inhabitants who vainly expected Capt. 
H
dworth
 and Capt. 
Br
okwel
 to their Relief; for these unfor∣tunate Gentlemen were intercepted by 700 
Moo
 with whom they fought for the space of 4 houres till not only they two but Capt. 
Sharp,
 and 51 Christians more lay dead upon the place.


At 
Woodcock
 10 miles from 
S
co
ch
 on the 16th 
M y
 was a little S
irmage betwixt the 
Moo
s
 and Christians, wherein there was of the later three slain and two wounded, and only two 
Indians
 Kild.


May
 28. 1676. Capt. 
Denison
 and Capt. 
Evr
 with 50 English and about 150 Paquet 
Indians
 Scouting among the Woods in 8 days space kill'd 25 
Indians
 and took 51 prisoners, one whereof was Grand-child to 
Dunham
 who was kill'd by Capt. 
Peirce
 in the enga
ement on the 26 
May.


The number of Christians slain since the be inning of the late Wars in New 
England,
 are 444. Taken Prisoner, 55


The number of 
Indi
ns
 Slain in this war is uncertain because they burn their Dead, keepin
 their Death as a Secret from the Christi∣ans knowledge, but the number mentioned herein is 910.


We have Received very late news that the Christians in New 
Engl nd
 have had very great Victory over the Infidel Natives.


FINIS.









