America : being the latest, and most accurate description of the new vvorld containing the original of the inhabitants, and the remarkable voyages thither, the conquest of the vast empires of Mexico and Peru and other large provinces and territories : with the several European plantations in those parts : also their cities, fortresses, towns, temples, mountains, and rivers : their habits, customs, manners, and religions, their plants, beasts, birds, and serpents : with an appendix containing, besides several other considerable additions, a brief survey of what hath been discover'd of the unknown south-land and the arctick region : collected from most authentick authors, augmented with later observations, and adorn'd with maps and sculptures / by John Ogilby ...
Ogilby, John, 1600-1676.
Approx. 2854 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 444 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A53222




Wing O165



ESTC R16958





ocm 12210275




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
America : being the latest, and most accurate description of the new vvorld containing the original of the inhabitants, and the remarkable voyages thither, the conquest of the vast empires of Mexico and Peru and other large provinces and territories : with the several European plantations in those parts : also their cities, fortresses, towns, temples, mountains, and rivers : their habits, customs, manners, and religions, their plants, beasts, birds, and serpents : with an appendix containing, besides several other considerable additions, a brief survey of what hath been discover'd of the unknown south-land and the arctick region : collected from most authentick authors, augmented with later observations, and adorn'd with maps and sculptures / by John Ogilby ...
Ogilby, John, 1600-1676.
Montanus, Arnoldus, 1625?-1683. Nieuwe en onbekende weereld.
[7], 674, [1] p., 32 leaves of plates (some folded) : ill., 6 ports., 19 maps (some folded).  


London :


Printed by the author ...,


1671.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels.
America --  Discovery and exploration.
America --  History --  To 1810.
2010-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-07
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2010-07
John Pas
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






o165


12210275


56274
















AMERICA












AMERICA: BEING THE LATEST, AND MOST ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF THE NEVV VVORLD; CONTAINING The Original of the Inhabitants, and the Re∣markable Voyages thither. THE CONQUEST OF THE VAST EMPIRES OF Mexico and Peru, AND OTHER LARGE PROVINCES and TERRITORIES, WITH THE SEVERAL 
EUROPEAN
 PLANTATIONS IN THOSE PARTS. ALSO Their Cities, Fortresses, Towns, Temples, Mountains, and Rivers. Their Habits, Customs, Manners, and Religions. Their Plants, Beasts, Birds, and Serpents.


WITH An 
APPENDIX,
 containing, besides several other considerable Additions, a brief Survey of what hath been discover'd of the 
Ʋnknown South-Land
 and the 
Arctick Region.


Collected from most Authentick Authors, Augmented with later Observations, and Adorn'd with Maps and Sculptures, by 
JOHN OGILBY
 
Esq
 His Majesty's 
Cosmographer, Geographick Printer,
 and Master of the 
Revels
 in the Kingdom of 
IRELAND.


LONDON,
 Printed by the Author, and are to be had at his House in 
White Fryers, M.DC.LXXI.










A Catalogue of the Authors, which are either mention'd, or made use of in this Volume of 
America.




ABraham Mellinus


Abraham Mylius


Adriaen vander Donk


Aelian


Albertus Magnus


Aldrete


Aelius Lampridius


Alexander Aphrodiensis


Alexander ab Alexandro


Alexander Guaginus


Alonso Garcia


Alonso de Ouagli


Andraeas Caesariensis


Angrin Jonas


Antonio de Herrera


Apuleius


Aristonicus Grammaticus


Aristotle


Athanasius Kircher


Augustinus


Augustin de Tarcate


Augustus Thuanus


Ayton 
of
 Armenia


Balthazar de Amizquita


Barnaba Cabo


Bartholomaeo de las Casas


Benjamin Tudalensis


Caspar Barlaeus


Castaldus


Charles Rochfort


Christopher Arcisseuski


Cicero


Claude de Abbeville


Clemens Alexandrinus


Conradus Gesner


Cornelius Nepos


Cornelius Witfleet


Ctesias


Curtius


Cyrianus


David Ingran


David Powel


Diodorus Siculus


Dionysius Halicarnassaeus


Dirk Ruiters


Dithmar Blefken


Duarte Mendez Seraon


Egydius Fletcher


Emanuel de Moraez


Erasmus Stella


Erick Roothaer


Everhard Reid


Eusebius


Euthymius Zibagenus


Festus Avienus


Francisc. Burmannus


Francisc. Delapuente


Francisc. de Gomara


Francisc. Lopes de Gomesa


Francisc. Raphelingius.


Francisc. Soarez


Francisc. Tirolmonte


Francisc. Xaverius


Fullerus


Galenus


Garcilasso de la Vega


Genebrardus


Gerardus Joannes Vossius


Guido de Brez


Guilielm. Piso


Guilielm. Postellus


Harmannus Moded


Henrick Haelbos


Henrick Hawks


Hernando de Leon


Herodotus


Hesychius


Hieronim. Benzo


Hieronim. Cardanus


Homer


Hugo Grotius


Hugo Linschot


Jacob Bontius


Jacob Planensis


Jacob Rabbi


Inca Garcilasso




Joannes Ardenois


Joannes Bertius


Joannes Chilton


Joannes Gysius


Joannes Johnstonus


Jean de Laet


Joannes de Ledesma


Joannes Leonclavius


Joannes Lery


Joannes Mariana


Joannes Nieuwhof


Joan. van de Sande


Joseph. Acosta


Joseph. Anchieta


Joseph. Scaliger


Isaacus Pontanus


Isaac. du Verne


Isidorus Mendes Sequera


Julius Caesar


Julius Caesar Scaliger


Lactantius


Lauren. Ananias


Lauren. Bikker


Lauren. Guascus Gerascius


Lauren. Keymis


Levinus Lemmius


Lieven Aizma


Lopez Vaz


Lucan


Lucretius


Lodowick Leo


Lysander


Manethon Persa


Marcus Zeno


Martin del Barco


Martin Perez


Matthaeus van den Broeke


Matthiolus


Melchior Soiterus


Mich. Lithower


Michovius


Miles Philips


Moses


Nicolaus Zeno


Olympiodorus


Paulus Venetus


Pedro de Ancieta


Pedro Pizarro


Pedro Fernandez de Quir


Pedro Maria


Peter Martyr


Pedro Ordonnes de Cevallos


Peter van Gendt


Philo Judaeus


Philippus Cluverius


Philippus Mornaeus


Phylarchus


Piere Moreau


Pinedas


Plato


Pliny


Plutarch


Pomponius Mela


Proclus


Procopius


Quarterius


Rabbi Simeon


Robertus Comtaeus


Sam. Purchas


Sebastiaen Schroten


Simplicius


Salust


Sigismond Baro


Strabo


Theodosio


Theopompus


Thevet


Tertullian


Trigaut


Vegetius


Virgil










THE CONTENTS of the several CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.




The first Book.


AMerica 
unknown to the Ancients
 Fol. 1


Of the Original of the Americans, whence they came, when, how, and from what People Planted
 Fol. 11


First Discoverers of
 America, 
with
 Chri∣stopher Colonus 
his Expedition
 Fol. 43


Pedro Alphonso Nigno 
his Voyage
 Fol. 56


The Voyage of
 Vincent Agnes Pinzon Fol. 58


The Expedition of
 Americus Vesputius Fol. 60


The Expedition of
 Alphonso Fogeda, Diego Nicuesa, Ancisus, 
and
 Roderick Col. menares Fol. 65


Peter Arias 
his Expedition, and the remark∣able Passages of
 Vascus Nunnez Fol. 69


The Expedition of
 Francisco Fernandez, Lupo Caizedo, Christophero Mo∣rantes, Bernardo Igniguez, 
and
 Juan Grisalva Fol. 76


The Expedition of
 Ferdinand Magaglian, 
commonly call'd
 Magellan Fol. 79


Ferdinando Cortez 
his Voyage.
 Fol. 81


Diego Gottierez 
his Expedition
 Fol. 92


The Expedition of
 Pedro Alvarado, Fran∣cisco 
and
 Gonzalvo Pizarro, 
and
 Diego de Almagro Fol. 95


The Expeditions of
 John Stade 
and
 Nicho∣las Durando Villegagnon Fol. 103


The Expedition of
 John Ribald, Renatus Laudonier, 
and
 Gurgie Fol. 105


Four
 English 
Expeditions, under the Command of our famous Sea-Captains,
 Martin For∣bisher, 
Sir
 Francis Drake, Thomas Candish, 
and
 John Smith Fol. 108


A
 Netherland 
Expedition, by
 Jaques Mahu 
and
 Simon de Cordes Fol. 110


The Expedition of
 Oliver van Noord Fol. 113


The Expedition of
 George van Spilber∣gen Fol. 115


The Expedition of
 Corneliszoon Schouten 
and
 Jacob Le Maire Fol. 117


The Voyage of the
 Nassavian 
Fleet, under the Command of
 Jaques le Heremite 
and
 Hugo Schapenham Fol. 120


Henry Brewer 
his Voyage
 Fol. 122






The Second Book.


OF the Bounds of
 America, 
and of the Division of the
 Mexican, 
or Nor∣thern part thereof
 Fol. 125


Estotiland Fol. 126


Terra Laboratoris. Fol. 128


Canada, 
or
 New France Fol. 129


Accadia, 
or
 Nova Scotia Fol. 133


Norumbegua Fol. 138


New England Fol. 139


New Netherland, 
now call'd
 New York Fol. 168


A new Description of
 Mary-Land Fol. 183


Virginia Fol. 192


The Relation of Captain
 Smith
's being taken Prisoner by
 Powhatan, 
and his deliverance by his Daughter
 Pocahonta. Fol. 202




Carolina Fol. 205


Florida Fol. 213


Jucatan Fol. 222


Guatimala Fol. 224


Vera Paz Fol. 227


Honduras Fol. 229


Nicaragua Fol. 232


Costarica Fol. 235


Veragua ibid.


Guatimala, 
properly so call'd
 ibid.


The Kingdom of
 Mexico, 
or
 New Spain Fol. 238


Mechoacan Fol. 261


Tlascalla Fol. 264


Guaxata Fol. 268


Panuco Fol. 270


Tabasco Fol. 273


New Gallicia Fol. 281


Guadalajara Fol. 284


Xalisco Fol. 285


Chiametla ibid.


Couliacan Fol. 286


Cinoloa Fol. 288


Zacatecas Fol. 289


New Biscay Fol. 290


New Mexico Fol. 291


Cibola, Tontonteac, 
and
 Nova Gra∣nada Fol. 298


Quivira Fol. 301


Terra Nova, 
or
 New-found Land, 
with the Island of
 Assumption Fol. 304


The
 Bermudas, 
or
 Summer-Islands Fol. 311


Hispaniola Fol. 314


Porto Rico, 
and
 Monico Fol. 327


Cuba Fol. 331


Jamaica Fol. 337


The Islands call'd
 The Lucaies Fol. 344


The
 Caribbee-Islands, Fol. 345


Anegada 
and
 Sombrero Fol. 362


Las Virgines Fol. 363


Anguilla ibid.


Saba Fol. 364


St. Crux ibid.


St. Martin Fol. 365


St. Bartholomew Fol. 367


Barboude Fol. 368


Rotonda ibid.


Nevis ibid.


Eustathius Fol. 369


Antego Fol. 370


Montserrat ibid.


Guadalupe Fol. 371


Deseado Fol. 372


Marigalante ibid.


Todos Sanctos Fol. 373


De Aves ibid.


Dominico Fol. 375


Martinico Fol. 376


St. Lucia Fol. 377


Barbados ibid.


St. Vincent Fol. 380


Bekia Fol. 381


Granada ibid.


Tabago Fol. 382


St. Christophers Fol. 383


California Fol. 389






The Third Book.


CAstella Aurea, 
otherwise call'd
 Terra Firma Fol. 394


Panama Fol. 395


Darien Fol. 399


New Andaluzia Fol. 400


St. Martha. Fol. 403


Rio de la Hacha Fol. 405


New Granada Fol. 406


Granada Fol. 408


Popayana Fol. 409


Peru Fol. 412


Quito Fol. 441


Los Quixos Fol. 446


Lima Fol. 450


Cusco Fol. 456


Los Charcas Fol. 462


Collao Fol. 466


Chile Fol. 471


Chile, 
properly so call'd
 Fol. 472


Magellanica Fol. 473


Paraguay, 
or
 Rio de la Plata Fol. 475


Rio de la Plata, 
properly so call'd
 Fol. 476


Tucuman ibid.


La Crux de Sierra Fol. 477


Brasile ibid.


St. Vincent Fol. 495


Rio de Janeiro Fol. 496


De Spirito Santo Fol. 497




Porto Seguro Fol. 498


Los Isleos Fol. 501


Bahia de Todos los Sanctos Fol. 502


Pernambuco Fol. 505


Parayba Fol. 508


Maragnan Fol. 511


The Lordships
 Tamarica, Rio Grande, Siara, 
and
 Para Fol. 517


A Relation of the Proceedings of the
 Nether∣land West-India 
Company in
 Brasile, 
to the Year
 1658. Fol. 518


The Journey of
 Rodulphus Baron, 
with the Description of the Customs and Manners of the
 Tapuyans Fol. 595


Grave Maurice 
his Account of
 Brasile, 
so far as it concern'd the
 West-India 
Com∣pany
 Fol. 600


The Councellor
 Dussen
's Relation of so much of
 Brasile 
as concern'd the
 West-India 
Company
 Fol. 601


A Description of the Palace
 Freyburgh, 
two Bridges, and a Banquetting-house, all built by
 Grave Maurice Fol. 605


Guiana Fol. 607


A Relation of the Journey of
 Francisco Orellana ibid.


Paria, 
or
 New Andalusia Fol. 620


Cumana Fol. 621


Venezuela Fol. 624


The Islands
 Margareta, Cubagua, 
and
 Coche Fol. 627


Of the Islands of
 Southern America Fol. 628






In the Appendix.


RIo de la Plata Fol. 631


Chili Fol. 634


A View of the
 Chilesian 
Language
 Fol. 635


Magellanica Fol. 649


The
 Unknown South-Land Fol. 653


Terra Borealis, 
or
 The Arctick Re∣gion Fol. 661


Several Attempts for the discovery of the
 North-West Passage Fol. 672


A brief View of what Places are possess'd at this day in the
 West-Indies, 
by the
 Eng∣lish, Spaniards, French, Portuguese, 
and
 Dutch Fol. 674








map of the Americas




















AN ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF AMERICA.




CHAP. I. America,
 unknown to the Antients.


T
HE Sea, that takes several Denominations from the Countreys which it washeth, and surrounding the dry Land, cuts out, and shapes so many winding Bays, Creeks, and Meandring In-lets, seems no where so much confin'd and penn'd into so narrow a Channel, as the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan:
 From whence again, soon expatiating, it spreads it self into two immense, and almost boundless Oceans, that which opens to the North, gives terminaries to the four Regions of the Earth; that to the South, onely to 
Asia
 and 
America;
 both which, indeed, are but one continu'd Sea, extending it self round the Universal Globe.


This watry part of the World, that almost through all Ages lay Fallow, hath in these later times been Furrow'd by several Expert and Stout Captains, who now by their Art and Industry, have given a good Account of, and made clear Discoveries from East to West, where-ever the Sun rises or sets.


The Northern Bounds under the 
Artick-Zone,
 have been hitherto so ob∣structed with Ice, that the undertakings of such as adventur'd either to find by the North-East or North-West a Passage to 
India,
 have been utterly frustrate. Of the Southern, no such pains hath as yet been taken in the Disco∣very, so that for the most part it is yet unknown how far the Water, either deep or shallow, overspreads the Earth, onely thus much Experience hath made out, that the 
Antartick
 needs lesser Line to Fathom, than the 
Artick-Ocean.


The antient 
Greeks, Phenicians,
 and 
Romans,
 or whosoever that were Renown'd by Antiquity, and Listed in the number of their famous Navigators, were no less Timerous than Ignorant concerning Maritim Affairs, and are not fit to stand in the least degree of competition with our later Voyagers.




Of old, by an inviolable Law, made by Custom, according to 
Pliny, Vigetius
 and others, the Sea was lock'd up, from the eleventh of 
October,
 to the tenth of 
March,
 no Ships daring to venture forth, dreading short Nights, and foul Wea∣ther; neither in Summer, did they so much as once offer, unless driven by Storms, to attempt the 
Offin,
 or loose sight of Land; yet there is no question, but that several Nations in former Ages,
 made it their business, spending their whole time, and wearying themselves in the Practical Art of Navigation.


The Sacred Scripture testifies, That the Kings of 
Judea, Solomon, Jehosaphat, Ozias,
 and others, prepar'd several Fleets that Sail'd through remote Seas, freighting themselves with Gold from 
Ophir,
 and other Rarities, which were Imported to supply and enrich the 
Holy-Land.
 And 
Strabo
 also tells us, That King 
Solomon
 being contemporary with 
Homer,
 then discover'd 
India.
 And 
Pliny
 relates, That the 
Romans,
 in the Reign of 
Augustus,
 passing the 
Straights
 of 
Gibraltar,
 and sleighting the 
Ne plus ultra,
 Coasted 
Spain, France,
 and 
Belgium,
 leaving not at the Promontory of the 
Cimbrians
 (now call'd 
Shager-Riff
) but also ventur'd in∣to the Northern Ocean, which washes 
Norwey
 and 
Lapland:
 But long before this, as 
Athenaeus
 relates, 
Phileas Taurominites,
 a 
Grecian
 Captain, and several others pass'd the 
Herculean-Pillars,
 penetrating the Northern Seas as far as 
Brit∣tain,
 and adventuring,
 made the first Discovery of 
Thule:
 And to the South∣ward the 
African
 Coasts without 
Gibraltar,
 and beyond 
Atlas,
 were now and then explor'd by several expert Captains. But more remarkable is the Voyage of 
Hanno
 a 
Carthaginian,
 who out-sail'd these, and inspected the Coasts of 
Africa,
 as far as the 
Gorgades:
 And 
Eudoxus Cyzicenus,
 flying from King 
Lathyrus,
 set Sail from the 
Arabian
 Gulph, and passing the 
Great-Cape,
 came to an Anchor at last in the Mouth of 
Gibraltar,
 having discover'd all the Eastern, Southern, and Western parts of 
Africa.


Moreover, it deserves special observation, That an antient 
Swedish
 King, as 
Cornelius Nepos
 relates, sent as a Rarity and great Present to the 
Roman
 Consul 
Metellus Celer,
 some 
Indians,
 who loosing their course, hatter'd up and down with perpetual Storms and stress of Weather, were at last driven into the Nor∣thern Ocean, where they suffer'd Shipwrack; yet saving themselves, Landed on his Coast:
 
Aristonicus Gramaticus
 relates, That 
Menelaus
 Sailing from the 
Sack
 of 
Troy,
 became so great a Voyager, that leaving the 
Straights,
 he surrounded 
Africa,
 and discovering 
India,
 after eight years re-measuring the same way he went, return'd with great Riches in safety to his own Kingdom: Which is consentaneous to 
Homer,
 who saith, 
Odyss,
 l. 4.


—None must compare


Mansions with 
Jove,
 his Seats Celestial are:


But with me any may, who eight years tost


Through Worlds of Miseries from Coast to Coast,


'Mongst unknown Seas, of my Return small hope,


Cyprus, Phoenicia, Aegypt,
 
Aethiope,


Sidon, Erembos
 found, and 
Lybia,
 where


Their Lambs are horn'd, their Ews teem thrice a year.


.


.








,




,


.




That which the 
Grecian
 Geographers relate concerning 
Ptolomy Euergetes,
 King of 
Egypt,
 is not to be forgotten, That sending Pilots,
 Commission'd to take the Soundings, and settle the Land-marks in the 
Arabian
 Gulph, they found by chance a forsaken Vessel, onely in it one Man half dead, lying among several other breathless Bodies, of whom, being refresh'd with conve∣nient Cordials, they enquir'd his Fortune, but he being unable to give them any present satisfaction, neither understanding what the other said, they sent him to the Court, where soon having got a smattering of Greek, he inform'd 
Euergetes,
 that he was a Native 
Indian,
 driven from their course into the place where they found him by stress of Weather, and that his company were famish'd, all their Provision spent in their Wandrings from their intended Voyage; Thus being kindly entertain'd, he also promis'd the King to open his Passage (if so he pleas'd) into 
India.
 The King slept not upon this Intelligence, but immediately prepar'd a Fleet Freighted with such Commodities as were advis'd;
 with which setting forth by the Conduct of this their 
Indian
 Pilot, they Anchor'd in their desir'd Port, and brought the King in return from thence a rich 
Cargo
 of Silk, Spices, costly Drugs, and precious Gems. 
Cleopatra,
 about sixty years after, intending not to lose the advantages reap'd by the former discoveries,
 equipp'd another and greater Navy; which passing through the Red-Sea, found the Stern of a Ship, on which was Presented a Horse, whereby some of the more knowing Sea-men judg'd, that it had been a 
Gibraltar
 Vessel, and Sailing about 
Africa,
 there by sad accident suffer'd a Wrack. This Stern was afterwards set up, and fix'd as a Memorial in the Market-place of 
Memphis.


In these later times, the first that endeavor'd to drive an 
European
 Trade in 
Africk,
 and held Commerce with 
India,
 was the State of 
Venice,
 who Sail'd from thence through the 
Adriatick,
 into the 
Mediterranean-Sea:
 So Steering for 
Alexandria,
 where unlading their Goods, from thence they carry'd them over Land, and Shipping again in the 
Arabian
 Gulph, Sail'd directly for 
India.
 Thus by Land and Water, were exchang'd several Commodities, and the 
Indian
 Growth and rich Products of the Oriental World plentifully Transported to 
Venice,
 and from thence, all 
Europe
 had ample Accommo∣dation,
 until an 
Egyptian Sultan
 suffer'd the Way to be infested by Thieves and Murdering Robbers, that so they were enforc'd to remove thence, and Dischage their several Cargoes at 
Aleppo;
 from whence, on Mules and Camels, they carry'd their Goods to 
Babylon,
 so to 
Balsarum,
 and then to 
Ormus,
 where they Re-ship'd thence, directly standing for 
India.


Thus they enjoy'd the benefit of so great a Trade and Commerce, until the 
Portuguese
 found a Passage by, Sea, saving the Expence and trouble of carrying Goods so far by Land to 
India;
 Of which here we will a little inlarge.


John,
 the first King of 
Portugal,
 who took from the 
Moors,
 by force of Arms, 
Septa,
 an 
African
 City, having five Sons; 
Henry
 his fourth behav'd himself so gallantly in the Leaguer of 
Septa,
 that after he became Master of the place, this Prince made many bold Excursions in several Parties against the Ene∣my, bringing in daily great store of Booty; so growing rich, he Rigg'd out two new Vessels to make farther Discoveries along the Coast of 
Africa.
 Yet this his Expedition went on but slowly, being much taken off in Building there a new City, then call'd 
Tarzanabala,
 and since 
Villa Infantis;
 but being Admonish'd by a Dream, and Check'd for his laying thus aside his first De∣sign of Navigation; he soon after, 
Anno
 1410. set forth the Ships that he inten∣ded, which he the more accelerated, being inform'd by some of his Prisoners

Natives, that 
Africa
 spread from the Basis of 
Mount-Atlas,
 very far towards the South:
 This Mountain then was the Terminary of Navigation that way, because thereabouts a long Ridge or Shelf of Sands thrust its Point under Shallow Waters so far out into the Ocean, that none durst venture to Sail in∣to the 
Offin,
 being out of sight of Land to double this conceal'd 
Cape.


The first that attempted to find Deep Water, and get round about, dis∣covering several unknown Coasts, and Uninhabited Isles belonging to that Region, were 
Joannes Gonsalves, Tristan Varseus,
 and 
Aegidius Annius;
 amongst which were the 
Madera's,
 and 
St. George de Picho,
 which Prince 
Henry
 first Planted with 
Portuguese,
 and others since with 
Netherlanders.
 He also obtain'd a Grant from Pope 
Martin
 the Fifth, of all the discover'd Territories East-ward from the 
Canaries,
 for ever to be the undoubted Right, and belonging to the Crown of 
Portugal.


After 
Henry
's Decease, 
Anno
 1460. the business of Navigation and Discove∣ries of new Countreys, lay neglected, because King 
Alphonso
 turmoyl'd in a Civil War, his Crown being at stake, had not leisure to think or look after uncertain improvements by Sea; yet at last having quell'd his Enemies, he ventur'd forth some Ships, who Sail'd as far as the River 
Zenaga,
 and came to Anchor before the City of 
Genny,
 famous since for Trade, which gave its de∣nomination to the Countrey and Coasts of 
Guiny,
 where they dealing, Barter'd for Ivory, Gold, Slaves, and also got so much footing into the Countrey, that they suddenly rais'd up a Fort, and Man'd it with a strong Garrison, Shipping their Slaves for 
Lisbon.


John
 the Second succeeding his Father 
Alphonso,
 had a great design upon 
Ara∣bia
 and 
India,
 and if possible, was ambitious to open a Passage from the 
Atlan∣tick,
 to the 
Oriental-Seas.
 But the difficulty lay in Steering so often from sight of Land, venturing into the Main Ocean, obstructed by so many dangerous Shoals that lay so far out into the 
Offin.


At that time flourish'd three famous Mathematician, 
Rhoderick, Joseph,
 and 
Mar∣tin Bohemus,
 Pupils bred up by 
Joannes Monteregius;
 with which the King consulting, perswaded, that they would by their Art invent some Instrument, that by Southern Constellation, the Pole being depress'd, the Navigator might know where he was, and in what height. so guessing what distance they were from this or that Countrey; they accordingly Club'd Learning, and by their great Study, found out what since hath prov'd so useful and beneficial to Sea∣men, the 
Astrolabe;
 which help having obtain'd, the Sailers encourag'd, more frequently ventur'd into remote and unknown Seas.


After these, King 
John
 of 
Portugal
 sent 
Jaques Cano
 with a Fleet, who Sailing, found the River 
Zaires,
 where he erected a Pillar with an Inscription, 
Latin
 and 
Portuguese,
 signifying by whom, and in what Kings Reign these 
African
 Coasts were discover'd: Here he also met some of the Natives, who more civiliz'd than the rest, told him, That they had a mighty King, who Raigning over them, kept his Court some few days Journey up in the Countrey, to whom 
Cano
 sending his Agents, detain'd four 
Africans
 as Pledges, which he carry'd with their free consent to 
Portugal,
 promising to bring them back in fifteen Months, who before that time having got some smatterings of their Tongue, inform'd them,
 that their Native Soyl was call'd 
Congo,
 whither returning by the appointed time, they were according to their agreement, exchang'd for the 
Portuguese,
 and 
Cano
 address'd himself with rich Presents to their King, whom he found sitting in their manner on an Ivory Throne, being from the middle up∣ward

Naked, his nether parts cover'd with long Silken Skirts,
 a Golden Arm∣let on his left Arm, athwart his Shoulders hung a Horses Tail, their Badge of Royal Dignity: 
Cano
 humbly laid the Presents down at the Kings Feet, amongst which was a Gilded Flag, or Pennon with a Cross, which Pope 
Innocent
 the Eighth had Consecrated with great Ceremony. After this, many of that Na∣tion became Christians, and the King himself receiv'd Baptism. But in short time, by the Instigations of their Diabolical Priests, and others, Christiani∣ty loosing ground, grew out of countenance: Mean while,
 King 
John
 the Second vigorously Prosecuted the business of Discovery, sending 
Jews
 and 
Chri∣stians
 by Land from 
Alexandria
 and other parts of 
Egypt
 to 
India,
 and from thence to explore the Coasts on the Eastern side of 
Africa,
 to the 
Great-Cape;
 if so a way might be found fit for Navigators, having doubled that Point, to Traffick with the Oriental parts of the World.


After this Princes Death the Work lay still a while, but in short time, King 
Emanuel
 his Successor freshly undertook the business once more, sending 
Vasques Gama
 with four Ships, who passing through many Dangers with great Difficult∣ties, Anchor'd at last before 
Calecut,
 and was the first of the 
Europeans
 that found a way to the 
East-Indies.


But 
Chistopher Columbus,
 five Years before 
Gama
's Expedition to the East, had been employ'd in Western Discoveries, which prov'd so very successful, that he found no less than another World; which soon after, from 
Americus Vespu∣tius,
 was call'd 
America:
 So that the Division of the World by the Antients,
 (concerning which they had so long err'd, and were utterly mistaken) was now made manifest by Experience, and undisputable Demonstration; for formerly the whole World was known by no other names than 
Asia, Africa,
 and 
Europe,
 but now, those three are found to make but one Part of what in∣circles the Universal Globe; because in the South lies a second, known no fur∣ther than by its Coastings and Superficial Margents; the third part being the New-World, our 
America.


Here it will not seem amiss, having prov'd that 
Africa
 was more than Coasted by the Ancients, to ingage and search with some scrutiny, concern∣ing this 
America;
 First, Whether at any time 'twas known by the Anci∣ents? And next, by what People, and when first Inhabited? About the former, the Learned of these later times Jangle amongst themselves, for some of them will needs ascribe so much Honor to Antiquity, declining the Worthy Praise of those that made so wonderful a Discovery, as if they of old, and many Ages before, had done the same, or at least, that this New-World to them was not unknown, maintaining this their bold Assertion from the Au∣thority of what they find, both in Ancient 
Greek,
 and 
Latin
 Authors: First, especially in the Learned 
Plato,
 who, as you know at large,
 describes a New 
Atlantis,
 lying beyond the 
Straights
 of 
Gibraltar;
 whose Coast is surrounded with two vast Seas that are Sow'd thick with scatter'd Islands. By these Seas they understand the Atlantick and Southern-Sea, by the many Isles, 
Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, California,
 and others, which lie sprinkled along the Coasts of 
America.
 But it cannot be made out, that 
Plato
 describes ought but a Fancy, his own 
Idea,
 not a Countrey that ever was, is, or shall be, though he sets it forth so Ac∣curately, and with such Judgment, as if he had taken a Survey of the place, and found such a Land indeed.


In like manner, 
Diodorus Siculus
 undertakes to prove,
 That 
America
 Was known to the Antients; telling a Story, how the 
Phenicians
 were driven by a Storm

from the Coasts of 
Africa
 West-ward, falling at last upon a great and altoge∣ther unknown Island, which our late Expositors take for 
America;
 Must it therefore be so? Surely not, for it is onely a bare Story, without any Proof or the least Testimony.
 They endeavor to make 
Aristotle
 bolster up their opinion that he had a knowledge of this New-World, which with no small pains they pump from these Words: 
Beyond the 
Herculean
 Pillars, certain 
Carthaginian
 Merchants penetrated the Atlantick Ocean so far, that at last they found a vast, yet un-inhabited Island, producing nothing but Herbage, Plants, and Wild-Beasts, yet interlac'd with many Meandring Rivers, abounding with several sorts of Fish, lying some days Sail from the Continent; they Landing, found a Soyl so fertile, and Air so temperate, that there they setled, and were the first Planters of that Isle. But the 
Carthaginians
 having intelligence thereof, Prohibited all Persons whatsoever, upon Pain of Death, to go thither, fear∣ing the place being so much commended, all the People would be ready to flock thither, and desert their own, and so utterly unfurnish and debili∣tate their then growing Common-wealth.


But how could the 
Carthaginians
 find 
America,
 without the use of the Com∣pass? How happen'd it, that they were so taken with the fertility of this their New-found-Land, when the Adjacent Countreys and Fields about 
Carthage
 are every where Flourishing, and most Luxurious? So that it may better be sup∣pos'd, that what 
Aristotle
 found so long since, may rather be the 
Canary-Isles,
 or 
Great-Brittain,
 than 
America.
 The 
Greeks
 having then also made some Inspection into the 
Brittish-Isles.
 They would also make you believe, that 
Virgil
 the Prince of Latin Poets,
 had known the New-World in these Verses; 
Aeneid.
 lib. 6.


There, there's the Prince, oft promis'd us before,


Divine 
Augustus Caesar,
 who once more


Shall Golden Days bring to th' 
Ausonian
 Land,


Kingdoms that once old 
Saturn
 did command,


And shall His power to 
India
 extend,


Beyond the Annual Circle, and beyond


The Sun's long Progress, where great 
Atlas
 bears,


Laden with Golden Stars, the glittering Sphears;


Hic vir, hic est, tibi quem promitti saepius audis,


Augustus Caesar,
 divûm genus, aurea condet


Saecula, qui rursus Latio, regnata per arva


Saturno quondam, super & Garamantas & Indos


Proferet imperium. Jacet extra sidera tellus,


Extra anni Solisque vias, ubi coelifer 
Atlas


Axem humero torquet stellis ardentibus aptum.


But what of all this? Who finds in any of these Writings, any Marks of 
America,
 or the least Description thereof? Though we cannot deny that the Antient Sages and Wise Philosophers of former times might easily make out, and no question did, that the Earth and Sea made the perfect Figure of a Globe; first from the round Shadow of the Earth that Ecclipses the Moon; the diffe∣rent Risings and Settings of the Celestial Luminaries; and the still Variati∣on of the Pole; so that the Earth and Sea making one Ball, they might easily conjecture, that the South-side of the Equinoctial might be Inhabited as well as the North: But all this was more grounded upon Natural Reason and Right Judgement, than any Experience of theirs, or the least certain know∣ledge thereof, which since these later times had the first happiness to obtain; so laying these Conjectures aside, there have been none more grosly erroneous, and so utterly mistaken in this Point, than some of the Ancients, and especi∣ally the Fathers of the Church.


Lactantius Firmianus,
 and St. 
Austin,
 who strangely jear'd at as ridiculous, and not thinking fit for a Serious Answer the Foolish Opinion of 
Antipodes,
 or

another Habitable World beyond the 
Equator:
 At which, 
Lactantius
 Drol∣ling, says, 
What, Forsooth, here is a fine Opinion broach'd indeed; an
 Antipodes! 
heigh-day! People whose Feet tread with ours, and walk Foot to Foot with us; their Heads downwards, and yet drop not into the Sky! There, yes, very likely, the Trees loaden with Fruit grow downwards, and it Rains, Hails, and Snows upwards; the Roofs and Spires of Cities, tops of Mountains, point at the Sky beneath them, and the Rivers revers'd topsi-turvy, ready to flow into the Air out of their Channels!


But these seeming witty Observations of 
Lactantius,
 though they may serve for a Jest, yet are not grounded on any serious Reasons; for the Earth and Sea being Globular, making one Universal Ball; all Materials whatsoever that belong to this great Body, sink by a natural Propensity towards its Center; so that where-ever we Travel, our Feet are downwards, and our Heads up∣wards, the Sky above, and the Earth beneath; neither need they fear, that any where the Earth should Moulder and drop into the Clouds:
 But St. 
Austin
 Reasons better, admitting that the Earth and Sea make a Universal Globe; yet it no way follows, that inhabited Countreys should lye opposite to our Northern, nay, altogether impossible, seeing that side which is our 
Antipodes
 is all nothing but Sea; and should we allow, that there were Land and Water mixt as ours is, who could prove, that they were Peopled? or how could any get thither, over such Vast and Immense Seas? or possibly pass the extream heat of the Torrid Zone, not to be endur'd by any living Creature? And what then becomes of Sacred Scripture, which says positively, 
That all Men were deriv'd from
 Adam, 
and after the Floud, from
 Noah 
and his three Sons?
 Therefore the Nations of the 
Antipodes
 must be of another Abstract, there being no possi∣bility (as they suppos'd) of passing from this World to that: But since the Dis∣covery of the 
East
 and 
West-Indies,
 Experience, the best Mistress, hath taught, that in the South are mighty Lands and vast Territories, and that as far as they have been Penetrated, are found to be full of People, extending their Domi∣nions from East to West. And though St. 
Austin
 deny'd this now well-known Truth, yet long before his time, 
Cicero, Pliny,
 and others amongst the 
Greeks
 and 
Romans,
 divided the Earth under five 
Zones;
 which 
Virgil
 describes thus:


Five Zones the heav'ns infold, hot Sun-beams beat


Always on one, and burns with raging heat.


The two Extreams to this on each hand lies


Muffled with Storms, fetter'd with cruel Ice.


'Twixt Cold and Heat, two more there are, th'aboads


Assign'd poor Mortals by th'Immortal Gods.


Quinque tenent caelum zonae: quarum una corusco


Semper Sole rubens, & torrida semper ab igni:


Quam circum extremae dextra, laevaque trahuntur


Caerulea glacie concretae, atque imbribus atris.


Has inter, mediamque, duae mortalibus aegris


Munere concessae divum: via secta per ambas,


Obliquus qua se signorum verteret ordo.


With 
Virgil, Pliny,
 and the Prince of Latin Orators agree, who saith,

You see, that those that inhabit the Earth dwell in Countreys so separated one from another, that it is impossible they should have any Commerce; some of them are our 
Antipodes,
 walking with their Heads downwards, some their Feet against our sides, others, as we, with their Heads upright. You see how the same Earth seems to be Swath'd about with Rolls, of which, two separated by the other three, are at utmost distance one from the other, ly∣ing equi-distant under the Vertick Points of Heaven, always cover'd with Snow and Ice; but the middlemost and greatest is scorch'd by the violent

heats of the Sun: Two Tracts are Habitable, one to the South, our Antipo∣des, the other North, which we Inhabit.


And 
Pliny
 also affirms,
 though against the Vulgar Opinion, this truth,

That the Earth is round about inhabited, and that people walk Foot to Foot in most parts thereof; though every one be ready to ask why our 
Antipodes
 drop not into the Sky; which question, our 
Antipodes
 may also ask concerning us.


But although the Ancients upon these and the like Demonstrations well un∣derstood, that there was a Habitable World towards the South under our 
Ho∣rizon,
 yet they could not make out or believe, that there was any possibility to pass thither; And, according as St. 
Austin
 conceiv'd, That the Earth produc'd nothing under either Pole, by reason of excessive cold, and that the 
Equinoxs
 or 
Middle-Zone,
 was not to be penetrated, because of the insufferable heat.


And 
Macrobius
 saith, 
That the 
Equinoctial Circle,
 the 
Artick
 and 
Antartick Lines,
 bind the two Habitable 
Zones,
 and make Temperate by the excessive Neigh∣boring Heats and Colds; and these Countreys onely give Animation, and comfortable Enjoyment to all Living Creatures.


Moreover, St. 
Austin
 in some places seems to clear his own Doubts, saying,

That People, if they could find a means to Sail those Vast and Undiscover'd Seas, might make Land, raising new Stars under another Sky.


A Learned Father, searching after the Original of all sorts of Beasts which multiply by Generation, concludes, That they must derive themselves from those that were sav'd with 
Noah
 in the Ark. But how came they to the Isles? To those adjacent and near the Main Land, they might easily Swim; to the re∣moter, they were Transported.


But this Doubt is not altogether clear'd, for the Domestick and other Crea∣tures fit for Humane use and Sustenance were thus brought thither: Yet how comes it to pass, that Voracious and Wild Creatures are also found there, such as Wolves, Tigers, Lions, and other Beasts of Prey? This puzzle putting St. 
Au∣stin
 to a stand, he had no other means to get off, but by saying, that by God's Commands or Permission, the Angels convey'd them thither; If so, why might not God please to Plant Men there in like manner, and the rather, the Earth be∣ing created for Humane use?
 But what needed this, when Men can in Ships Transport themselves, either of their own accord for curious Inquest, to find new Countreys, or else enforc'd by stress of Weather, to far remoter, and alto∣gether unknown Lands:
 Besides, though the Earth is here and there divided by large Bays and vast Seas, yet nevertheless, in other places it is all continu'd Land, or at least parted by some narrow In-let or Sea; so that there was no difficulty for a crouded Plantation to go over, and so ease themselves in an∣other Countrey, till then not Inhabited; therefore none need to question, but that from 
Adam,
 or nearer, from 
Noah's
 three Sons, 
Sem, Ham,
 and 
Japhet,
 those, as well as we, were extracted, that Inhabit this our other World.


But one question is to be observ'd, How first after the expiration of so ma∣ny Ages in these our later times, a New-World was discover'd, altogether unknown to the Antients, when they in the greatness of their Parts and Un∣dertaking, Prowess and Prudence, were no ways inferior to the Modern, and every way as fit for great Designs and grand Exploits?
 We need not scruple or make the least doubt, but the Sea hath been Navigated of old; but the first at∣tempters set forth unexperienc'd,
 in as pittiful and ill-contriv'd Vessels. The 
Heathens
 ascribe the Art of Navigation, first to the 
Cretans,
 who under the Con∣duct of 
Neptune,
 set forth a Navy to explore Foraign Countries. But 
Pliny


long before gives the Invention of this Art to 
Erythra,
 King of 
Egypt,
 who upon Pieces of Timber, conjoyn'd and brac'd together, crept along the Shores, and ventur'd to Discover the Isles in the 
Red-Sea.
 But others give that honor to the 
Trojans,
 and 
Micians,
 when with a Fleet by Sea, they Invaded 
Thrace:
 Others;
 to the 
Brittains,
 who made little Vessels of Leather, and were the first that by this Invention found how to Float upon the Waters: Some plead, that the 
Samothracians
 were first. Others, that 
Danaeus
 before all, found a way by Sea from 
Egypt
 to 
Greece.
 But without all Contradiction, 
Noah
's Ark was the Pat∣tern or Sample, that succeeding Ages imitating, built their Ships by; and the more probable, because his Offspring multiplying so fast, that they were en∣forc'd to inlarge their Colonies, by passing Seas, and other broad Rivers, to settle their Super-numeraries there.


So 
Jason
 Invented a Ship, which he call'd 
Argos,
 which 
Sesostris
 King of 
Egypt
 took as his Pattern. Next, the 
Biremis,
 a Galley with double Banks of Oar, was made by the 
Erythreans;
 with treble Banks, by the 
Corinthian Amocles;
 the addition of the 
Quadruple,
 the 
Carthaginians
 boast; of the 
Quinqueremis Nesichthon, Alexander the Great,
 brought them to twelve Banks; 
Ptolomy Soter,
 to fifteen; 
Demetrius, Antigonus
 Son, doubled them to thirty; 
Ptolomy Philadelphus,
 to for∣ty; and last of all, 
Philopater
 rais'd them to fifty Banks of Oars. 
Hippus
 a 
Tiri∣an,
 was the first that set Ships upon the Stocks; the 
Rhodians
 a Ketch, and the 
Batavians
 a Boat; the 
Copes
 made the first Oar; 
Dedalus
 the Mast and Boltsprit; 
Piscus
 the Beak; the 
Tyrrheans
 the Anchor; 
Tiphys
 the Rudder; taking exam∣ple from the motion of a Kites Stern; 
Icarus
 found Sails, fancy'd by the Poets for Wings, though some ascribe that honor to his Father 
Dedalus.


Minos
 was the first that Ingag'd in a Sea-Fight, whereby we may easily con∣jecture, that of old none adventur'd far into the 
Offin,
 or to remote Countreys, not daring to trust their so sleight contriv'd Vessels. But these later times have strangely and suddenly improv'd this growing Art of Navigation, yet pitch'd not to that height at first, as boldly to adventure, and loose sight of Land.


The 
Tyrians
 first understood how to Steer their Course by the North-Star, and when dark and foul Weather had Clouded the Sky, that they could nei∣ther see Heaven or Earth, but onely Sea, they directed their Course by the Wind; and if they doubted the change thereof, they let some Birds flie, whom they follow'd, supposing that they flood directly to the nearest Land. But these are but poor helps, and blind Guides to shew you Land from the middle of the boundless Ocean. It is certain,
 that the 
Romans
 in the time of 
Julius Caesar
 and 
Augustus,
 stretch'd the Bounds of that Empire Eastward to 
Euphrates,
 the 
Rhyne,
 and the 
Danube,
 and Westward to the 
Ocean
 and 
Mount Atlas,
 Sailing up and down the 
Mediterranean,
 with great Fleets, which stoutly endur'd the vio∣lence both of Waves and Weather; but all this made them not so hardy, as once to think or look after new Worlds. But after the 
Roman
 power decreas'd, by several Eruptions of the 
Goths, Vandals, Huns, Normans, Lumbards,
 and other Northern Countreys, which swarm'd with People, that overflow'd all places like a Deluge, so that 
Europe
 was every where puzzel'd and Imbroyl'd, their whole business consisting in conjoyning Forces to withstand such bold Invaders, and so vexatious an Enemy.


And farther East, 
Asia
 was at the same time little better, still trembling at the daily Alarms and Incursions of the 
Scythians, Persians,
 and 
Saracens;
 and afterwards the 
Turks
 growing upon them more than any of the former, expect∣ed no other than a sad Gatastrophe, so that the known World had too much

work cut out for them by these Distractions and Alterations of Government, then to go in Quest of uncertainties, to find they know not where, another.


Here also is added by St. 
Jerom,
 what an antient Writer saith, 
Great care hath been taken in Computing the Age of this World, and if there be another which Commenc'd not with ours,
 (as 
Clemens
 mentions in his Epistles) 
where are scituate those Seas and Lands that make that second World? Or is it a part of that, in which
 Adam 
was Created? Or may it not rather Metaphorically be taken for Worldly Affairs, govern'd by the Prince of the Air, ruling in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience?


But 
Pliny, Cicero,
 and 
Virgil,
 the best in their kind of Latin Writers, concur, That there may be a habitable World under our 
Horizon,
 in the temperate Southern 
Zone,
 beyond the extream heat, and on this side of the 
Antartick
 colds.


But what signifies all this to the Discovery of 
America,
 which lies not onely under the scorching Heats of the 
Equinox,
 but under the Frosts and Snows of the 
Artick
 and 
Antartick-Poles?
 Yet less probable is that which 
Lodowick Leo,
 an 
Augustine
 Frier takes out of 
Obadiah;
 as if that Prophet in the three last Verses of his 
Prophecy
 should speak of the 
Spaniards,
 which should not onely discover and Conquer 
America,
 but also Convert the Inhabitants to the 
Christian Faith,
 because those that are in 
Sepharad,
 should Inherit and Possess the Cities of the South, 
And Saviours shall arise from the Mountains of
 Zion, 
to judge the Mount and Wealth of
 Esau.


But certainly, 
Obadiah
 meant no other than the Restauration of the 
Jews
 from the Captivity of 
Babylon,
 who after their return, should grow more powerful than ever, and they, led by their 
Messias,
 obtain the height of all felicity, who would send his 
Evangelists
 and 
Apostles
 to declare Salvation to the utmost Bor∣ders of the Earth. It is true, that the 
Rabins
 Expound 
Sepharad
 to be 
Spain,
 and therefore he concludes, that 
Obadiah
 Prophesi'd of the 
Spaniard,
 and their Con∣quests in 
America;
 so they would prove, that 
America
 was long known before Christ.


And lastly, It signifies as little what 
Pineda
 and 
Levinus Lemnius
 drive at, That 
Solomon
 first finding the use of the Compass,
 Rigg'd a Navy at 
Ezion-Geber,
 which from the 
Red-Sea
 had no indirect Course to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan;
 from whence he might Lade his Vessels with the Gold of 
Peru.
 In whose De∣scription it shall be manifested, that 
Peru
 is not 
Ophir,
 as some without any shew of Reason or Truth would make us believe.


But as concerning King 
Solomon
's finding out the use of the 
Magnet,
 it is soon said, but not easily prov'd; for though that Prince exceeded all Man-kind in Wisdom and Learning, and was perfect in the Operations, and knew the Occultest Secrets of Nature, understanding what e're belong'd to Plants, from the Cedar of 
Libanus,
 to Hysop, and the meanest Shrub that grows upon the Wall; yet it nothing makes out, that he knew the Mystery of the Navigable use of the 
Load-Stone:
 But suppose he did know, there is no where any mention of it; and if this excellent thing, the 
Compass,
 had been found in 
Solomon
's time, how came it afterwards so utterly to be lost?


Albertus Magnus
 mistakes, when he ascribes the knowledge of the 
Compass
 to 
Aristotle,
 of which he himself makes not the least mention; neither 
Galen, Alex∣ander Aphrodisiensis, Pliny, Lucretius,
 nor any of the 
Roman, Greek, Arabian,
 or other Countrey Writers whatsoever.
 Some give the honor thereof to an 
In∣dian,
 others to a Shepherd in 
Mount Ida,
 whose Clouted Shooes being full of Hob-Nails, the Iron sticking fast to the Stones on which he stood, stopt his

motion. And although the Antients found but many Secrets of Nature, amongst which this of the 
Load-Stone,
 Attracing Iron, as being its proper Food; and the three sorts of the 
Magnet,
 of which some will not draw Steel, found by 
Theamedes
 a 
Greek
 Author, and other since, well known Properties: Yet they never attain'd that knowledge, that the 
Load-Stone
 would ease Pain,
 and stop the effusion of Blood, though the edge piercing the Skin, open'd the Vein: as 
Hieronimus Cardanus
 experienc'd on himself and others,
 which he had from 
Lau∣rentius Guascus,
 a great Chyrurgeon. Much less, that the Needle of the 
Compass
 being touch'd by the 
Load-Stone
 on the Northside of the 
Equinox,
 respects the North; but depressing the 
Artick,
 and raising the 
Antartick
 Pole, it looks as sted∣fastly towards the South: But far less dreamt they of its several variations,
 according to the Coasts that are nearest; as when you come from the Island 
del Cuervo,
 the Point varies more West; but Sailing towards the 
Equinox,
 it varies Eastward; by which we may absolutely conclude, that without this use of the 
Load-Stone,
 first found by 
Flavius Melvius
 a 
Neapolitan,
 in the Year 1303. it was al∣together impossible to reach 
America.
 So that 
Joseph de Acosta
 mistakes,
 who gives the honor of the finding so great a benefit to Navigation, to some 
Mahu∣metan
 Sea-men which 
Vasques de Gama
 met with near 
Mosambique,
 who had Sail'd those Seas by the use thereof; whereas 
Gama
's Expedition was above a hun∣dred years after 
Melfius,
 who liv'd in such a juncture of time for Mathema∣tical Learning, that few Ages boasted the like: For then flourish'd in 
England,
 and were Contemporaries, besides others abroad, 
Richard Wallingford, Nicolas de Lynna, John Halifax, Walter Britte, John Duns,
 and 
John de Lignarijs,
 all eminent in Astronomical Arts, belonging to Navigation, and doubtless, no small helps to 
Melfius
 in this his happy Invention.


Lastly, We will relate what hath, been held as a seeming, Testimony; (that 
America
 was known to the 
Europeans
 before the Birth of our Saviour) by an an∣tique Meddal of the Emperor 
Augustus,
 digg'd out of the Ground in 
Peru,
 and sent to his Holiness at, 
Rome,
 which may well be reckon'd with the like Cheat contriv'd by 
Hermicus Cajadus, Anno
 1505. near 
Syntra,
 a Town in 
Portu∣gal,
 where three Marbles Ingraven with antient Characters, concerning a Pro∣phecy of discovering the 
East-Indies
 by the 
Portuguese,
 in the Reign of King 
Ema∣nuel,
 were privately bury'd under Ground, and not long after, by a pretended accident digg'd out, which made such a bustle amongst the Learned, that se∣veral tired themselves about the explanation of the suppos'd Sibylline Pre∣diction.






CHAP. II.
 Of the Original of the 
Americans,
 whence they came, when, how, and from what People Planted.


ABout the Original of the 
Americans,
 the Learned Dispute so much, that they find nothing more difficult in Story, than to clear that Point; for whether inquiry be made after the time, when the 
Ameri∣cans
 first settled themselves where they now inhabit, or after what manner they came thither, either by Shipping or by Land; on purpose, or accidental∣ly; driven by Storm, or else forc'd by a more powerful People, to remove

from their old Plantations, and seek for new? or if any one should be yet more curious, asking the way that directed them out of another Countrey to this New World? or else enquire for those People, from whom the 
Americans
 deriv'd themselves? He will find several Opinions, and the Learned still Jangling.


The first Doubt is concerning the time:
 Mr. 
Purchas,
 where-ever he had the Hint, endeavors to prove, that 
America
 hath been but lately Planted; for which he thus argues,


That if 
Asia,
 or 
Europe
 furnish'd 
America
 with People in 
Abra∣ham
's time, or at least before the Birth of our Saviour; then it must upon necessity, by the Expiration of so many Ages, have been much more Popu∣lous, then the 
Spaniards
 found when first they discover'd it.
 Besides the vast Territories yet unhabited (says he) are sufficient testimonies, that this New World hath been Planted but scatteringly, and not many Ages since, else the Countrey would have more abounded with Inhabitants, because the fer∣tility of the Soyl was able plentifully to maintain Millions more, then were there when first discover'd: And what Marks are better to know a new Peo∣ple by, in any Countrey, than a rude Life and unsettled Government? just like a Family removing to another House, which takes no short time to settle their Goods and Houshold-stuff in a handsome and convenient Order.


When 
Noah
 went out of the Ark on Mount 
Ararat,
 and not long after, saw his Seed spread over 
Armenia
 and 
Assyria,
 the new Generation of People con∣sisted in Shepherds and Husbandmen, that setled themselves near Lakes and Rivers. Villages, Cities (and much less) whole Kingdoms, were scarce found on the Face of the Earth, and as little of Trade or Commerce; Riches, Division of Lands, costly Garments and Furniture for Houses, were not then in use, but the works of long settlements in happy Peace. To curb growing-Wickedness, and the Pride of 
Libertines,
 who incroach'd upon their weaker Neighbors, Laws were invented, by which Bridle, the unbroke or wild World grew tamer: And first, the 
Assyrians
 were brought to endure the Bit, and answer the Reins of Government; then 
Egypt,
 next 
Greece,
 and after that the 
Romans,
 who spreading their Power by Arms and Martial Discipline, first civiliz'd the 
Gauls, Spain, Brittain,
 and lastly 
Germany.


But because a Countrey or Pastoral Life, knowing no Commerce, but mean Hovels, and to dwell in Huts, priding in poor and no Habits, despising all greatness, unlimited by Laws, and all things else, (which the People observ'd presently after the Flood) is now found among the 
Americans,
 who will take them for ought else, but new Comers to that Land, as themselves acknow∣ledge? For the 
Mexicans
 boast, that they are the eldest there, and that from them, 
Peru, Chili, Chika,
 and other Countreys towards the South, had their Colonies, and yet the oldest Chronicles of 
Mexico
 reckon not above a thou∣sand Years.


Thus far Mr. 
Purchas.


But certainly, all this Muster of appearing Reasons, is not able, to van∣quish single Truth; For, grant that 
America
 was not very Populous when the 
Spaniards
 first arrived there;
 must this needs prove, that it was never well in∣habited before? Perhaps the Civil Wars, which have been always destructive to this Nation, have much hindred the increase of People; and the more, be∣cause their Salvage Nature is such, that in several places they account Man's Flesh Broil'd a very great Dainty.
 And suppose such Prodigal Excess of their Humane Bankets were not us'd in 
America,
 as indeed they are, Is it wonder, that such a great part of the World, not onely exceeding 
Europe
 in bigness, but 
Asia


also should here and there have a Tract of Land uninhabited? These might by reason of their Barrenness, be useless, as many such places are found in the midst of the most Populous and fertile Countreys. But above all this, it is cer∣tain, that 
America
 to this day (notwithstanding almost innumerable thousands of 
Indians
 formerly Slain arid Massacred by the 
Spaniards
) is so well in∣habited, that it may stand in Competition with either 
Asia
 or 
Europe.
 And how could such vast multitudes Plant the far-spreading Countrey of 
America,
 without the help of many Ages? Moreover, This truth is not without suffici∣ent Testimonies; when any one looks on the Islands with which 
America
 lies incompass'd, he may suppose they did not willingly go from the Main Con∣tinent to the Isles, but were driven thither by Wars among themselves, or as most times it happens, because of the vast increase of the Natives, the Coun∣trey must discharge its burden.


Hereto is added, the several Languages us'd in 
America,
 as in 
Europe
 or any other part of the known World; whereby we may easily guess, that 
America
 was Peopled presently after the Confusion of Tongues at 
Babel.
 Furthermore, If the 
Americans
 live a Rude Life, go meanly Habited, be without stately Houses; such Customs are even among us observ'd by several People; as the 
Tartars, Numidians,
 and others, which made their Antiquity be call'd in question. He also must needs have no knowledge of the Arts and Mechanick Sciences us'd by the 
Americans,
 who concludes, that they setled but lately in 
America.
 One Ar∣gument at present will be sufficient to contradict them all; and in the further Description, the contrary will be more manifest.


Hieronimus Benso
 relates, That he stood amaz'd at the Gold and Silver Smiths in the Territory of 
Chito,
 who without any Iron Tools made Images, and all manner of Vessels: Which work they performed thus, First, they made an Oval Crucible of a good Look, round about Pasted with Earth, embody'd with the Powder of Wood Coals; which Crucible being Bak'd very hard in the Sun, they fill with Pieces of Gold or Silver, and put in the Fire; about which standing with five, six, or more Pipes made of Canes, they blow the Fire so long, till the Mettal melts, which others sitting on the ground, run it into Moulds of black Stone, and so with little trouble, Cast into what shape they please. Lastly, Though 
Mexico
 can reckon but a thousand years, must it therefore fol∣low, that the Inhabitants are no older? How many famous places (even among our selves) have no longer Registers, and if they have, they are common∣ly Fabulous, few Nations boasting truly their own Original; which Argu∣ment, not onely contradicts (as we suppose) Mr. 
Purchas,
 but all others ascri∣bing the Plantation of 
America
 to our later times.




SECT. I.


¶ IN the next place, let us enquire, how the 
Americans
 were transmitted thi∣ther, whether by Sea, or Land? Both which are feasible two several ways; if they made an Expedition thither, as Discoverers, or were driven on those Coasts by stress of Weather.


The first is most unlikely, and not seeming possible, for how could they Steer thorow so vast an Ocean, to Countreys they never heard of, without the Compass, and other Necessaries for such a Voyage? for when first discover'd, their want of experience in Shipping for so long a Voyage, knowing no fur∣ther than the use of small Boats or 
Canoos,
 plainly explode, that they willingly





 Steer'd from a known World, to an unknown, with no better accommodati∣on; but some probable reasons may be made out, to induce us to believe, that they were rather driven thither by Storm.


But some will say, How liv'd the little Boats, and how indur'd they in such a continual Tempest, and were not either swallow'd up amidst the Waves, or starv'd for want of Provision, which their hollow Troughs could not con∣tain?


The first doubt is the least, for there are Examples enough by which appear, that oftentimes great Ships Bulging, are over-set or sunk in the Sea by foul Wea∣ther when the Mariners escape in their Cock-Boat; and if they were but thin∣ly Victual'd for so long a Voyage, questionless, that little which they had, they spun out, and made it last, while the impetuous Storm shortned the passage, which fair Weather would have made much longer.


Pliny
 tells us of 
Annius Plocquius,
 General of the 
Red-Sea,
 That one of his Slaves being Enfranchiz'd,
 Sailing down towards the 
Arabian
 Gulf, was car∣ry'd by a violent Tempest from the North, beyond 
Caramania,
 and on the fif∣teenth day came to an Anchor in 
Hippuros,
 a Haven of 
Taprobane,
 which 
Ortelius
 judges to be 
Sumatra;
 but 
Mercator
 and 
Cluverius,
 on better grounds, 
Zeylon,
 which is no less than three thousand 
English
 Miles.


In like manner, 
Joseph de Acosta tells
 us, That in fifteen days time, he got with a Northerly Wind from the 
Canaries
 to 
America,
 and his Voyage had been shorter, durst he have born more Sails, which may partly clear the former doubts.


Moreover, the 
Peruvians
 themselves give some small Testimony (in their an∣tient Records) of a few that Landed of old upon their Coasts, which were (as they say) mighty and cruel Giants, committing much Bloodshed, Slaughtering the Natives every where; and having subdu'd the whole Countrey, built stately Edifices, of which remain yet the Ruines of some Foundations, very Artificial and Costly. They also shew near 
Manta,
 and 
Puerto Viejo,
 many huge Bones (as

they believe of Giants, three times longer and thicker than an ordinary Mans. They also tell us, that many Ages since, one 
Ica
 and 
Arica
 Sail'd Westward thi∣ther upon Sea Wolves Skins, blown up like Bladders: But however,
 without contradiction, the 
Americans
 never knew, much less built any such Vessels, with which they durst venture to the 
Offin,
 out of sight of Land: their 
Balsas, Periagos,
 and 
Canoos,
 will not all amount to the Bulk of one of our small Barques; wherefore the Inhabitants of 
Tumbez,
 when they descry'd the 
Spanish
 Fleet, sent to discover 
Peru,
 were amaz'd at the high Masts, spreading Sails, and bigness of the Ships, judging them first to be Rocks, cast up out of the Sea; but ob∣serving them to approach their Coast, and that they were full of Bearded-Men,
 thought the Gods were walking in them; by our Modern Poet, Mr: 
Dryden
 in his 
Indian Emperor,
 thus Elegantly describ'd.




Guyomar 
to
 Montezuma.


I went in order, Sir, to your Command,


To view the utmost Limits of the Land:


To see that Shore, where no more World is found;


But Foamy Billows, breaking on the ground;


Where, for a while, my Eyes no Object met,


But distant Skies, that in the Ocean set:


And low-hung Clouds that dipt themselves in Rain


To shake their Fleeces on the Earth again.


At last, as far as I could cast my Eyes


Upon the Sea, somewhat, methought did rise


Like Bluish Mists, which still appearing more,


Took dreadful Shapes, and mov'd towards the Shore.


Mont.
 What Forms did these new Wonders represent?


Guy.
 More strange than what your Wonder can invent.


The Object I could first distinctly view,


Was tall straight Trees, which on the Waters flew;


Wing on their sides, in stead of Leaves did grow,


Which gather'd all the Breath the Winds could blow:


And at their Roots grew floatingg Palaces,


Whose out-blow'n Bellies cut the yielding Seas.


Mont.
 What Divine Monsters, O ye Gods, were these,


That float in Air, and fly upon the Seas!


Came they alive or dead upon the Shore?


Guy.
 Alas, they liv'd too sure, I heard them roar.


All turn'd their sides, and to each other spoke,


I saw their Words break out in Fire and Smoke.


Sure, 'tis their Voice that Thunders from on high,


Or these, the younger Brothers of the Skie.


Deaf with the noise, I took my hasty Flight,


No Mortal Courage can support the Fright.




But the resolving these Doubts, starts a harder Question, 
viz.
 Grant that the 
Americans
 were by Tempest driven thither, How then came the Beasts thither? It is certain, that those which are beneficial for humane use, as Dogs for to Hunt, great Cattel, Sheep, for Food, and other Necessaries, might easily be car∣ry'd thither, for so the 
Spaniards
 brought Cows, Horses, Swine, and other Cat∣tel;
 and also Poultery from 
Spain,
 to the new-discover'd Isles, 
Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Margaretta,
 and 
La Dominica,
 when at their arrival, formerly no four-footed Beasts were found there, whose fertile Soyl hath so multiply'd their increase, that the Doggs running Wilde, and breeding as fast, do great hurt to the Grazing Herds, which they onely shoot for their Skins, leaving their Flesh, the best of Meats, onely to Manure the Ground on which they lie.


The Transporting of tame and profitable Cattel might easily be allow'd of, but who would load their Ships with Lions, Tygers, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and other Serpents and Voracious Beasts? it is certain that some may be tam'd before they were Ship'd.


Lampridius
 relates, That 
Heliogabalus
 the 
Roman
 Emperor, took great pleasure in Domestick Lions, and Leopards, to frighten his Guests withal; for with the third Course, they were all brought in, and sate betwixt the Invited, a Man

and a Beast.
 The great 
Cham,
 as 
Paulus Venetus
 an Eye-witness attests, Rides on Hunting,
 attended in couples with tame Leopards. The King of 
Camboja
 in like manner is serv'd with Panthers: 
Scaliger
 adds also, That they went not unpro∣vided of a Lamb or Goat, to give the Panther, lest falling into his natural fe∣rocity, provok'd by hunger, he should make the Huntsmen his Quarry, if he had no other Prey. But notwithstanding some wilde Beasts seem to forget their Voracious Nature, yet there ought great care to be taken in the Trans∣porting of them, because they oftentimes grow wild again, which 
France
 can witness,
 where two Leopards, a Male and a Female being tam'd, presently after the death of King 
Francis,
 whether negligently or on purpose, let loose, ran into the Woods, and near 
Orleans
 devour'd a great number of People, and Cattel: 
Gesner
 saith, That some Womens bodies were found, who were un∣touch'd, onely their Breasts eaten by the Leopards, as if they took them for the daintiest part; which is not unlike the antient, 
Jeres,
 who according to Saint 
Hierom,
 entertain'd their Guests as a most delicious Dish, with Womens Breasts, and Mens Buttocks Roasted. Besides, the devouring nature of these Wilde Beasts, what profit could Tygers, Lions, Wolves, Bears, and the like advantage the Transporter? And how came Serpents, Adders, and other Re∣ptiles, thither over the Ocean, that with no Art whatsoever can be made tame? Were the small Vessels just laden with such terrible Creatures, when against their wills, they were by Storm driven on a new Coast? By these im∣possibilities we may easily judge, that the 
Americans
 came thither by Land, and no other way, but how, and upon what occasion must be our next enquiry.






SECT. II.


¶ HIstories generally gives us onely two accounts, Why People remov'd from one Countrey to another, either not, or thinly inhabited; whe∣ther driven by force, or of their own accord, so to unburthen and give ease to their too Plethorick Countreys.


Thus the banish'd 
Japanners
 forsook their Native Countrey, and setled them∣selves in a desolate Soyl, since a flourishing Empire, shining with Riches, and Crown'd with stately Cities: So the 
Batavians
 took possession of the uninhabi∣ted Isle, lying between the 
Rhyne,
 and the 
Wael,
 being driven out of 
Hessen
 by Civil-Wars, and preserv'd the memory of the place, from whence they had their Original on the utmost Point of the Island, in the Villages of 
Cattenwyck;
 for the 
Hessens
 formerly went by the name of 
Catti;
 others that remov'd did not onely fall upon their Neighbors, but made a way by force of Arms, cho∣sing their Habitations under a temperate Climate, and in a fruitful Soyl. Af∣ter which manner the 
Franks
 enter'd 
Gaul,
 and afterwards the 
Normans
 set upon 
France;
 so that the Conquer'd Countreys, have ever since from the Conque∣rors been call'd 
France
 and 
Normandy:
 But although it cannot punctually be said, how the Inhabitants of 
America
 remov'd, yet it is without contradiction, that they first found an empty Countrey.
 The Opinions which they have themselves concerning it, are full of idle Fancies. First, they question their Original from the Floud, which is so well rooted in the memory of all Nati∣ons, that the blindest and most ignorant know something of it, though de∣formedly alter'd and vary'd, tack'd up with additional fabulous Stories, the truth it self known onely to us, but to all others lost in Oblivion.




Who hath not heard of 
Deucalion
's Flood, how his Wife 
Pyrrha
 and he only escap'd in a little Boat, and (as 'tis Fabl'd) landing on a Mountain, from thence Peopled the World again, by throwing Stones backwards over their Heads? Something of this seems to hint the true Story of 
Noah,
 his Wife, and Children, from whom the desolated World was replenish'd.


The same they relate of 
Prometheus,
 concerning whom, thus 
Diodorus Sicu∣lus:
 
They say that the 
Nyle
 breaking through his Dams, and over-flowing his Banks, drown'd all 
Egypt,
 especially that part where 
Prometheus
 Rul'd, where all the Inhabitants were swallow'd by the Deluge.
 None can ima∣gine but that 
Diodorus
 by this makes mention of a particular Flood, and not the general one in 
Noah
's time; for as the 
Greeks
 ascrib'd all things to their 
Heroes,
 so the 
Egyptians
 in like manner did the same to 
theirs:
 Therefore they have of the general Flood, made a particular one in 
Egypt,
 though perhaps it never was: So that what is Fabled of 
Prometheus,
 is nothing but a Part of the Universal Deluge; which the Name 
Prometheus
 proves, because it signifies,
 
Sprung from Heaven,
 and is the same with 
Noah,
 whom they hold to be the first Father of all Mankind since the Flood, born of, or regenerated from his Wife 
Asia;
 and 
Asia
 signifies 
Earth,
 or 
The Mother of all things;
 and so espousing 
Noah,
 being sprung from God, to 
Ararat,
 from whence descended the Generations of Mankind, and by degrees spread over the whole surface of the Earth.


The 
Chineses, East-Indians, Japanners,
 and other People of 
Asia
 and 
Africa,
 have also some knowledge of a very ancient Flood; but hood-wink't under many idle Fancies, not unlike that which the 
Americans
 relate, from whom several Learned Persons find no obscure Confessions of the Deluge,
 which thus my∣stically they have wrapp'd up, That one 
Viracocha
 came out of the great Lake 
Titicaca,
 and setled his Residence upon 
Tiaguanaco,
 where yet remain the Ruines of ancient Walls, built after a wonderful manner: At length removing from 
Tiaguanaco
 to 
Cusco,
 he began to multiply the Generation of Mankind. They shew in the foremention'd Lake a small Island, under which, the 
Americans
 say,
 the Sun sav'd himself from the Flood; wherefore in ancient Times they su∣perstitiously observ'd that place, heightning their Bloody Sacrifices with Hu∣mane Slaughter. Others relate, That six Persons leap'd through a Hole out of a Window, from whence all Men were since Extracted; and from that new Increase, the place (after the Inhabitants of the Old World were all drown'd) got the Denomination of 
Pacari Tampo;
 and therefore they hold the 
Tampo
's to be the most ancient Families: From hence 
Mangocapam
 deriv'd,
 being the Pri∣mogenitor of the 
Ynca's
 or Kings; from whom sprung two Generations, 
Hanon Cuzco,
 and 
Urim Cuzco.
 They tell us also, That their 
Ynca's,
 when they make War upon any People, say that the occasion, as they pretend, was, because all Ter∣ritories are Tributary to them justly, from whom they were deriv'd and re∣stor'd, being the first Planters of the New World; and withal, That the true Religion was declar'd to them from Heaven.


This Relation, though mix'd with Fables, shews (but very darkly) that they have some knowledge of the Flood:
 For who are those six else that leap'd out of a Window to replenish the Generations of Mankind, but 
Shem, Ham,
 and 
Japhet,
 with their Wives?


The 
Americans
 can give but a little better Account of their first Original; and indeed it is no wonder, because for want of Books they can relate nothing certain, but only what they have Registred in their usual 
Quipocamagos,
 which is not above four hundred years old. 
Acosta
 asking what Original they judg'd

they were of,
 and from what Countrey and People deriv'd? receiv'd no other Answer, but that 
America
 only was their native Countrey, and that they were deriv'd from no other elsewhere. But though the 
Peruvians
 are of this Opi∣nion, yet the 
Mexicans
 are of another mind,
 giving the 
Spaniards
 a far better Ac∣count when first they came thither, wherein we must a little deviate, 
viz.
 How they were remov'd from some other place, as 
Robert Comtaeus
 relates, who with many Learned and seemingly true Arguments affirms, That the Original of the 
Americans
 must be sought for either among the 
Phenicians, Sydonians, Tyrians,
 or 
Carthaginians,
 being indeed all one People. 
Herodotus
 saith thus of the 
Pheni∣cians,
 
They liv'd formerly, according to their own Relation, along the Shore of the 
Red-Sea;
 from whence removing, they planted the Sea-Coast of the 
Syrians.
 
Festus Avienus
 the 
Latin
 Poet agrees with this Opinion, where he saith,


On the 
Phenicians
 Coasts the Ocean beats,


Who through the 
Red-Sea
 Sailing, chang'd their Seats.


They were the first that ventur'd through the Seas,


And freighted Ships with richer Merchandise:


Fair or foul Weather, They without controule!


Sought Foreign Trade, directed by the Pole.


Aristotle
 from a 
Greek
 Word calls them 
Phenicians,
 from their being red or bloody with the Slaughter of all Strangers that Landed on their Coast; but rather, and so indeed they are call'd 
Phenicians,
 or 
Erythreans,
 from 
Esau,
 or 
Edom,
 from whom they are deriv'd; for these two Words, or Denominations, signifie in 
Greek, Red;
 the two last, the like in 
Hebrew. Phenix
 him∣self first planted all the Countrey lying between the River 
Eleutherus,
 and the 
Egyptian
 City 
Pelusium;
 and afterwards 
Damiata,
 wash'd by the 
Medi∣terrane:
 But since, these Boundaries are alter'd, on the North, by 
Judea;
 West∣ward, by the 
Mediterrane;
 Southerly, by 
Egypt;
 and towards the East, by the Desart 
Arabia.


The chiefest Cities are 
Ptolemais,
 otherwise call'd 
Acon, Sidon, Arad, Great Ca∣na, Sarepta, Biblis, Bothrit, Berithus,
 and their Princess 
Tyre,
 formerly scituate in an Isle, but since joyn'd to the Main-Land by 
Alexander the Great.


None can disown, but that the 
Phenicians
 have every where been Admirals of the Sea; so that they were formidable to the greatest Princes. When the 
Persian
 King 
Cambyses
 came with a vast Army against the 
Carthaginians,
 he was forc'd to give over his Design, because the 
Phenicians
 refus'd to help him with their Fleet, being allied to, and the City founded by them: But they not only built 
Carthage,
 which strove with 
Rome
 to be the Empress of the World, but also the famous Cities 
Leptis, Utica, Hippo,
 and 
Adrumetum
 in 
Africa,
 with 
Cad
z
 and 
Tartessus
 in 
Spain;
 nay, they sent Plantations of People into the Heart of 
Iberia
 and 
Lybia.
 It will not be amiss to add 
Q. Curtius
 his Relation, who tells us, 
Where-ever the 
Phenicians
 came with their Fleets,
 Landing their Men, they subdu'd whole Countreys, and by that means spread their Colonies over the known World; 
Carthage
 in 
Africa, Thebes
 in 
Boetia,
 and 
Cadiz
 near the 
Western Ocean. Aristotle
 relates, "That they made such rich Returns of their Mer∣chandize, and chiefly of their Oyl, in 
Spain,
 that their Anchors, Pins, and all Iron Materials belonging to a Ship, in stead of that Metal, were Silver.


But to return to our Discourse, and disprove the former Testimony, That the 
Phenicians
 found 
America.
 The formention'd 
Comtaeus
 saith thus; 
None

can justly doubt,
 but that since the 
Phenicians
 took the Command of the Sea from the 
Rhodians,
 they more and more increas'd their Fleets, and growing experter in Navigation, passing the 
Gibraltar
 Northward, became Masters of 
Cadiz,
 and still prepar'd new Fleets, which searching beyond 
Atlas
 Southward, discover'd the Coasts of 
Africa,
 and the adjacent Isles, driving a great Trade to the 
Canaries,
 and to those which lay scatter'd along 
Cape de Verd,
 formerly call'd the 
Gorgades.
 This way of Trade also was not unknown to the 
Greeks, Iberians,
 and other People; but after the 
Phenicians
 assum'd it wholly to themselves, without any respect or difference of Countreys, they sunk all whomsoever they could catch. 
Curtius
 further adds, saying,
 "I believe that the 
Phenicians,
 sailing into the Main Ocean, have discover'd unknown Coun∣treys. And which are those?
 Not the 
Gorgades,
 or 
Canary Isles;
 for those were sufficiently known before; but a Main Land, far beyond.
 But though the 
Pheni∣cians
 were most expert, yet not skilful enough to make out such Discoveries. They indeed were the first that before any other sail'd out of the Mid-land Sea; nay, they ventur'd a good way into the main Ocean, beyond the 
Straights of Gibraltar,
 or the 
Herculean Pillars:
 But how far? Not to the 
Gorgades,
 above half way betwixt 
Spain
 and 
America;
 but to the 
Cassiterides,
 or 
Flemish Islands,
 which to the number of nine lie in sight of 
Spain. Strabo
 affirms this Truth,
 saying, 
The 
Cassiterides
 are ten, lying in order close by one another:
 One remains uninhabited; on the rest live a swarthy People.
 This way the 
Phenicians
 sail'd first, when they were in quest for Trade, from 
Cadiz.
 And though he reckons ten, there are indeed but nine, 
viz. St. Michael, St. Mary, St. George, Tercera, de Pico,
 or 
Tenariff,
 so call'd from the Mountain which vomits Fire, 
Fayal, Las Flores, Del Cuervo,
 and 
Gratiosa.
 Moreover, the same 
Strabo
 relates,
 
That the 
Carthaginians
 did not throw over-board the Traders on the remote 
Gorgades,
 but those especially that came from 
Sardinia
 or 
Cadiz.


Mean while, we cannot deny, but that the 
Gorgades
 that lye before 
Cape de Verd
 were frequented by the 
Carthaginians,
 long before the Birth of our Savior; but with so much admiration, that 
Hanno
 their Captain in that Expedition was listed amongst the number of their Heroes, hapning thus: The 
Carthaginians
 sailing for 
Cadiz,
 to assist the 
Phenicians
 against the 
Spaniards,
 made that the Seat of War, which soon drew on a greater Design; for 
Hamilco
 and 
Hanno
 being impowr'd by the Senate at 
Carthage,
 manag'd the War in 
Spain.
 Both of them were ambitious to discover new Countreys. 
Hamilco
 sail'd along the Coast of 
Spain
 and 
Gaule,
 reaching to 
Batavia. Hanno
 steer'd Southerly,
 carrying thirty thousand Men of all Trades in his Fleet, purposing to build a new City in some place or other, and got beyond the Promontory 
Ampelusium,
 now call'd 
Cabo Spatil;
 the River 
Ziloa,
 which washeth the City 
Arzilla;
 and the Stream 
Lix,
 now 
Lusso,
 where the Poets place the Gardens of the 
Hesperides,
 in the cu∣stody of a waking Dragon: From thence proceeding on his Voyage, he came to an Anchor in the Mouth of the River 
Subur,
 at this day call'd 
Subu;
 and afterwards before the City 
Sala,
 now call'd 
Salle,
 at that time made very dan∣gerous by the voracious Beasts in the neighboring Woods: At last the Fleet reach'd the Foot of the lesser 
Atlas,
 which ends at the Point 
Chaunaria,
 by the Modern Navigators call'd 
Cabo Non,
 because it was judg'd, that none could scape with Life, that durst adventure to steer beyond 
Chaunaria;
 yet 
Hanno
 sail'd between 
Palma,
 one of the 
Canary-Islands,
 and the Promontory 
Bojadoris,
 towards the pointed Coast call'd then 
Cornu Hesperium,
 but now 
Cape Verd,
 in the River 
Asama,
 by 
Castaldus
 call'd 
Omirabi:
 Here he found horrible Crocco∣diles,

and 
Hippopotami
 or Sea-Horses. 
Atsama
 is held to flow from the same Foun∣tain whence the 
Nyle
 hath its Original. In this Latitude 
Hanno
 descried those Islands which he call'd 
Gorgones
 (from the three deform'd Sisters 
Medusa, Sthe∣nio,
 and 
Euryale,
 whose Heads were Periwig'd with curl'd Serpents) because they found as illfavor'd Women on these Islands, which at this day the 
Hollanders
 call the 
Salt-Islands;
 amongst which, the chiefest is 
St. Jago,
 a Colony of 
The Portuguese;
 but the Mountains opposite to the 
Gorgones,
 on the main Coast of 
Africa,
 rising aloft with spiring tops near the River 
Masitholus, Hanno
 call'd the 
Chariots of the Gods,
 now nam'd 
Sierra Liona,
 lying in eight Degrees Northern La∣titude. When 
Hanno
 and his Armado, either provok'd by an undaunted Courage, or covetous of Fame, if they proceeded in their so wonderful Adventure, went forward,
 where they reported, that they saw Rivers of Fire falling into the Ocean, the Countrey all about burning, and the tops of the Mountains dazle∣ing their Eyes with continual Flashes of Lightning, intermix'd with terrible Thunder; adding further, That the Natives all the Summer shelter'd them∣selves from the excessive Heat, in Caves under Ground; and coming forth in the night, run abroad with lighted Torches over their Ground, so gathering in their Harvest, and Officiating all other Affairs of Husbandry: Yet 
Hanno
 no ways daunted at such strange Sights, sail'd from 
Sierra Liona
 Southerly to the 
Aequinox,
 where he discover'd an Island not far from the 
African
 Coast, inhabited by a rough and hairy People,
 to take some of whom, he us'd all possible means, yet could not; onely two Women, being incompass'd by Soldiers, were ta∣ken, and carried aboard; but being very salvage, and barbarously wild, could not be tamed, or brought to any Complacency; so they kill'd them, and carried their stuff'd-up Skins to 
Carthage,
 where they were a long time gaz'd upon with great admiration.


This Island which 
Hanno
 then found, can be no other but that which we call St. 
Thomas,
 and hath a very unhealthy Air for Strangers, but else very fruitful, and abounding with Sugar-Canes; and the hairy People which he makes mention of, were 
Babeons,
 or 
Baboons,
 which 
Africa
 in this place breeds large, to the amazement of the Beholders, in great abundance; because those deform'd Monsters, more than any other Beast whatsoever, represent Humane shape.


Here 
Hanno
 stopp'd his Voyage, being hindred from going further for want of Provision. Five years he spent in this Expedition, before he Anchor'd again at 
Cadiz,
 from whence not long after he steer'd to his Native Countrey 
Carthage,
 where he was receiv'd with no less Wonder than State, insomuch that none before or after him ever gain'd greater Honor, seeming to oblige his Countrey with the hopes of future Profits from these new discover'd Regi∣ons: Nay,
 he receiv'd a Name, and was plac'd amongst their Gods in the Temples, which, he being ambitious of, promoted after a strange manner, teaching several Birds to cry, 
The great God Hanno;
 which when they could speak perfect, they were let fly in the Air, where to the admiration of all Peo∣ple, they every where repeated their well-taught Lesson.


This the most remarkable Voyage which hapned in the time of the Anci∣ents, considering they wanted several Mathematical Instruments belonging to Navigation, and especially the use of the Compass; and also considering the length of the Voyage to 
Sierra Liona,
 whither never any durst venture before: Nay, in so many Ages after 
Hanno,
 the famousest Navigators which were set out by the King of 
Portugal,
 fear'd a long time to cut their Passage through the

Aequinoctial-Line;
 however in long Process of time, divers Experiments were made, which have now so much improv'd the Art of Navigation.


Hanno
's Voyage was four hundred years before the Birth of our Savior; therefore if none have been further than 
Hanno,
 until the time the 
Portuguese
 sail'd beyond 
Cape de Bona Esperana,
 how could 
America
 be discover'd by Sea? How did they steer from the Salt-Islands, or 
St. Thomas,
 out of sight of Land, through the Main Ocean, to an unknown World? 
Hanno
 himself, who was the stoutest of all Ancient Navigators, not only crept along the 
African
 Coast, which made him spend so much time; but not daring to cross over those wide spreading Bays he found, left not his hold of the Shore, and measur'd and search'd every winding Inlet and Creek: And if he found a New World, why was it not known? The more; because his Ambition carry'd him on to get a Name and Reputation by such Naval Discoveries. And how true the Relati∣on of this Expedition is, 
Pliny
 tells us, saying, The Journal-Books were then to be seen which 
Hanno
 writ in that his 
African
 Expedition: Though many of the 
Greeks,
 and also of our Moderns, following 
Hanno,
 have found several things contrary to his Observations, wherein he makes mention of several Cities built by him, which none ever since heard of, or any have seen, neither is there the least Marks of their Ruines to be found.


This large Relation serves for nothing else, but to shew that they seek in vain herein to give the Honor of the Discovery of 
America
 to the Ancients; And as little do those Testimonies signifie that are taken out of 
Diodorus Sicu∣lus, Pliny, Pomponius Mela,
 and 
Aelian.
 It will be worth our time to hear every one of them particularly.


First, 
Diodorus
 saith, 
Beyond 
Lybia,
 in the Ocean, lies a very great Island, several days sailing in Circumference, having a very fruitful Soil, and pleasant Meadows, distinguish'd by Hills, and moistned by Navigable Ri∣vers, unknown in Ancient Times, because it seems to be separated from the other World, and was thus found: The 
Phenicians
 sailing along the 
Lybian
 Coast, were several days and nights toss'd with perpetual Tempests, and at last driven to the foremention'd Island, where Anchoring, and observing the pleasant Scituation thereof, made it known to their Magistrates.


But how comes this nameless Island to be 
America?
 What Man would take that for an Island, which far exceeds the main Continent of 
Asia?
 And have the 
Phenicians
 ascrib'd the finding of this New World to any? Whence then proceeds such great silence amongst all the Ancient Writers of a whole World, who otherwise us'd to give Denominations to the least remote Village, or Mountain, or River?


Pliny
 speaks after the same manner, saying, 
The Writers make mention, that 
Atlas
 rises out of the middle of the Sands, with a Shrubby and Bushy top towards the Sky, on the Shore of the Ocean to which he gives his Denomi∣nation; That it is full of Woods, and water'd by several Fountains on that side towards 
Africa,
 by which means it bears all manner of Fruit. In the Day-time none of the Inhabitants appear, all things being in silence, as in the middle of a Desart; the Approacher is struck with sudden amazement. And besides its excessive high Crown, reaching above the Clouds, and neigh∣boring, as they say, the Circle of the Moon appears in the Night as if it were all in a Flame, resounding far and near with Pipes, Trumpets, and Cym∣bals; and the Journey up thither, very long and dangerous.


I cannot understand that 
Pliny
 can mean 
America
 by this, because himself, in

the first Division of his Fifth Book, makes his beginning with the Descripti∣on of 
Africa:
 And as to what further concerns the strange Relation and dan∣ger thereof, is a little before related in 
Hanno
's Voyage; and it is but a slight Argument to prove it 
America,
 because it seems to resound with those sorts of Instruments which the 
Americans
 were observ'd to use when discover'd.


Pomponius Mela
 being the third,
 hath no greater Arguments than the former. 
We hear (says he) that utmost People towards the West,
 being the 
Atlanticans,
 are rather half Beasts than Men, cloven-footed, without Heads, their Faces upon their Breasts, and naked, with one great Foot, like Satyrs or Goblins, which range up and down, without any Artificial Shelters or Houses.


Lastly,
 
Aelian
 seems to say something, when he sets down the Discourse be∣tween 
Midas
 and 
Silenus,
 out of 
Theopompus,
 where 
Silenus
 relates, 
That 
Eu∣rope, Asia,
 and 
Lybia
 are Islands; and that a vast Countrey lyes beyond this his tripple-divided World, mighty Populous, and abounding with all other Living Creatures, as big again as ours, and living twice as long: That they are wondrous rich; their Religions, Laws, and Customs, founded upon another Morality and Reason, quite different from ours. They boast espe∣cially of two great Cities, 
Machimus
 and 
Eusebes;
 the Inhabitants of the first maintaining themselves by driving altogether a Trade of War, mustering up, and filling their numerous Regiments with several valiant Nations. The Listed Citizens amount in their Muster-Rolls, all bred to Soldiery, to two Millions, of whom few but scorn either dying bravely by Wounds receiv'd with Flint-edg'd Laths, and Staves, in stead of Spears, pointed with Stones, not knowing the use of Iron or Steel, but so over-stock'd with Gold and Silver, that they account it a Drug of less Value than our basest Metal. Some Years since they march'd into our World, a hundred thousand strong, as far as the 
Hyperborean
 Mountains, where being inform'd, that all the Na∣tions of our World, compar'd with them, liv'd in a poor and despicable condition; as not thinking them worth their Conquest, they return'd. But the second City 
Eusebes,
 deals altogether in Peace, and its Citizens are not ra∣pacious, but exercise Justice, so much affecting Morality and Divine Wor∣ship, that they conquer Heaven by their Piety and Meekness; and the Gods themselves are pleas'd to descend, and advise with them concerning their Celestial Affairs.


Who observes not this to be a Poetical Relation, shewing how much better the Acquirements of Peace are, than those of War; the one conquering only Men, the other, the Gods? Nor can more be taken out of 
Aelian
's Discourse, but that the Ancients believ'd there was another Habitable World to be our 
Antipodes.


Thus far hath been disputed concerning the Original of the 
Americans,
 whose Plantations from 
Tyre
 or 
Carthage
 by Sea, are found altogether invalid: Yet we will search a little further,
 to see whether the People Analogize, either in their Religion, Policy, Oeconomy, or Customs.


It is certain, that the ancient 
Phenicians
 liv'd in Tents, and sometimes ex∣chang'd eaten-up Pastures for fresh, which the 
Americans
 to this day observe; by which it might appear, that they are of a 
Phenician
 Extract. But why not as well deriv'd from 
Numidia, Tartary,
 or the ancient Patriarchs, who all liv'd such an unsettl'd wandering Life? Besides, the 
Phenicians
 had a long time given over Pastoral Business, for Maritime Affairs of greater consequence, not only Merchandizing through all the World, but sending great Colonies in Ships to

new Plantations: And moreover, the 
Americans
 could not so strangely degene∣rate from their Ancestors, but would have built great Cities like them; of which many were found in 
Phenicia,
 but none of Antiquity in 
America.


As to their Religion, if it agreed with the 
Phenicians,
 it was the same that all the World profess'd at that time, and therefore may as well be extracted from any other, as them: 'Tis true, we find them inclind to Sorcery, and dealing with Evil Spirits, as the 
Phenicians,
 in which they were not only guilty, but all other Nations at that time.


Nay, why not as well transported out of 
Asia
 or 
Europe,
 where were formerly many the like Tamperers, and those that dealt in such Diabolical Sciences? And why not from 
Salmantica,
 where, as 
Laurentius Ananias
 relates,
 Magick-Arts were publickly taught, and they commenc'd Doctors, and took their Degrees according to their Learning? The Devil also hath publick Worship amongst the 
Americans,
 and so he had with the 
Phenicians:
 yet not only they, but the whole World had dedicated Temples to him.
 Here began Humane and Infer∣nal Sacrifices, supposing that Evil Spirits were delighted, and so feasted with the Steam of Humane Offerings, whose sweetness made them milder, and so intoxicating, lull'd them into less mischief.


How famous is 
Zoroaster,
 and the whole School of the Eastern Magicians? In 
Moses
's time this Wickedness had already took place: Nor can it be deny'd but that the 
Phenicians
 carry'd their Idols in their Ships,
 as 
Herodotus
 testifies,
 saying, 
The Image of 
Vulcan
 much resembles the 
Phenicians Patacoioi,
 which they plac'd on the Fore-castle of their Ships.


In like manner, the 
Americans
 when they go to Sea, carry their Idols with them; and the Ships took Name from the Image, which was either painted or carv'd on the Stern, or plac'd elsewhere upon the Deck.


The same Custom the 
Chineses
 observe to this present: 
Francis Xaverius
 re∣lates, 
 That he sail'd in a 
Chinese
 Vessel from 
Goa
 to 
Japan,
 which bore an Idol in its Stern, before which the Master lighted Candles, perfum'd it with Aloe-wood, and offer'd Birds and other Food, inquiring of it the Event of his Voyage. Sometimes he judg'd from the Statues immovable Looks, that it would fall out successfully; and other times, not.


Lastly, 
Porphyrius
 relates, 
That the 
Phenicians
 upon any great Exigency, as War, excessive Heat, or Mortal Distempers, by order selected one of the most comely and beautiful of their Children, to be offer'd up to 
Saturn.
 And 
Eusebius
 saith also out of 
Porphyrius,
 
That 
Saturn,
 whom the 
Phenicians
 call 
Israel,
 the Learned 
Vossius
 and 
Hugo Grotius
 read 
Il,
 or 
El
 (one of the ten Names of God in 
Hebrew
) which they also give to the Planet 
Saturn,
 who when he Reign'd in 
Phenicia,
 having one only Son born by the Nymph 
Ano∣bret,
 and was in danger to lose his Kingdom, being worsted in an unlucky War, he dress'd him in Royal Robes, and placing him on an Altar built for that purpose, sacrific'd him with his own Hands.


And although such like cruel Oblations are us'd in 
America,
 must it therefore follow, that they are deriv'd from the 
Phenicians,
 when several other People are guilty of the same? Nay, there is scarce one Countrey, which hath not at some time or other perform'd such inhumane Acts, seeming to them Zeal in their Religion; for the most eminent of the Heathens scrupled not at it, which certainly are held to be the 
Persians, Greeks,
 and 
Romans;
 and yet they were not abhorr'd, though committing Humane Slaughters.


This holy Butchery and Religious Slaughter of Mankind began in 
Rome
 in

the Emperor 
Adrian
's Reign, so continuing till the time of 
Tertullian, Lactanti∣us,
 and 
Eusebius.
 The 
Greeks
 which inhabited the utmost part of 
Italy,
 em∣ploy'd themselves daily in Sacrificing Strangers to 
Saturn,
 and sometimes one another.
 But at last this formal Cruelty became a ridiculous Custom; for the 
Romans
 by severe Edicts strictly forbad all such Humane Offerings: Yet that they might retain some memory of their former Sacrifices, they order'd thirty Ima∣ges to be made of Rushes, which every year on the fifteenth of 
April,
 were by the 
Roman
 Priests and Vestal Nuns, to be thrown from the 
Milvian
 Bridge into the 
Tyber.


Moreover, 
Manethon
 relates, "That the 
Egyptians
 in 
Heliopolis
 us'd to offer three Men at once to 
Juno;
 which Custom was observ'd till King 
Amasis
 or∣der'd, That in stead of Men, they should serve her with Wax Candles.


Amestris,
 Queen to the famous 
Xerxes,
 caus'd twelve Men to be burn'd alive, as an Oblation, to pacifie and oblige 
Pluto
 to maintain them in their present Grandeur.


Procopius
 relates of the People about the 
Arabian Gulph,
 
That they often∣times Sacrific'd Men to the Sun.


The 
Indians,
 saith 
Pomponius Mela,
 kill their nearest Relations and Parents, before they decay by Sickness or Age, and judg'd it fit and most Religious to Feast and Banquet themselves with the Entrails of the slain.


The 
Albanians,
 as 
Strabo
 relates, offer yearly one of their Priests to the Moon.


The same 
Mela
 relates of the 
Tauri,
 That they us'd to cut the Throats of Strangers, whenever they came near to the Place of their Sacrifice.


The 
Egyptian
 Idol 
Typhon,
 as you may read in 
Manethon,
 was daily made red∣hot, and living People put in, and broyl'd to death.


But to pass by several other People guilty of such bloody Idolatry, How did the Altars erected in the Woods in 
Gaul
 and 
Germany,
 for 
Taran, Hesus, Teu∣tates,
 and 
Woden,
 continually smoke with the Blood of Humane Expiations? Of which, 
Caesar
 saith thus in his 
Commentaries;
 
The 
Gauls
 are a very Devout and Superstitious Nation; and therefore when any were dangerously sick, or likely to be worsted in Battel, they vow'd to feast their Gods that sav'd them with Humane Flesh, and if need were, would make themselves a thankful Sacrifice to those that help'd them off in such an Exigence. Con∣cerning these bloody Rites, they consulted and imploy'd the 
Druydes,
 by whose advice they all believ'd that no Victim was so acceptable to the 
Nu∣mens,
 as pour'd-out Humane Blood, but especially that of Malefactors; which Dainty if they could not procure, their Gods must be treated with the Lives of the Innocent.


Lastly,
 the Holy Scripture saith thus, 
When the King of
 Moab 
saw that the Battel was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred Men that drew Swords, to break through even to the King of
 Edom; 
but they could not. Then he took his eldest Son, that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a Burnt-offering on the Wall.


These Testimonies are sufficient Witnestes, That the Ancient 
Heathens
 ex∣press'd the height of their Devotion, and fury of mad Zeal, in such execrable Rites, as to this day the like is practised by the 
Indians, Chineses, Japanners,
 and others: Wherefore it can no ways be a sufficient ground to prove, that the 
Americans
 are deriv'd from the 
Phenicians,
 because of their Humane Sacrifices, for that they were usual Customs in all Places.




The third Proof they offer us, is borrow'd from the similitude and likeness of the 
Phenician
 and 
American
 Languages: 
Comtoeus
 sets down some Words, 
viz.
 the 
Phenicians
 call'd a Mountain, 
Abila;
 Blood, 
Edom;
 a Mother; 
Anech;
 a Maid, 
Hellotia;
 Water, 
Heni,
 and 
Jam:
 With the first agrees the 
American Anth∣la;
 with the second, 
Holedonch;
 with the third, 
Anam;
 with the fourth, 
Hel∣lotie;
 with the fifth, 
Ame,
 and 
Jame.
 But those that will thus corrupt the Words, may as well make the unseemliest Comparisons. It is certain, that the 
Phenicians
 and some of the 
Americans
 call a Cup 
Asur,
 and Red Wine, 
Belasa;
 But does it therefore follow by this, that the one is extracted from the other? How many Names do signifie all one, amongst People that never had any Conversation together? This proceeds only from meer accident; Or else if some Words of one, sound like the same Words us'd in a remote Countrey, and be of one signification, must they therefore be deriv'd from one another? Then upon necessity the 
Greeks, Latins,
 and 
Germans
 had their Original from the 
Hebrews,
 or the 
Latins
 from the 
Greeks,
 or the Germans from the 
Latins,
 or the 
Persians
 from the 
Germans;
 or, on the contrary, the last owe their Extract to the first. I will as a Testimony, and to give you a Pattern, pick out a few from a greater number.


How little difference is there in many Words between the 
Greek
 and 
Hebrew?
 The 
Hebrews
 call a Church-Congregation 
Sanhedrim,
 the 
Greeks
; the 
Greeks
 for 
I advise,
 use 
, the other 
; the 
Hebrews
 call Wise-men 
Zophei,
 the other 
: And less difference there is between 
Sympho∣niah
 and 
, 
A well-set Lesson;
 or 
Psanterin
 and 
, 
A Spiritual Hymn:
 And who also will not find a near resemblance in the consonating of divers 
Latin
 and 
Hebrew
 Words?
 For there is little difference betwixt 
Mesurah
 and 
Mensura, a Measure; Shekar
 and 
Saccarus, a sweet Moisture; Levya
 and 
Leaena, a Lioness, Sabbeca
 and 
Sambuca, a Chopping-board; Pesa
 and 
Passus, a Pace.


Then starting over the 
Greek
 and 
Latin,
 the 
Teutonicks
 would likewise pro∣duce many Words which have the same sound and signification with the 
He∣brew;
 as 
Chobel, a Cable; Ethmol
 and 
Etmael, Watching; Sothim
 and 
Sotten, Fools;
 the 
Hebrew Arets,
 is in 
Dutch, Aerde,
 or as we in 
English, Ear'd Lands; Phert
 and 
Peert, a Horse; Levyah
 and 
Leeuw, a Lion; Shad
 and 
Schadea, Damages; Kisse
 and 
Kussen,
 in our Dialect the very same, 
Kisse; Shaken
 and 
Schenken, a giving,
 whence we derive our 
English Skinker,
 from serving of Drink; 
Bel
 and 
Beeld, an Image;
 for 
Bel
 properly signifies 
Lord,
 perhaps because the Images of Heroes or Lords were worshipp'd by them, or else because 
Ninus
 first erected an Image for his Fa∣ther 
Belus,
 or 
Bel,
 to be worshipp'd.


It would make a large Volume it self, to reckon up the Consonancies of the 
Hebrew, Greek,
 and 
Latin,
 and their scatterings among all Languages where ever their Empire spread, the one being indeed borrow'd from the other, as all Languages that deal or have any converse together: For not only the Words, with some small Alterations of Letters, signifie the same in both Lan∣guages; but also without the least alteration.
 Both 
Greeks
 and 
Latins
 express 
I do,
 by 
Ago;
 the Number 
Eight,
 by 
Octo; an Arm,
 by 
Brachium
 or 
Brachion,
 in 
English, Branches,
 and 
Braces; I eat,
 by 
Edo; a Cup,
 by 
Phiale; a Curtain,
 by 
Cor∣tina,
 or 
Cortine; Merry,
 by 
Hilaris,
 or 
Hilaros; a ratling Noise or Sound,
 by 
Clango; a Camel,
 by 
Camelus,
 or 
Camelos; a Knee,
 by 
Genu,
 or 
Gonu; a Bowl
 or 
Chalice,
 by 
Calix; a Mouse,
 by 
Mus; Deceit,
 by 
Dolus,
 or 
Dolos; a House,
 by 
Domus,
 or 
Do∣mos; I carry,
 by 
Fero,
 or 
Phero;
 the Pronoun 
I, Ego; a Lion,
 by 
Leo,
 or 
; 
Flax,
 by 
Linum,
 or 
Linon; a Mother,
 by 
Mater,
 or 
Meter; now,
 by 
nunc,
 or 
nun;

the Night,
 by 
Nox,
 or 
Nux; a Rock-stone,
 by 
Petra; a Nick-name,
 by 
Scomma,
 or 
Skomma; a Boat,
 by 
Scapha,
 or 
Skaphe; a Treasure,
 by 
Thesaurus,
 or 
Thesauros; Father,
 by 
Pater; I tremble,
 by 
Tremo; an Hour,
 by 
Hora; the Evening,
 by 
Vespe∣ra,
 or 
Hespera;
 and an innumerable many Words more, that are of one signifi∣cation in both.


Now if there is not the hundredth part of the resemblance found between the 
American
 and 
Phenician
 Tongues, as there is between the 
Hebrew, Greek, Latin,
 and 
Dutch,
 according to the foremention'd Examples, which notwithstanding cannot be observ'd to be deriv'd from one another, what testimony can there be in five or six Words, which only have a few Letters that do not differ? But suppose that the agreeing of the 
Phenician
 and 
American
 Tongues could serve for a testimony,
 that these last People had their Original from the first, then there remains another doubt, 
viz.
 To know what 
Americans
 acknowledge the 
Phenicians
 for their Fathers; because their Countrey is so big, that it may almost stand in competition with all the other three parts of the Known World, being divided by so many Nations, which differ not only in their va∣rious Customs, but also in their several Languages, most of them not having the least likeness one with another: Nay, often times the Inhabitants of one Province differ so much in Dialect, that, according to 
Petrus de Cieca,
 the one cannot understand the other.


John de Laet
 observes out of 
Peter Martyr,
 and other Writers concerning the 
West-Indies,
 That there are several Languages and strange Words spoken among the divers Inhabitants of 
America;
 for the 
Hurones
 call a Head 
Sionta;
 the 
Mexicans, Tzontecontli;
 the Inhabitants of 
New-Netherland, Anonsi;
 the 
Brasilians, Acanga;
 the 
Jaos, Boppe:
 the Figures One, Two, Three, and Four, the 
Hurones
 tell thus, 
Escate, Teni, Hachin, Dac;
 the 
Mexicans, Ce, Ome, Yei, Nahuy;
 the 
Sankikanders, Cotte, Nysse, Natcha, Wyve;
 the 
Brasilians, Oyepe, Mocoy, Mocapir, Oirundi;
 the 
Jaos, Tewyn, Tage, Terrewaw, Tagyne;
 the Natives of 
New-Netherland, Onsat, Tiggani, Asse, Cayere.
 Moreover the 
Hurones
 call a Father 
Aystan;
 the 
Mexicans, Tathli;
 the 
Canadensers, Notaovi;
 in 
New-Netherland, Ragina;
 in 
Brasile, Tuba:
 And so it is generally with all other Words, which agree not in the least one with the other; so that every Territory hath not only a several Dialect, but in many Places they use besides two, three, or more distinct Speeches, not relating in the least one to another, in one Province, by which the People inhabiting Towns and Villages are distinguish'd. The Islanders discover'd by the 
Spani∣ards,
 and destroy'd,
 have left few Words behind them; yet 
Peter Martyr
 sets down some of them, which were formerly us'd in 
Hispaniola:
 They call'd Heaven 
Tures;
 a House, 
Boa;
 Gold, 
Cauni;
 a good Man, 
Tayno.
 It is worthy of observation,
 that they pronounce no 
H
 in their Language, but what is spo∣ken with a Vowel, and then give it a strong Aspiration, like the warbling gut∣tural 
 
Ghain
 of the 
Hebrews.


Our last and chiefest Testimony is 
Moses,
 who says thus in 
Genesis, Cursed be
 Canaan, a 
Servant of Servants shall he be unto his Brethren. Moreover he s
id, Blessed be the Lord God of
 Shem, 
and
 Canaan 
shall be his Servant: God shall inlarge
 Ja∣phet, 
and he shall dwell in the Tents of
 Shem; 
and
 Canaan 
shall be his Servant.
 And in the next Chapter,
 
Canaan
 begat 
Sidon.
 These Scriptures are explain'd as a Testimony of the 
Americans
 Extract from the 
Phenicians,
 which they ground on these following Reasons: The 
Phenicians
 are 
Canaan
's Successors from 
Sidon,
 who gave name to their chief City. 
Tubal
 the Issue of 
Japhet,
 whose Tents God promis'd to enlarge, and that 
Canaan
 should be his Servant, planted 
Spain.


The 
Phenicians,
 descendants from 
Sydon,
 (say they) Peopled 
America;
 the 
Spani∣ards
 sprung from 
Tubal,
 of 
Japhet,
 have subjected the 
Americans,
 descended from 
Sydon,
 of 
Canaan;
 wherein is fulfill'd that Prophecy of 
Moses, That
 Canaan 
should be Servant to
 Japhet; but it seems a great mistake,
 so to derive the 
Pheni∣cians
 from 
Canaan,
 for they are Extracted from 
Shem, Heber, Abraham,
 and 
Esau,
 sirnam'd 
Edom,
 from his saying, 
Adom, Adom,
 when he ask'd of 
Jacob, That Red, That Red,
 because he knew not how to call the prepared Pottage by its proper Name; And 
Edom
 setling himself on Mount 
Seir,
 a part of the Stony 
Arabia,
 and on the Coast of the 
Red-Sea,
 gave denomination to it, because that Sea was much frequented and Navigated by his Successors. The 
Greeks
 call it 
Ery∣threum,
 from 
Erythros,
 who is the same with 
Esau,
 and likewise signifies 
Red.
 Hereto is added, That 
Phaeix
 and 
Erythros
 have the same signification in the 
Greek;
 So then, these 
Idumeans
 taking the name of 
Phenicians,
 from the great 
Phae∣nix,
 spread themselves far and near under mighty Kings, by Navigation in the 
Red-Sea,
 and from thence Planted several Coasts and Islands, removing at last to 
Syria.


The seventh King of 
Edom, Moses
 reckoneth to be 
Baal-hanan,
 which name,
 by transposing the Syllables, the famous 
Carthaginian
 General 
Hannibal
 bare. Moreover, it may easily be demonstrated, that the 
Phenicians
 Extracted from 
Heber,
 have formerly spoke 
Hebrew,
 and since 
Arabick;
 for they dwelt before their removing, in the Stony-
Arabia.
 St. 
Jerom
 saith,
 the 
Punick
 Tongue agrees for the most part with the 
Hebrew:
 And St. 
Austin
 tells us, that many, nay,
 most of the 
Carthaginian
 words are 
Hebrew. Elisa, Dido,
 the first Foundress of 
Carthage
 proves this, for 
Elisa
 or 
Elissah,
 with the 
Hebrews,
 denotes 
A Lamb of my God;
 and 
Dido, A Lover.
 But who can find the least likeness, between the 
Hebrew
 or 
Arabick
 Tongue with the 
Americans?
 Lastly, Since the 
Phenicians
 acknowledge 
Esau
 for a Father, what then concerns the 
Americans,
 the curse of 
Canaan,
 since they are no more Extracted from 
Canaan,
 than the 
Phenicians?
 Thus much con∣cerning the 
Phenicians.


Some would derive the 
Americans
 from the 
Jews;
 others, from the ten Tribes of 
Israel,
 carry'd into captivity. The ground of which Opinions is, That the 
Jews
 and 
Israelites
 were scatter'd amongst all Nations; therefore they conclude, that 
America
 was also Peopled by them, the rather, because the an∣tient 
Jews
 and 
Americans
 were of one Complexion, and went a like Habited, both going without Shooes, onely wearing Sandals, and an upper Coat over a shorter Linnen Vest. Both are humble, quick of apprehension, and obliging, yet Valiant: But it is certain, they cannot be like the 
Jews,
 because the 
Ameri∣cans
 change their Habit, according as they live in cold or hot Countreys, and go not in the least like one another.


Father 
Immanuel
 relates, That he saw a 
Brasilian,
 not onely stoutly make his party good against three 
Portugal
 Soldiers, but had it not been by meer chance, worsted them.


Lastly, What Ceremonies of Religious Rites are observ'd by the 
Americans,
 which are used in 
Judaism?
 The 
Jews
 indeed have transplanted their Circum∣cision amongst divers Eastern People, and have they onely forgot the first Ce∣remony and signal Badge of their Religion in 
America,
 which yet not onely they, but those 
Mahumetans
 and other Sectaries punctually observe?


This makes evident their scatterings about the Face of the Earth, but will not bring them to reach 
America.
 The Sacred Text sets forth a two-fold de∣scription of the 
Jews;
 The one before the Birth of our Saviour, when they

liv'd as strangers in 
Pontus,
 
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
 and 
Bythinia. Jerusalem
 was their Metropolis, although others had their chief residence in 
Babylon,
 and 
Alex∣andria;
 for there was an 
Asiatick
 and a 
European
 dispersion; those of 
Asia
 had 
Babylon
 for their chief City, and us'd in their Synagogues the 
Chaldean
 Transla∣tion of the Bible. The 
Europeans
 kept their Seat at 
Alexandria,
 where they had a Temple like that of 
Jerusalem;
 and whilst they employ'd themselves in the 
Greek
 Version of the Holy Scripture, by the seventy two Interpreters, under 
Ptolomeus Philadelphus,
 they were call'd 
Wandering Greeks:
 Therefore, certainly the 
Americans
 are not deriv'd from these 
Jews,
 and with as little reason from those, which by 
Titus Vespasian,
 after the destruction of 
Jerusalem
 were driven in∣to several Countreys, for they were never permitted (that I may borrow the words of St. 
Cyprian
) to set forward one step,
 though but as Pilgrims, towards their Native Countrey, but strictly forbidden not to assemble or meet toge∣ther in any considerable number, which would have been necessary, if they in∣tended to Plant a new World.


A small seeming Testimony is added, being taken out of the fourth Book of 
Esdras,
 that the ten Tribes of 
Israel
 that were carry'd away by 
Salmanassar
 with their King 
Hosea
 to 
Nahalah, Habor,
 the River 
Gozan,
 and the Cities of the 
Medes,
 might be acknowledged for the first Planters of 
America:
 Concerning which,
 
Esdras
 saith thus, 
The ten Tribes brought over into another Countrey, consulted that they should forsake the multitude of the
 Heathens, 
and travel to a remoter Countrey, where no Generation of Mankind had ever liv'd before, there they would maintain their Laws, which they had not observ'd in their Countrey: Whereupon they went thither thorow the narrow entrances of the River
 Euphrates, 
for the Almighty stopt the Vains of the Ri∣ver, till they were past over; for thorow the Countrey was a way of a year and halfs Journey: wherefore that Tract of Land is call'd
 Assareth, 
then they liv'd there till the last time.


But since these Books of 
Esdras
 were not Written by a Prophet, either in the 
Hebrew
 Tongue, or allow'd by the 
Jews
 to be the Word of God, or any where taken notice of in the 
New Testament;
 wherefore then is 
Assareth
 more 
America
 than any other remoter Countrey?


St. 
Hierom
 (who certainly had a peculiar knowledge of the condition of the ten Tribes of 
Israel,
 because he liv'd in 
Asia,
 and held Correspondence with the 
Jews,
 that he might perfectly learn the 
Hebrew
 Tongue,) relates, 
That the ten Tribes (St. 
Hierome
 liv'd about the Year four hundred, under the Em∣peror 
Theodosius
) underwent great slavery in the Cities of 
Medes
 and 
Persians;
 so that this strange Voyage to 
Assareth,
 which must have happen'd long before St. 
Hierom
's time, may be Recorded amongst the other Legends of the Rabbies, concerning their 
Behemoth
 and 
Leviathan,
 who lock'd up the Souls of those that sleighted their Laws,
 in Caves under ground, as 
Esdras.


And how little opportunity the 
Israelites
 had to remove since his time, may appear by the horrible Destruction that was made for several Ages together in 
Persia
 and 
Media;
 for although the 
Persians
 became Masters again of the Realm, Conquer'd by 
Alexander
 the Great, whilst 
Alexander
's Successors invaded one another, yet they were continually in War, either against the 
Romans,
 or else the 
Indians,
 and other Eastern People; nay, the 
Saracens
 wrested the Scepter out of their hand, though but for a small time; for soon after, breaking out into Factions amongst themselves, 
Muchumet Subictigenes, Imbrael
's Son, esta∣blish'd his Throne on their Ruines, and incourag'd by such success, Arm'd himself against the 
Indians,
 and made use of the 
Turks
 assistance, with which he subdu'd the 
Babylonian Arabians:
 After which, the 
Turks,
 not without great

slaughter set the 
Persian
 Crown on their Head; which immediately totter'd by bloudy Commotions; for 
Tangrolipix
 being King of 
Persia,
 clashing with his Brother 
Cutlumuses,
 made 
Persia
 swim in the Blood of a Civil-War, till at last 
Zengis Chan
 brought from 
Tartary
 so great an Army, 
Anno
 1200. that none durst stay to make opposition; for the 
Turks
 forsook 
Persia
 after a Conquest of six Ages, and made their own way for new Quarters into 
Carmania, Phrygia,
 and 
Bithynia,
 whence they made such incursions on the 
Greek
 Empire, that at last they became sole Masters thereof. Who cannot but easily judge by this, how little opportunity the ten Tribes had, to be assembled together from remote Countreys, and to go long Journeys through untrack'd ways, and full of Ene∣mies, to travel to 
America?


Immanuel de Moraes,
 who had gotten peculiar knowledge of the 
Americans
 by his long Conversation with them, judgeth that they are not deriv'd from one People, but from the 
Carthaginians
 and 
Jews,
 and that at several times, and pla∣ces, they Landed in this New World; for the 
Carthaginians
 Sailing thither, found the Soyl so fertile, that many forsook their Native Countrey to dwell there: Whereupon, it was forbidden upon pain of Death, to send no more thither, left if 
Carthage
 should be invaded by a foraign Enemy, it should want People for a Home-defence: From this occasion it happen'd, that those that were already Transported, became rude, and of a Salvage Disposition, and spreading their Families, planted the desolate Countreys in a ranging manner, without acknowledging any Supreme Head or Governor.


Thus being scatter'd up and down, every one invented to himself a new Language, which should neither agree with the 
Carthaginians,
 or any other: But this Opinion is before at large contradicted.


Moreover, 
Moraes
 endeavors to shew, that the 
Brasilians
 are of a 
Hebrew
 Ex∣tract, because that according to the example or the 
Jews,
 they might not Mar∣ry, but in their own Tribes; they also call their Unkles, Fathers, and their Aunts, Mothers; both mourn for the Dead a Moneth together, and wear long Garments down to their Ankles. But these Arguments seem to us of small consequence, for indeed the 
Brasilians
 differ in their Marriages from the 
Jews,
 for they not onely Marry in their own Tribes, but frequently commix with their Sisters, and Daughters, or other their nearest Relations. Moreover, the 
Jews
 call'd them Fathers, from whose Loyns they sprang many Ages before, as well as their Unkles, which the 
Americans
 do not.


The Mourning for the Dead hath been an old Custom, and is not observ'd by many People, but the time of a Moneth was not setled amongst them, but was observ'd after a more unusual manner, seventy days, as in the Fields of 
Moab
 for 
Moses,
 and elsewhere for the Patriarch 
Jacob.
 Lastly, all people know, that the 
Romans
 and 
Persians
 girt themselves about with long Clothes. Besides, the 
Jews
 were strictly bound to observe Circumcision, without which they were not accounted 
Jews,
 which the 
Brasilians
 use not, as neither their Language or Letters. How is it possible, that in 
America
 they should at once have forgotten their Extract, Laws, Circumcision, Language, and other Ce∣remonies, when the rest of them observ'd nothing more strictly in all parts of the Earth?


The Learned 
Hugo Grotius,
 in his Enquiry after the original of the 
Americans,
 brings them with many Circumstances to belong to 
Panama,
 situate opposite to the Northern Parts of 
Norway,
 because something of their Languages agrees, and the Way thither easie and nearest to be found: for first they travell'd from 
Nor∣way


to 
Ysland,
 over which the 
Norwegians
 Rul'd above a thousand years since; so from 
Ysland
 through 
Friezland
 to 
Groenland,
 and from thence to 
Estotiland,
 being a part of the Main Continent of 
America.


From 
Friezland
 some Fishers went thither (as he says) two Centuries be∣fore the 
Spaniards
 touch'd that Shore;
 which 
John de Laet
 contradicts. And in∣deed what Reasons can be given, Why the 
Americans
 of the 
Straights,
 between 
Panama
 and 
Nombre de Dios,
 lying Northerly, should have another original than those that live to the South, seeing the same 
Straights
 are neither divided by Mountains nor Rivers; and the 
Spaniards
 found no alteration in the Customs and Languages betwixt them that liv'd above or below these 
Straights.
 And who will believe that 
Norway,
 which was but indifferently peopled, could af∣ford such numerous Colonies as could plant the Northern 
America,
 which far exceeds the South, and chiefly, when the great Islands that lie near the East and West, are added to it? Moreover it is certain, (if the Yslander 
Angrim Jonas
 is to be credited) that some Families fled out of 
Norway
 from their enraged King to 
Ysland
 in the Year 874. which at that time was but meanly inhabited.


Forty years before, 
Lewis
 the Just put the 
Yslanders
 under the protection of Pope 
Gregory
 the fourth, who gave the Government of the 
Ysland
 Church to 
Ansgar
 Archbishop of 
Hamburgh.
 But how comes it that there is not the least spark of 
Christianity
 found amongst the Northern 
Americans,
 if they are deriv'd from the 
Ysland Christians?
 and why did the 
Yslanders
 remove to colder Coun∣treys than 
Groenland
 and 
Friezland,
 or their own native Soil, and for the most part not inhabited?


Concerning 
Groenland
 and 
Friezland,
 it is known by our 
English
 Navigators, that they are joyn'd together, and both to the Northern 
America;
 but not with∣out vast Bays and Inlets, which betwixt 
Groenland
 and 
America
 are obstructed with floating Castles of Ice; so that the Passage is very dangerous. And full as troublesom, if not altogether impossible, would the Journey be by Land, because the Earth lies so thick cover'd with Ice and Snow, especially the Val∣leys, that no Traveller is able to get through.


Moreover, that which 
Grotius
 says farther of the Fishers which first disco∣ver'd 
Estotiland,
 is grounded on the Relation of the 
Venetian
 Knights, 
Nicholas
 and 
Marcus Zeno,
 two Brothers. 
Anno
 1380. 
Nicholas Zeno
 suffer'd Shipwrack on the 
Friezland
 Coast; 
Marcus
 inform'd thereof, steer'd his Course thither; fourteen years they spent before they came to 
Estotiland:
 at last they return'd again to 
Friezland,
 where 
Nicholas
 died: But 
Marcus
 returning home publish'd his Journal;
 wherein he relates, That 
Estotiland
 is above a thousand Leagues distant from 
Friezland,
 and was discover'd by 
Friezland
 Fisher-men that were driven thither by Storm. But he hath set down many things that have little resemblance of truth, according to what is since found by credible Navigators; and therefore we cannot depend on 
Zeno
's Discovery.


John de Laet
 accounts it a great mistake in 
Grotius,
 that as a testimony of the 
Americans
 original out of 
Norway,
 he compares their Languages. He reckons up some Places to be Northward of 
Panama,
 which end their words with the syllable 
Lan
 in stead of 
Land,
 because the 
Spaniards
 have left out the Letter 
D
 at the end thereof. It is certain, that in the Northern 
America
 lie 
Cimatlan, Coatlan, Guescolan, Artlan, Quaxutatlan, Icatlan, Tapatlan, Cinacatlan, Tenuchitlan, Comitlan, Metzitlan, Guatitlan, Necotitlan, Curcatatlan.
 Besides, that most of these Names are not of Countreys, but of Towns and Villages, and therefore no ways fitting to have the termination of 
Land:
 and it is well known that ma∣ny

ny 
American
 words end with 
Lan,
 which signifie nothing less than Land: for the 
Mexicans say Puertatitlan,
 which signifies 
At the Gate below; Ochachitlantzitlan, Yet lower; Tenoxtitlan,
 (this City is also call'd from her Founder 
Mexis, Mexico
) that is, 
Rests on a Rock.
 Moreover, it may not without reason seem strange to any, that the Northern 
Americans
 have remembred but three Cities out of all the 
Teutonick
 Tongue, 
viz. Lan
 in stead 
Land.


Concerning 
Groenland,
 through which the 
Norwegians
 are thought to have travell'd to 
America, Lysander
 witnesseth,
 That it was accidentally discover'd by one 
Eric Rauder, Anno
 987. and planted thirteen years after.


Olaus,
 King of 
Norway,
 plac'd two Bishops over the new Inhabitants, as Sub∣stitutes to the Archbishop of 
Dronthen.
 For four Ages they Sail'd frequently to 
Groenland;
 but since their King was impoverish'd by War, they left off that Trade.


We find not in any Author, that the 
Norwegians
 which liv'd along the Sea∣shore, ever went to seek a Way over the inaccessible Snowy Mountains of 
Groenland,
 to this our 
New World.


Besides, 
Grotius
 stands for the 
Norwegians
 as Planters, upon testimony of the 
Mexicans
 themselves, who told the 
Spaniards,
 That their Ancestors which plant∣ed there came from the 
North,
 first setling themselves on 
Estotiland,
 where to this day there are not improbable proofs by several remarks, that they were a 
Norwegian
 Colony.


In the 
American
 City 
Norumbega,
 live a People that speak the same Language, and observe the same Customs with the 
Mexicans.


In this by-Corner are found also some 
Alavards,
 or 
Longobards,
 or 
Lombards,
 as they say. Now the 
Spaniards
 call that 
New Mexico
 because last discover'd, though indeed the old, cramm'd with People eight hundred years since: for the 
Mexicans
 of 
New Mexico
 do not lie so far Northerly, as to the North-west: for this 
Mexico
 lies in sight of 
California,
 which is believ'd to border on 
Tartary,
 or at least separated from it by a narrow Channel. But 
Norumbega
 (if ever such a Place was) must, according to the 
West-Indian
 Records, have been situate where a part of 
New France
 lies, now planted by the 
English:
 between which and 
New Mexico
 lies an almost unmeasurable vast Tract of Land. Mean while here is not the least sign of this City 
Norumbega
 to be found: neither do the In∣habitants dwell in Cities, but live in Tents, or moveable Villages, which change their Names as oft as their Governors. Moreover, the 
Norwegians
 could not get to this 
Norumbega
 by Land through 
Ysland
 and 
Groenland
 to 
Estotiland,
 because of the vast Bays, and great 
Midland-Sea,
 discover'd by the 
English
 in their North-western Discoveries; so that leaving 
Estotiland,
 it was altogether impossible for them to come to 
Norumbega.


Hereto may be added what the 
Mexicans
 say of themselves, who acknow∣ledge, That travelling from the 
North,
 they did not find an un-inhabited Countrey before them, but were forc'd to make their Way by a long and bloody War with the 
Chichimecen,
 a salvage People,
 that knew neither Laws or Religion.


The People also dwelling opposite to 
California,
 differ from the Customs of the 
Mexicans,
 being divided into several People of contrary Constitutions, and as different Languages.


Grotius
 scrues up his Arguments from the likeness of the 
American
 Speech and Customs with the 
Norwegian:
 for (says he) there is little difference between 
Pagod
 and 
by-God,
 or 
like God; Guaira
 and 
Waeijer,
 that is, 
A Fan; Ilama
 and 
Lam,






 in 
English, Lamb; Peko
 and 
Beke,
 a 
Brook
 or 
Rivulet.
 Both Customs and Con∣stitutions have also great resemblance. The 
Mexicans
 relate, that their Prede∣cessors onely follow'd Hunting; that they divided and reckon'd the Time, not by Days, but by Nights, and wash'd their Children as soon as they were born in cold Water.


They are so much inclin'd to Gaming, that they venture their Liberty at it. Every one is satisfi'd with one Wife, except some of the Nobility, which of∣tentimes have more. They throw up high Banks in several places to damm out the Sea; believe the Immortality of the Soul; every one eats at a peculiar Table; most of them go naked, onely caver their 
Pudenda
 with a Cloth; some Sacrifice and eat Mans-flesh: all which, according to 
Tacitus, Pliny, Lucan,
 and other 
Roman
 Writers, was observ'd by the antient 
Germans;
 from whom those that inhabit between the 
Norwegian
 Mountains were extracted.


These Allegations, to make the 
Norwegians
 to be the Parents of the Nor∣thern 
Americans, John de Laet
 thus contradicts : 
It no ways follows that one People take original from the other, because here and there are several words found, that have the same signification and sound in divers Countreys; much less when they must either add, change, or diminish several Letters. Moreover, there is no small mistake in the compar'd words: for 
Pagod
 is not us'd all over 
America;
 the 
East-Indians
 about the River 
Indus,
 call their Idol-Temples 
Pagod,
 or 
Pagode;
 the word 
Guaira
 is no where us'd in 
America,
 but by the 
Peruvians,
 and with them not signifying a 
Fan,
 but a little 
Oven;
 neither is 
Ilama a Lamb,
 (for before the coming of the 
Spaniards
 thither, nei∣ther Sheep nor Lambs were ever seen in 
Peru
) but a Wool-bearing Beast, thus describ'd by 
Joseph de Acosta:


Ilama
 (says he) a four-footed Creature, furnishes its Master with Meat and Clothing, and supplies the office of a Beast for Burthens, and at no charge for Hay nor Provender, well satisfi'd with what he finds in the Ways or Mountains. But the 
Ilama's
 are of two sorts, either woolly, or short-hair'd:

the first go by the Name 
Pacos,
 the other 
Moromoro,
 being not much less than a Calf, with a long Neck like a Camel, but of several colours; for some are white, some black, and others speckled, having an odd Look, espe∣cially when they are ty'd, and stand still without any motion, staring with goggle-eyes on their Owners: Sometimes in a moody humor, upon a sud∣den taking a freak, they run up to the top of almost inaccessible Mountains, where both the frantick Beast and his Burthen are loft. The 
Pacos
 sometimes likewise takes sudden Pets, and fustian Fits, often doing the forward 
Supersalt,
 tumbling over and over with their Goods, and will not be rais'd, their moo∣diness continuing, with beating, nay though they cut them to pieces: but the best way is to sit down by them, and wait some hours till their humor be∣ing spent they rise again of their own accords. These Beasts are much in∣clin'd to a Disease call'd 
Carashe
 or the 
Mange,
 of which they generally die: and because the Disease is very catching, they straight bury the infect∣ed alive, so the better to preserve the rest.


Grotius
 also mistakes, when he compares the 
Mexican Peke
 with the 
Dutck Beke;
 for though many 
Mexican
 Places, Mountains, and Rivers, terminate in 
Peke,
 yet it signifies not a 
Brook
 or 
Rivulet,
 for that they call 
Atlauhtli.


John de Laet
 tells also,
 That with great diligence he found a 
Mexican
 Dictio∣nary, Printed by the 
Spaniards
 in 
Mexico,
 to find if there were any words in it which agreed with any of those 
European
 Languages that he understood, but found not one.


It is the same case with the Customs and Constitutions between the 
Norwe∣gians
 and Northern. 
Americans:
 for what concerns Hunting, how many People have formerly liv'd by it? The antient 
Germans,
 and to this day the 
Tartars
 make it their whole business, excelling, in that Art all other Nations. Besides, that the more serious sort of the 
Mexicans
 many Ages since scorn'd to derive themselves from a Hunting Ancestry, but affirm that they found the 
Chichimecen
 in those Countreys, who were great 
Venators.


The accounting of Time by the Nights, extracted from the 
Hebrews,
 is ob∣serv'd by divers Eastern People: and although the 
Germans
 dipt and wash'd their Children in cold Rivers, or Brooks, so soon as they were born, yet the 
Mexicans
 never did it, but the Mother lays the Child on the fourth day after its Birth, in an open place of the House; in the middle whereof stands a Pot full of Water cover'd with Broom, in which they wash the Infant. Neither are the 
Americans
 so much addicted to the Vice of Gaming as other Nations;
 so that 
Grotius
 taxeth them too severely as to that point: as on the contrary, he too much clears them of Polygamy, whereas the 
Mexicans
 Marry as many Wives as they please, or are able to maintain. Father 
Martyn Perez
 relates the same of the 
Cinaloans,
 and other 
Americans;
 as also 
Quarterius
 of the Natives in 
Nova Fran∣cia,
 which lie nearest to 
Norway.
 And what need the 
Americans
 have the 
Germans
 their Teachers, to make Dams and Banks against Floods, since Nature and Necessity it self instructs it? and where are any People so ignorant, as to ascribe the same event to Men and Beasts after death? 'Tis true, their man∣ner of eating in 
America
 is several, because the People do not much converse together: but they did not go naked;
 for the 
Spaniards
 found them not onely neatly Habited, but had a proper. Name for every thing they wore. The 
Virginians
 us'd long Shirts; the 
Floridans
 Skins of wild Beasts; and towards the North they cover'd themselves from Head to Foot in hairy and undress'd Hydes. The sacrificing of Men was in former Ages spreading far and near

over the World, and how far it was practis'd here, hath been already declar'd at large. Lastly, all the 
Americans
 are not guilty of eating of Man's-flesh, but that salvageness is confin'd to the Southern 
America.


Thus much we have said, to prove that the 
Norwegians
 had no hand in planting the Northern 
America,
 we shall now proceed to enquire who planted the Southern Parts, from the 
Straights
 between 
Panama
 and 
Nombre de Dios,
 to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan.


The 
Peruvians,
 possessing a large Tract of Land along the Coast of the 
South-Sea, Grotius
 would thus derive from 
China:


The 
Peruvians,
 being of a subtile Wit, and quick of Apprehension, argue suf∣ficiently that they are not extracted from the more Northern 
Americans,
 but ra∣ther from the 
Chineses,
 which the several Wrecks of 
Chinese
 Ships found on these Coasts sufficiently evidence: and no wonder, if curiosity or accident brought the 
Chineses
 expert Navigators to this Countrey, separated onely by one Sea from them. To this we may add their Rites of Religion; for both worship the Sun, and call their King the Son of the Sun; they write no Let∣ters, but make Characters downwards.
 
Mancocapacus
 was a 
Chinese
 of strange Policy; who being inform'd that his Countrey-men inhabited fruitful Coun∣treys on the other side of the 
South-Sea,
 but without Laws or Government, Sail'd over thither, and gather'd the scatter'd Multitudes in a Body, and establish'd an hereditary Kingdom after the 
Chinese
 manner, to him and his Successors.


To which 
John de Laet
 answers thus:


Though the 
Peruvians
 exceed the other 
Americans
 in Policy, and at the arrival of the 
Spaniards
 liv'd in a handsom Order of Government, yet they can no ways be compar'd to the sharp-witted, and noble-spirited 
Chineses;
 nay, there are in no Place of 
Peru
 found such Artificers as those of 
China,
 that bear the praise of all the World; no where such manner of Buildings or Cities, nor the least likeness of the 
Chinese
 Curiosities. As concerning the Wrecks found in 
Peru,
 I find no cre∣dible Author that gives an account thereof: for certainly the 
Chineses
 could much easier, and a nearer way have come through the 
Atlantick Sea
 to the Coasts of 
America,
 lying to the East of 
Peru,
 than steer along the vast, and much greater 
South Sea,
 and endure the horrible Storms and vast Waves, which the 
European
 Ships are scarce able to endure, much less the 
Chinese
 Ves∣sels, which are not so good. The 
Spaniards
 which Sail yearly from 
Acupul∣co
 to the 
Philippines
 sensible of the great danger which they endure, chiefly by the great gusts of Wind near 
California.
 Besides, the 
Peruvians
 before the the arrival of the 
Spaniards,
 were utterly ignorant of great Ships, and the use of Sails. How could they at once have forgotten that Art, which they brought with them thither, Moreover, it is easier to Sail from 
Peru
 to 
China,
 than from 
China
 to 
Peru;
 because the Winds under the Equinoctial Line commonly blow Easterly. And it is the greater wonder, that the 
Chi∣nese
 Jonks accidentally by Storm should be driven to 
Peru,
 because they were never stor'd with Provisions but for a short Voyage, whereas this ask'd nine Moneths. But if any one will suppose, that they purposely directed their Course thither, how came the 
Chineses
 to Sail just to 
Peru,
 and not to 
New Spain,
 which is much closer to 
China?
 why were there no Merchan∣dises of the 
Chineses
 found in 
Peru,
 since they went thither for Trade? how came they to neglect that Navigation they had once found? Nor is their Sun-worship (which was formerly practis'd in most Parts of the World) of

any validity to derive them from 
China?
 But the contrary is most apparent, for the 
Peruvians
 worship for their chief God, 
Viracocha,
 that is, 
God Almighty,
 or 
The Creator of all things.


The 
Chineses,
 it 
Consutius
 an eye-witness may be credited, are divided into three Sects of Religion: The first follow the Learn'd 
Trigantius,
 and acknow∣ledge a King of the Heavens, which must onely be serv'd as the 
Chineses
 sole Governor; to which purpose, two Temples are built in the Royal Cities 
Nankin
 and 
Pekin,
 one Consecrate to Heaven, and the other to the Earth. The second Sect hath the name of 
Sciequia,
 and serve the Idol 
Omyto.
 The third nam'd 
Lanzu,
 imploy themselves in Magick and Exorcisms, Conju∣ring up, and laying Evi-Spirits, whose horrid representations, when they have stuck upon the Walls, they make an artificial and dreadful noise, as if Hell were broke loose, and the House full of Devils; sometimes also force the Evil-Spirits to enter into Images, from whence they receive no imper∣tinent answers to their questions: Therefore, who will compare this Su∣perstition of the 
Peruvians
 worshipping of the Sun, to the 
Chinese
 Religion, which do no such things?


The 
Peruvians
 call'd their King, 
A Lord of the Realm,
 and not 
The Son of the Sun,
 as in 
China:
 Though the 
Mexicans
 otherwise worship the Sun, and in their manner of adulation, styl'd 
Hernando Cortez,
 their Conqueror, 
Son of the Sun:
 As to what concerns the manner of writing, it is very well known, that the 
Chineses
 words are all Monosyllables, so that they have as many Letters as Words, which they joyn so together, that they reckon eighty thousand, but with ten thousand they are able to express themselves in most matters. These Characters are contain'd in their 
Halpien
 or Dictionary.
 The antient 
Chineses
 us'd seventeen several sorts of Characters in their writing, some con∣sisting of Serpents, that by several Wreathes and contortious Windings, sig∣nify'd several things; others, of all sorts of agrestick Tools belonging to Husbandry; some Characters of the Feathers of the Bird 
Fum-hoar;
 others of Oysters and Worms, or of Roots, of Herbs, or Birds Claws, or of Turtles, or of Herbs and Birds Feathers mingled, or of Planets, and such like; but what manner of Writing or Hieroglyphick of theirs resembles those, who by their own testimony know neither Pen, Paper, Ink, nor any manner of Writing, but reckon the antiquity of time by strung Beads, which was observ'd many ages since among several Nations.


Hitherto we have discover'd the several Opinions concerning the Original of the 
Americans,
 or first Plantation of 
America,
 from all which, having receiv'd no clear or demonstrative satisfaction, we must open our way to a further scrutiny: But first, we must needs confess, that contradiction is not difficult; but it is some∣thing of Work, when we have beaten down a well-fortifi'd Opinion, to set up somewhat in stead thereof, to stand a permanent and undeniable truth, which will be the harder, in regard the Inhabitants of this new World have no old Chronologies concerning their Antiquities, and first settling there; yet if we cannot go so far absolutely to assert, yet some probabilities, grounded (as we suppose) upon better reasons, may give more satisfaction;
 for none will deny, but that the Generations of Mankind being strangely multiply'd after the Flood, they then living five times our Ages, and Wars not beginning till the known part of the Earth was over-stock'd, justling for Territories, and some thrust quite out, at last found 
America;
 which spreading it self to a vast extent, and now found almost every where well inhabited, may be guess'd,

that it was not onely Planted from the first, but several times replenish'd since by various Nations; Why may not several Planters, and at several times make room for their Colonies, incroaching one upon another, either by force or compact;
 as the 
French
 themselves upon the 
Gauls,
 the 
Normans
 upon them, the 
Goths
 among the 
Spaniards,
 and the 
Saxons
 among the 
Brittains,
 and the 
Nor∣mans
 again upon them?


Several people may easily Sail over thither, the 
Azores
 or the 
Canary
 Isles lye so, that they are ready (as if design'd) for Transportation to 
America;
 from whence 
Acosta
 made a Voyage in fifteen days. Also 
Pliny
 gives us an account, that these Islands lay uninhabited in his time; yet is it well known, that after 
Pliny's
 time, Ruins of Buildings were found there, signifying, they had been former∣ly Planted; and why might not those ancient Inhabitants Sail thence to the neighboring 
America?


Tercera
 lying half way between 
Spain
 and 
America,
 was frequented by Navi∣gators before the Birth of our Savior; and it seems as easie to Sail from thence to 
America,
 as from the Main Land of 
Spain
 thither: Add this, that necessity forc'd the 
Spaniards
 to look about them from other Countreys,
 for since they lost their Victorious Champion 
Baucius Gapetus,
 they were every where bea∣ten, being tired out by the 
Phenician
 Forces, and that oppression over, suffer'd as much under the 
Roman
 Yoke: Wherefore it seems not strange, if a con∣siderable number remov'd from thence, that they might live some where else in quiet; for which purpose they wanted no conveniencies to Rig and set forth stout and sufficient Vessels, able to live in those Seas, having had long experience from the 
Phenician
 Voyagers, whose Fleets Sail'd daily to and again in several Expeditions, from 
Cadiz
 and 
Gibraltar
 towards these Western Coun∣treys: Nay, 
Hanno
 himself their first Navigator that way, who gives an account of the 
Gorgons,
 or the Isles of 
Cape Verd,
 a good part of the way to 
America.


And though 
Brittain, Ireland,
 and the 
Brittish Orcades
 lay further from 
America,
 yet something may be said particularly to prove, That many Ages since, Ex∣peditions had been made from thence to the New World; and that the Inhabitants of these our Isles, in former Ages, were peculiarly famous for their skill in Navigation;
 insomuch, that the 
Cretans
 and 
Phenicians
 emulous of their skill, and jealous of their danger, made several Attacques and Invasions upon these Isles, which is the more probable, many remarks of the 
Phenician
 and 
Greek
 Language, remaining in the denominations of the Countrey: Of which, take first this account:


Anno
 1170. When 
Owen Guyneth,
 Prince of 
Wales,
 having Raign'd long and happily in his setled Dominions, dying, left several Sons, who quarrelling, their elder Brother, as not contented with their shares of the Principality, nor to be under him, having gotten no mean Interests and Claims to the whole by their struglings, so weakned one another, that they open'd a way to the loo∣sing of all.


Amongst these Brothers, 
Madok,
 a Prince of a milder disposition, weary of such unnatural Dissentions, threw up his share, better contented to seek new Fortunes abroad;
 whereupon there were many soon perswaded to venture their lives with him, where ever he would please to Transport: So Rigging a small Fleet, he Sail'd Westward, far beyond 
Ireland,
 where at last he dis∣cover'd an unknown and un-inhabited Countrey, but wondrous pleasant, the Air being temperate, and the Soyl most fertile: Glad of this good success (as the Story says) he returning, spreading the Fame of this his New-Found-Land,

which they might exchange for a barren Soyl, hatter'd and harass'd with an endless Civil-War.


No small number flock'd to these Summons, as a most acceptable Underta∣king; so that soon after he was able to send forth ten good Ships, Ereighted only with Men, Women, and Children, and all other Materials fit for a new Planta∣tion; which not long after Landed in 
Acuzamil,
 a Countrey in the North of 
Ame∣rica,
 as 
Francis Lopez de Gomara
 believes, because there he onely found some re∣maining Tracks of Christianity, a People that worshipp'd the Cross, but knew no reason why or wherefore they ador'd that sign of our Redemption. Now, some will say, that this Worship of the Cross is no argument to prove, that the 
Brittish
 Christians first Planted in the North of 
America;
 but what will not time and change of place do, where Transplanted People keep no Records, so they forget not onely Religion, Laws, and Customs, but who they were, and from whence they came, Oblivion first mutilating, and at last swallowing up all; of which, take this one late president.


Anno
 1598. The Duke 
De La Roche
 obtain'd leave of the 
French
 King, to trans∣port a Colony of Volunteers to 
New France;
 in his way he Landed fifty Men on the Island 
De Sable,
 to rest his Passengers, and that he might the better, and with more ease explore the Countrey, and when resolv'd where to settle, then to fetch them off; who accordingly, as design'd, soon after, returning thither, was met with so violent a Storm, that not being able to Weather the Isle of 
Sable,
 where he left his People, he lost his whole Expedition, and was driven back to a 
French
 Harbor, where no sooner arriv'd, he was so highly charg'd, that he was cast into Prison, when those he had left neglected upon the Isle, were not once so much as thought of; in this interim, they never expecting to hear more of their Captain, liv'd in a wild and miserable condition, feeding upon Fish, and sometimes wild Swine, without Bread, Drink, or Salt.


When the Baron of 
Leri
 went with Letters Patents, to be Governor of 
Nova Francia,
 and by stress of Weather in his Voyage, was forc'd to put in at 
Sable,
 where he found the remainder of 
La Roches
 People, who being from fifty re∣duced to twelve, having clad themselves in Sea-Wolves Skins, they had not onely lost their former 
French
 Civilities, but forgot in a manner their Religi∣on, much of their Language, and what they were, being as if Metamorphos'd into bestial Salvages.


And although we have already controverted the improbability of Peopling 
America,
 either by accident of Storm, or set purpose; yet it may be possible that so it might happen, for as the several vertues of Plants, Herbs, Precious-Stones, and Minerals, though strangely occult, and so altogether unknown, that what could never be found by Art, meer chance hath brought to light, and their wondrous qualities, some casual accident hath made apparent; so strange and remote Countreys never to be found in our Charts, or Maps, nor Registred in any Story, Seamen bound to their intended Harbors, have stumbled on by chance, either Hood-wink'd by blind Mists, or forc'd upon by pertinatious Weather; of which 
America
 may be her own witness, for how was 
Columbus
 stirr'd up, but by incitations of the Journals of a Sea-Captain, dying in his House, driven on the 
American
 Islands by foul Weather.


Although from the foremention'd places, and after the same manner, 
Ame∣rica
 might be furnish'd with Inhabitants; so it also gives us a more certain as∣surance, that the Planting of 
America
 was not onely soon after the Flood, but that they came also thither by Land: And how strangely would it be against

the Majesty and Wisdom of Divine Providence, to leave half the Universal Globe, a World fully supply'd with all sorts of Creatures, fit for Food and Service, Plants, Herbs, and the richest Minerals, like a House new built, and well fumish'd,
 without a Master or any Inhabitant, 
viz.
 Man, who be∣ing of Celestial Extract, should be able to acknowledge and glorifie the Crea∣tor, by admiring the Creature in his great Works: Besides, the confus'd No∣tions and Fables of Giants, Perpetrators of all manner of Crimes, and wal∣lowing in all kind of sensual Debaucheries, are always remembred among the Antiquities of the 
Americans,
 and that they had some slender hints of antient Truth, not onely of the Giants before the Flood, but of those that soon after the rank fatness of the Earth, produc'd and fed to that pitch of Arrogance, that the covenanting Brethren defi'd God,
 fortifying themselves to fight him by the ad∣vantage of that their long congested Pile, 
Babel,
 which in a short time was trans∣verted by the 
Heathen
 Poets into their 
Gigantomachia,
 heaping Hills on Hills, like the 
American
 Traditions: From which we may conjecture, that they came thither in the time of 
Noah;
 for why may not any believe, when 
Noah
 liv'd three hun∣dred years after he Landed on Mount 
Ararat,
 that he took care to People the World? And who will make him ignorant of this New World, who living five hundred years before, might not improbably by his own industry and the help of the former long-liv'd 
Patriarchs,
 been well able to make a general Survey of the Old; and he could better furnish 
America,
 it being nearer Mount 
Ararat,
 than supply 
Italy, Spain, Germany,
 or any Northern Territories in 
Europe,
 so that 
America
 might be known to the first people after the Flood, nay, inhabit∣ed by them, though since that, the knowledge was lost.


Pliny
 complaining of the Supine negligence, and stupendious sloth which reign'd then and long before as he had observ'd, among all people, and in eve∣ry place, who were so far from making inquiry after discoveries of Lands for new Plantations, that they lost the old, when they had begun to settle, though under the greatest serenity of Peace; The Sea by that means lying open be∣yond what any juncture of former times could be proud of.


Yet the 
Fortunate,
 or 
Canary
 Islands were in the first ages after 
Noah,
 frequented with Vessels, which in later times were altogether neglected, till 
Guillaum Betan∣court,
 a Gentleman of 
Picardye,
 brought them again to be taken notice of by a fresh Trade.
 The Fable of the 
Hesperian
 Gardens, and the Dragon that kept the Golden Fruit, with constant Vigils, is nothing but an allusion to the Sea, which with Serpentine Embraces, not onely secur'd these scatter'd Isles, but swal∣low'd up several Adventurers that too hardy made their unhappy approaches for discovery.


Another Allegation for the Planting of 
America
 by Land, both whose sides are wash'd on the East and West, by the South and Atlantick Ocean, may be thus probably made out: The Atlantick rowls over with almost Fathomless Waters, three thousand Leagues of Ground; the South-Sea not much less, which well may be, being indeed but one continu'd Sea, encompassing, till meeting there, the Universal Ball; whence springs a more likelyhood, that 
America
 might be Planted from the Southern parts, from the 
Straights
 of 
Magel∣lan,
 and 
Le-Mayr.


Peter Fernandes de Quir
 relates, That he and a Commander, 
Lodowick Paes le Torres
 saw a part of the South Countrey, and in it innumerable Inhabitants, 
Whites,
 
Blacks, Sallows,
 with long, black, curl'd, Woolly, and yellow Hair. They know no Walls or Fortresses for Defence, Laws or Kings, but are divided

into Tribes: They use indeed Bows, Arrows, Clubs, and a kind of Spears: Their Houses are cover'd with Palm-Tree-Leaves; their Housholdstuff con∣sists onely of a few Earthen Pots, and such Trinkets; yet they have some lit∣tle skill in Weaving, and though they gonaked, pride themselves in Neck-Laces and Bracelets, made of Mother of Pearl: But these for their Complexions and Constitution of Body, Customs, and manners, are rather deriv'd from the 
Ame∣ricans,
 than they from them, and therefore we must seek for their Original from the North; from which are but two ways, one from 
Ysland
 and 
Groen∣land,
 which 
Grotius
 endeavors to prove, but contradicted; the other out of 
Tar∣tary,
 which certainly was the first Nursery, from whence the 
Americans
 were Transplanted.


Tartary
 or 
Tattary,
 so call'd from the River 
Tatter,
 which runs thorow the Countrey 
Mongul
 into the Northern Ocean, covers a great part of the Terre∣strial Globe; the lesser 
Tartary
 makes out a considerable part of 
Europe;
 the greater is 
Asia.


This great 
Tartary,
 which is a thousand Leagues long, and six hundred broad, reckons five chief Provinces, 
viz.
 the wild 
Tartary,
 inhabited by Herdsmen; 
Sa∣gatai,
 of which the Metropolis is 
Samarcand,
 famous for the mighty 
Tamerlane;
 next 
Turkestan;
 then 
Kitai,
 which the great 
Cham
 Commands; and lastly, 
Old Tartary,
 according to 
Andreas Caesariensis,
 the habitation of 
Gog
 and 
Magog.


Now we must enquire from what 
Tartars
 the 
Americans
 are Extracted:


Mornaeus, Postellus, Genebrardus, Poterus,
 and others are of opinion,
 That the 
Tartars,
 which about the year 1228. under the Command of 
Zingis Cham
 overspread the Earth like a deluge, were the Successors of the ten Tribes of 
Is∣rael,
 which were carry'd into captivity to 
Assyria
 by 
Salmanazar.
 The name 
Tar∣tary,
 or rather 
Tattaria,
 seems to be some testimony thereof, because it signifies in the 
Syrian
 or 
Hebrew
 Tongue, 
Remnants
 or 
Remainders,
 as seemingly, because these 
Tartarians
 were remainders of the foremention'd Tribes; nay, the Northern 
Tartary
 Herdsmen preserve to this day the Names 
Dan, Zabulon,
 and 
Naphthali:
 Wherefore we need not to admire, why so many 
Jews
 are found in 
Russia, Sar∣matia,
 and 
Liefland;
 nay, the nearer to 
Tartary,
 the mote 
Jews
 there are.


Circumcision hath a long time been observ'd among them, before 
Mahomet
 brought in his new Law; it seems, that 
Mahomet
 order'd the Circumcision and other Laws, according to 
Moses,
 to be observ'd by the Northern people, be∣cause that in his time, they began to Rebel, that so they might the better be kept in awe by their new Religion.


Joannes Leonclavius
 relates, That in 
Liefland
 near 
Riga,
 he heard the wilde Natives call'd 
Letti,
 not without great admiration, go crying along the High-Ways and Fields, with a doleful voice, 
Jeru, Jeru, Masco lou:
 It is believ'd that they mourn for 
Jerusalem
 and 
Damascus;
 but by their long continuance in the vast Wildernesses, they have forgot their Religion and Laws, and what else might enable to tell us who they were. Several learned Authors question this removal of the 
Israelites
 out of 
Assyria
 to 
Tartary,
 though to our Judgement their Arguments are too weak, to take from them of the footing they have gotten there; yet nevertheless, the 
Israelites
 are not to be taken for the Planters of 
America,
 for why else is not 
Judaisme
 as well found in 
America
 as in 
Tartary.
 But it is already shewn, that 
America
 was inhabited long before the dispersion of the 
Israelites.


Now to shut up all, it is evident, that the first Planters of 
America
 were not 
Europeans
 from the dissimilitude of the People, both in their Complexions, Lan∣guage,

and Persons; nor 
Africans,
 because that in all the far spreading Coun∣trey of 
America,
 not one 
Negro
 is to be found, except a few near the River 
Mar∣tha,
 in the little Territory 
Quarequa,
 which must by Storm be drove thither from the 
Guinny
 Coast:
 So that 
Asia,
 the Mother of all People, onely remains to be Implanter of our 
America,
 whose Western Coast, opposite to 
Asia,
 is more inhabited than to the East, where it respects 
Europe.


Moreover, 
Armenia,
 out of which, by 
Noah
's Progeny, the whole Earth was re-peopled, borders on 
Scythia,
 now call'd 
Tartary,
 and 
Tartary
 faces 
America,
 separated onely by the 
Straights
 of 
Anian;
 though some are of opinion, that out of the South into the Frozen Sea, there is no passage thorow these 
Straights;
 else (as we have already prov'd the contrary) how came all those Voracious and Poysonous Beasts into 
America,
 if it be clearly separated from 
Asia
 by Sea?


It deserves here to be related, what happen'd to 
Henry Cornelison Schaep,
 and 
William Byleveld,
 Sailing from 
Batavia
 to discover the 
Tartarick
 River 
Polysange,
 but were taken and carry'd Prisoners to the 
Japan
 Court at 
Jedo;
 being Com∣manded there by Order of the Councel to give an account of a 
Japan
 Map or Card, which was laid before them, and contain'd the Provinces of 
Japan, Am∣boina,
 the 
Molucca
 Islands, 
Manilha,
 the 
South-Sea, Borneo, Celebes, Malacca, Tartary, Formosa, Corea,
 and the vast and Mountainous Countrey or Desart of 
Jesso,
 sepa∣rated from 
Japan
 by the 
Straights
 of 
Sungar;
 though toward the North, it joyns to 
Japan
 in the Province of 
Ochio;
 and beginning in forty seven degrees, run North-East towards 
America,
 but they could not possible find the 
Straights
 of 
Anian;
 but on the contrary, the Promontory of 
Tartary, viz.
 the Province 
Ka∣taya
 or 
Katui
 lay in the same parallel with the Northern 
America.


Hereto may be added, that 
Asia
 hath no Territory any where, which may more easily with numerous Colonies supply 
America
 than this part of 
Tartary,
 as well for the vastness of the Countrey, to which no other can compare, as for the increasing of the Inhabitants: Who doth not admire, that according to 
Michalon Lithouwer,
 there is scarce a City in 
Tartary
 that boasted less than a thou∣sand Temples? and to see 
Canguista
 first King of 
Tartary,
 about the Year 1200. in Arms; and his Successor 
Hoccata
 following his Fathers bloody Footsteps, whilst he prepar'd his Sons with three vast Armies? The eldest Son, 
Jachis,
 March'd Westward with thirty thousand Horse; 
Batho
 drew with as great an Army towards the North; 
Tagladais
 being the youngest fell into the 
Moores
 Countrey above 
Egypt. Hoccata
 himself March'd victoriously into the North 
America,
 subdu'd great part of the 
Persian
 Kingdom, and beat the 
Turks,
 led by the General 
Goniata
 with a great Army, 
Anno
 1241. as 
Jacob Planensis
 and 
Bene∣dictus Sarmata,
 two 
Monks,
 sent by Pope 
Innocent
 to 
Hoccata,
 witness: The great number of the 
Tartars
 or 
Scythians,
 may appear by the several people, spread far and near over 
Tartary; Pliny
 reckons some of them, 
viz. Auchetes, Neuri, Ge∣loni, Thussagetes, Budini, Basilides, Agathyrsi, Nomades, Anthropophagi, Hyperborei, Arimphei, Cimmerij, Cicianthi, Georgi, Sacores,
 and others: What number would the Inhabitants make up that live in 
America,
 in 
Teneneuf, Virginia, Florida, New Spain, Guadalaiara, Guatemala, Terra firma, New Granada, Peru, Chili, Rio de la Plata, Brasil, Guaiana, New Andaluzai?


It will be worth our time, to compare the likeness between the 
Scythians
 and Northern 
Americans;
 both of them are differenc'd with special Marks of a more than ordinary and natural distance between the Eyes, which much alters the whole Air of the Face, and the plumpness and swelling of their Cheeks sum∣mits

above the Cheek-bone; most of these are of a middle stature, having downy Hair upon their Chin, like the Callow Feathers of an unfledg'd Bird. Lastly, as the 
Tartars,
 they differ amongst themselves in their Customs, yet in several things they agree one with another, according as they are govern'd by others, and yet other Princes, some powerful, and some weaker, according as every ones power be more or less. The Inhabitants of 
Lucaja
 bear so great a respect, and stand so much in awe of their Governor, that if commanded to leap, from a Rock, and break their Necks, they instantly obey.


The same is observ'd by the 
Tartars;
 the first King 
Canguista
 Commanded the seven Princes of his Realm to Murder their Sons with their own Hands, which they all readily performed.


In 
Popaina
 they live to this day like some 
Tartars,
 without Laws or Law∣givers, who change their places by turns, from the great increase or the 
Tar∣tars,
 the 
Americans
 no ways differ.


Bartholomeus de las Casas
 writ to 
Charles the Fifth,
 That the 
Spaniards
 in few years, onely on the Islands 
Cuba, Hispaniola, Naco, Hondures,
 in 
Venezuela
 and 
New Spain,
 destroy'd above 2600000. Men, besides the slaughter that was made in 
Peru, Brafil, Rio de la Plata
 and other places, which far exceed the foremen∣tion'd numbers.


Polygamy is still in use, both among the 
Tartars
 and 
Americans;
 both ad∣knowledge the Immortality of the Soul, both like 
Cannibals,
 Eating and Sacri∣ficing Mans flesh. How famous amongst the Antients was the Altar of 
Diana
 in 
Taurica Chersonesus,
 where several Men were daily Sacrificed? How deli∣cate, according to 
Sabellicus,
 did the 
Tartars
 account their Dishes, Sauc'd and serv'd with humane Gore?


Strabo
 relates,
 That the antient People account it an honourable Death to be chop'd in pieces, and their flesh serv'd up in Commons. Those that die by Age, a natural death, are despis'd like Malefactors, and as a punishment ac∣cording to their Demerits, left in the open Fields, a prey to Birds and Beasts; some delight in that loathsome gorging themselves with Mens flesh, others on the contrary, not onely detest humane, but all manner of flesh: And just so the 
Americans
 are distinguish'd, for although the 
Caribes, Brasilians,
 the Inhabi∣tants of 
New Spain, New Granada, St. Martha,
 and others, Sacrifice and eat Men, yet as many abhor and detest that odious Diet and abominable Custom.


Giles Flesher
 Queen 
Elisabeths
 Agent in 
Muscow
 relates, That 
Anno
 1588. 
Kinach Morsey,
 Grandson to the Governor of the 
Chrim Tartars,
 made his entrance there with a Retinue of three hundred Noblemen, and two Ladies, of which one was the Widow of his deceased Brother. The great Prince inform'd of their com∣ing, sent him two slaughter'd Horses, whose sides and Hanches they feasted on, as we on Fallow Deer.


Most of the 
Tartars
 use no manner of Letters or Characters; in the Voyage made into 
Persia,
 they first learn'd to make Letters; just so it is in 
America;
 their bemoaning of the dead ends in one Moneth, both by the 
Tartars
 and 
Ame∣ricans;
 with a Person of Quality, the 
Tartars
 bury a live Servant; the same Custom is observ'd by some of the 
Americans;
 and so much do they agree in a salvage and rude life, that Merchandizing and Mechanicks are little regarded, 
Ayson
 the 
American
 acknowledges the 
Tartars
 for a rude People in their Religion, Habits, and Dwellings, and yet in all these the 
Americans
 differ but very little. Lastly, How common is it amongst them to worship the Devil?
 Along the River 
Sagadahoc,
 the Inhabitants are every new Moon miserably tormented by

an Evil Spirit call'd 
Tanto.
 In the Temples in 
Virginia
 remain yet the horrible Images of the Devils 
Oka
 and 
Menetto.
 Not a House in 
Mexico,
 but hath a pe∣culiar Chappel, set apart for this their suppos'd holy, but damnable Adoration of the Devil. Others in 
Virginia
 believe, That there is a great and supreme De∣ity, which is Everlasting, and for ever. The 
Tartars
 also are of the like per∣swasion.


But this Opinion 
Grotius
 hath laid a strong and dangerous Battery against, that 
America
 could not be Peopled by the 
Tartars,
 because the 
Americans
 before the 
Spaniards
 coming thither, had never seen any Horses; whereas the 
Tartars
 use no Beast more, either in Peace or War, nor can less want: For the 
Tartarian
 Forces do not only consist in Horse;
 but the Wealth of this Countrey is reckon'd up in the numerous Breeds of Horses, and several Studs of Mares. Some of the Nobless keep a thousand Horse; none, though never so poor, but keep two or three; and Beggars there mounted crave Alms and Charity of the People. When they remove their Habitations, their Horses carry their Provisions and Tents: If Provisions grow short, they eat Mares Milk, high gusted with Garlick, which satisfies Hunger and Thirst; and the red Liquor which they tap warm from their Veins, serves them to help Digestion, and heighten their Humor, instead of the Blood of the Grape, our sweet Wine. The swiftest Rivers, though raging and precipitated with Land-floods, they dare adventure swimming their Horses over, hanging naked by their Manes, and guiding them by a slipp'd Rein whither they please: To their Tails they tie their Saddles, and other Necessaries, bound up in Rushes. When a Per∣son of Quality prepares to cross any River, they tie two Horses Tail to Tail, and athwart both their Backs fasten a Mat pleited of Rushes, to sit on. When they are stopp'd at any broad River, or standing Lake, they kill and flea their worst Horses; then turning the Skins inside out, and well Liquoring, they stretch them open with the Ribs, which stand like the Bayles of a Tilted Wher∣ry, and thus furnish'd, serves them for a Boat to carry eight Persons. When they take the Field, going to War, not any but musters three Horses; which makes their Armies, when drawn out in Campain, shew much bigger than indeed they are: And though many of them are kill'd in the Wars, or slain for Food, yet the 
European Tartars
 pay yearly forty thousand Horses to the 
Rus∣sians
 from whence 
Grotius
 thus argues, 
If 
America
 joyns to 
Tartary,
 then the Horses which run wild at Grass might easily have found 
America
 them∣selves, seeking to improve their Pasture, and have gone from one Countrey into the other, as it appears, that since the 
Spaniards
 transported Horses to 
America,
 they are dispers'd over the highest Mountains, out of one Province into the other: Or if the 
Straights of Anian
 run between both, the 
Tartars
 never were Navigators; and suppose they had been, they would not have cross'd without Horses, without which they knew not how to subsist.
 To which we only say thus, That although 
Tartary
 now, and in former times, abounded in Horse, yet must we grant, that it hath been always so? or that the ancient 
Scythians,
 who we avouch first planted 
America,
 had such frequent use of them as the 
Tartars
 now. This may be controverted, for that these 
Scythians
 planting there in the Non-age of Time, presently after the Flood, the use of Horses was unknown, which the Ancient Poets testifie by their Fi∣ction of 
Centaurs,
 who when first seen, the Horse and Rider were taken for one Creature. The like mistake the 
Mexicans
 had, when they saw the mount∣ed 
Spaniards,
 a thousand running away from one Cavalier.








portrait of Christopher Colombus


CHRISTOFEL COLONUS.






As to their coming thither of themselves, it may easily be confuted: Who knows not, that there is no Countrey a continu'd Pasture, but luxurious Vales separated with inaccessible. Mountains, Lakes, and vast Wildernesses. But 
Da∣vid Ingram
 relates, 
That he saw some Horses in the Northern 
America,
 which the 
Mexicans,
 and other Conquests of the 
Spaniards
 never heard of: Where∣upon we may conclude, and we suppose without all peradventure, That the 
Americans
 have absolutely their Original from 
Tartary,
 which bordering 
Arme∣nia,
 where 
Noah's
 Ark first rested, hath a convenient way, though beyond the 
Artick Circle,
 through a temperate Climate betwixt Heat and Cold, to 
Cathay,
 in the same Parallel with the neighboring 
America.








CHAP. III. 
First Discoverers of
 America. Christopher Colonus 
his Expedition.


Christopher Colonus,
 generally (though by mistake) call'd 
Columbus,
 was born in 
Arbizolo,
 a Village in the Dominion of 
Genoa,
 near 
Sovona;
 his Father liv'd by Fishing in the Midland-Sea: So that 
Sebastian Schroter,
 and others besides him, are mistaken, saying, 
Colonus
 was born in the City 
Cucu∣reum,
 and descended of the Noble Family 
Pilistrelli:
 For 
Peter Bezarus, Colunus
 his Countrey-man, gives unquestionable Proofs of his mean Extract;
 and amongst other things, That the Common-wealth of 
Genoa
 refus'd to receive the great Legacy which 
Colonus
 left them in his Will, because they fondly thought it a derogation to their Honor, being so great a Republick, to take any thing of Bequest from a Fishers Son: Yet his Majesty of 
Castile
 thought otherwise, not onely enriching him with Wealth, and a fair Revenue for his Discovery of the 
West-Indies;
 but also, though of a low derivation, rais'd him to great Honor, Ennobling him the first of his Family with Dignities, Titles, and Escutcheon, which rank'd him in place among his Prime Nobility.


Colonus,
 whom we shall henceforth call 
Columbus,
 spent his Youth neat the Sea, where he was busie exploring the Winds, considering their Natures, and the Quarters whence the rose, especially with the setting of the Current from the 
Atlantick
 to the 
Mediterrane.
 The Wescern Winds, which often, as well as the 
Levant,
 blow several days together from the great Ocean, much amusing him, hinted at last some Notions, that there might be another World, and hew Pla∣ces to be discover'd, beyond the setting of the Sun; and that the 
Ne plus ultra
 should not be, if he could help, it, the commanding Terminary of the Earth that way. He also spent much time, being of a solid Judgment, in the Emen∣dations of Charts and Maps, then very much improvable: And the 
Portuguese,
 who at that time had got the start in Navigation from all other People, being the busie to find a way by the South of 
Africa
 to the 
East-Indies,
 not contented to go by hear-say, he went himself in Person a Voyage with them. Soon af∣ter 
Columbus
 settled himself in the Island 
Madera,
 where an Accident hapned,
 which 
Francis Lopez de Gomesa
 relates thus: 
The Master of a Ship, whose Name and Countrey lies buried in Oblivion (though some would have him to be of 
Spain,
 some an 
Andalusian
 or 
Biscayner,
 and other a 
Portuguese
) Tra∣ding to the 
Canaries
 and 
Flemmish-Isles,
 was surpris'd by a hideous Tempest

from the East, which hurried him 
nolens volens
 through dreadful Waves, where at last he found himself ingag'd upon a Western Coast, altogether un∣known. The Storm ceasing, without making further Discoveries, he pick'd his way homeward, at last Landing in the Haven of 
Madera:
 All his Crew but three and himself, with hardship, want, and the long Voyage having pe∣rish'd, himself dangerously sick, was carried into 
Columbus
 his House; where lying on his Death-Bed, he bequeath'd to 
Columbus
 his Maps, Journals, and other Observations of this his unfortunate Voyage.
 
Columbus
 being by these Papers more confirm'd than ever in his Opinion of a New World in the West, declar'd what he verily believ'd,
 to the States of 
Genoa;
 but they look'd upon him as a vain and idle Fellow; yet 
Columbus
 full of his great Project, thus slighted and scornfully rejected, sate not so down, but address'd himself to the King of 
Portugal,
 where they wearied him, spending long time with dila∣tory Answers, to ho effect; the Opinion of a whole Court of expert Naviga∣tors having cast his Declaration out, as a 
Chimera
 or meer Fancy. Soon after 
Columbus
 sending his Brother into 
England,
 to move the Business to King 
Henry
 the Seventh, he being taken Prisoner by the way, and lying long er'e his Re∣lease, came too late to the 
English
 Court, prevented by the News of 
Christophe
's return with Success from his intended Voyage: For mean while 
Ferdinando
 and 
Isabella
 King of 
Castile,
 having finish'd his Wars with the 
Moors,
 had fur∣nish'd him out for the Expedition; which he effected by the favor of 
Alfonso Mendotio
 and 
Alfonso Quintavilia,
 both great Ministers of State under 
Ferdinand
 and 
Isabel,
 and obtain'd so much at last, that he was sent with a hundred and twenty Souldiers, besides Sea-men, in two Ships, and one Pinnace. Thus sup∣plied,
 he set Sail from 
Cadiz
 upon the Kings account the fourth of 
August, Anno
 1492, and first reach'd the 
Canary-Islands,
 and from thence steering South-West, the Wind in thirty three days scarce varying one Point: But though the Weather blew so constant, yet the Sea-men chang'd their Minds, and Storm'd quite contrary, crying,
 That 
Columbus
 was guilty of all their Deaths: 
For
 (said they, after they had lost sight of the 
Canaries
 so many days, nothing appearing but Sea and Sky) 
Who can hope for any Success or happy conclusion of so desperate a Voyage, so rashly undertaken, and found now so full of eminent danger?
 Yet 
Columbus
 bore bravely up, and weather'd all their Exclamations, although, they threatned no less than his Murder: At last Articling, they came to this Agreement, 
That if after sailing forwards three days more, no Land were discover'd, they should return:
 But about two a Clock the next Night, 
Columbus
 saw a glim∣mering like Fire in the Sky, and in the Morning found himself close aboard a most pleasant Coast, where Landing with twelve Men, he erected a Cross cut out of a Tree. Thence he sail'd over to 
Cuba,
 where the Sea was so rough, that he was forc'd to stand off, fearing Rocks and Shallow Water. Soon after he got to the Northward of the Island 
Haytin,
 which he call'd 
Hispaniola:
 Here his best Ship was bulged upon a Rock, on which they had all perish'd, had it not been flat on the top, so that the Soldiers and the whole Crew of Sea-men were sav'd by the two Vessels. The Inhabitants stark naked, seeing these Strangers, fled to the Woods; but the 
Spaniards
 overtaking a Woman, they en∣tertain'd her with Sweet-meats and 
Spanish
 Wine, and putting her on a white Shirt, sent her again to the rest of the Natives, where return'd, she told what good Entertainment she had had to her Companions; whereupon divers of the Islanders came aboard of the 
Spaniards,
 in Boats made of one piece of Wood, where they barter'd Gold for Beads, pieces of Glass, Knives, Shells,

and other Trifles. The King of 
Guaccanarillo
 gave testimony of peculiar incli∣nation to the 
Spaniards,
 helping them to Fish up the remaining Goods of the Wreck, and inform'd them, That some Rivers flowing, from the tops of high Mountains, wash'd down the Gold amongst the Sand: notwithstanding a strange Prophecy had been told to these Islanders, namely, 
That Bearded Men out of remote Countries should destroy their Goods, take their Land, and massacre their Chil∣dren.
 He also told them what made them fly, and betake them to their Heels at the arrival of the 
Spaniards,
 because they were oftentimes surpris'd by the 
Cannibals,
 who snatch'd up all they could lay hold on: Their Boys and Strip∣lings they gelded, cooping and cramming them up, as we our Capons, for Feasts: The young and well-grown Men they chopp'd to pieces, salted, and Barrel'd up: Young Women they preserv'd for breed, and old ones they made Slaves. These 
Cannibals
 were so terrible to the Inhabitants of 
Haytin,
 that a thousand of them durst not venture to engage against ten, but would run eve∣ry way, dispers'd like Flocks of Sheep before the Wolf.


Lastly, Their King permitted the 
Spaniards
 to build a Lodge or Hovel, wherein thirty or forty of them might shelter; but indeed so taking possession in right of the King of 
Spain.


Mean while 
Columbus
 return'd in safety to 
Spain,
 and was receiv'd with great joy, King 
Ferdinand
 making him Admiral of the Sea,
 and sending his Brother 
Bartholomew
 Governor to 
Haytin,
 now call'd 
Hispaniola.
 The Gold, Parrots, Mastick, Aloes, the strange Bread 
Jucca,
 whose extracted Juyce is rank Poyson, but the Body makes good Meal, which kneaded and bak'd, yields a fine Man∣chet and wholesom Food, they look'd upon with great delight and admirati∣on; but two of the Natives being naked, with Gold Rings through their No∣ses and Ears, Ornaments with them of high esteem, and signifying their no mean Quality, the People old and young came in Throngs to wonder at, ne∣ver, weary of gazing upon them. But the King, encourag'd by this Success, took no dilatory Course, but suddenly, and before any could expect, built fourteen stout Carvels, and three Frigats,
 and as soon mann'd them with twelve hundred Soldiers, besides a great number of Artificers of all forts, with their Wives and Children, freighting them with Horses, Swine, Goats, Cattel for Breed, all sorts of 
European
 Corn to sow, Fruit-Trees and Vines to plant, and some Priests to instruct and convert the Natives to their Religion.


The second of 
September, Anno
 1493. they set sail from 
Cadiz,
 and Anchor'd before 
Ferreo,
 the last and furthest of the 
Canary-Islands,
 where they could get no Water, but what dropp'd from the Dew hanging on Trees into Troughs. After that, 
Columbus
 came on the one and twentieth day amongst the 
Caribby-Islands,
 where he dropp'd Anchor before one, which he Call'd 
Dominico;
 but finding it desolate, set sail further, and discover'd several other Coasts, where he likewise found nothing but very great Porcupines or Hedg-hogs, arid sweet∣smelling Trees. Steering forward, he found the Coasts of the 
Cannibals,
 which inhabited along the Shore in little Huts or Hovels, built round of Wood,
 and stak'd about on the out-side with long Poles, like 
Palisado's:
 They have also Posts within, which are shorter, pleited and fastned together with Cot∣ton, or long Roots of Trees, plyant like our Osiars, over which they hang Cloths painted with horrible Figures and strange Representations: The Roofs rise like our Canopy'd Tents, highest in the middle, cover'd with Palm-Tree, Leaves to keep off the Rain: At the Entrances hang two Hairy Images on Poles, not for Religion sake, but Ornament: Their Bed-steads being high

from the Ground, are fill'd with a kind of Straw; and in long Hovels fitted for that purpose they store their Sugar.


Columbus
 landing here, found all the 
Cannibals
 fled; but their Houses full of Stone Vessels, Cruises, Pans, and Pots, boyling with Mens Flesh, Parrots, and Wild-foul; the Hanches and Sides of young Men, on Spits roasting at the Fire, with the Splinters of whose broken Bones they headed their Arrows. This Island by the Inhabitants call'd 
Carucueria, Columbus
 chang'd to 
Guadalupe,
 because the Mountains rise up with their tops not unlike 
Estremadura
 in 
Spain,
 famous there for the wonderful Representation of our Lady, as that of the Lady of 
Loretto
 in 
Italy.
 Thirty Women which he had taken from the neigh∣boring Isles, he sent with Presents to the fled 
Canibals,
 which the next day re∣turning made a great appearance hear the Shore; but when they had gaz'd a while upon the 
Spaniards,
 looking stedfastly on one another, they suddenly ran back again, sheltring themselves in the Covert of the Woods. 
Columbus
 think∣ing it not worth his while to expect their return, seeing their barbarous Life, burnt and destroy'd all their Boats, and spoiling whatever ht could, sail'd to 
Matanino.


The releas'd Women in 
Guadalupe,
 that came back again, inform'd the 
Spani∣ards,
 That 
Matanino
 was an Isle onely inhabited by Women, which at accustom'd times row'd over to these 
Cannibals,
 where a while they drove a Trade and Commerce of Love, the Product of which, if Girls, they kept; but the Boys they sent over to their Fathers. They live in Caves, the Mouths and Entrances of which they maintain and stoutly make good with their Bowe, shooting Arrows as thick as Hail at the approach of Men, after their impregnating by the 
Cannibals.


From hence the Fleet pass'd by several other fruitful Islands, 
Columbus
 giving them the Names of 
Montseratto, Rodondo, St. Martin, Santa Cruz,
 formerly by the Inhabitants call'd 
Ayaya.
 On this last Island he landed thirty Men, who took four Women, which held out their Hands before them, as if Petitioners that begg'd Quarter, or praying, and then conceal'd themselves in Ambuscade, the better to surprize more; when by chance they spied an 
Indian Canoo
 at Sea, with eight Men,
 and as many Women; whereupon those in Ambuscade made a Signal to the next Ship, which immediately sent off some Boats well Mann'd; but before they drew near them, or expected an On-set, one of the 
Spaniards
 was kill'd, and another wounded with their Arrows; amongst whom a Woman, to whom all the rest shew'd greatest Respect and Reverence, aim'd very exactly. Their barbed Shafts were poyson'd; whereupon the 
Spaniards
 enrag'd, stemm'd the 
Canoo,
 and oversetting, row'd quite over; which little or nothing avail'd; for they all swam, and though separated, shot their Arrows at them, as if the Boat had been a But. At last the 
Indians
 got upon a blind Rock, cover'd with Shole Water, which gave them fresh Courage; but the 
Spaniards
 having more aid sent them from the Fleet, took them all Prisoners; but the Queens Son being wounded in the Scuffle, and dying soon after, was thrown overboard.
 The Prisoners being brought before 
Columbus,
 foam'd at the Mouth for raging madness; and being afterwards carried to 
Castile,
 so re∣tain'd their fierce and salvage Nature, that they scar'd away and frighted the safe Beholders.


Mean while the 
Spanish
 Fleet proceeded on their Voyage, between several Islands, to 
Hispaniola,
 of which some appear desolate and barren, others green and Woody; the small Vessels sailing close under the Shore, and the great ones

standing further off at Sea, which was very turbulent, and beat exceedingly against the Shole Rocks. The Island 
Burichema, Columbus
 call'd St. 
Johns,
 to which belong'd some of the Women sent forth in 
Guadalupe,
 who inform'd them, That 
Burichema
 was well inhabited by a kind and hospitable People, who when the 
Cannibals
 landed there fought them, and if Conquerors, were so much exasperated with their inhumane Barbarisms, that they seiz'd on them like Mastiffs open-mouth'd, and tore them piece-meal with their Teeth; yet themselves abhorring the Custom of eating Mens Flesh. Here the 
Spaniards
 found onely a large House, surrounded with twelve lesser ones, all deserted; for the Inhabitants with their King 
Chiasichio
 were then retir'd into the cool and more sheltring Woods, from the mid-day Heat. All this the 
Indians
 told him, which he brought back with him from 
Spain.
 Coming to an Anchor at 
Hispaniola,
 he sent one of the 
Indians
 ashore,
 that he might tell what brave things he had seen in the 
Spanish
 Court; but the remaining three took the ad∣vantage of the following Night, and leaping over-board, swam to Shore. But this Accident he not much regarded, trusting to have a sufficient Account from his eight and thirty 
Spaniards
 which he had left in the Fort upon the Island; and the more, because King 
Guaccanarillo
's brother, in sign of Friendship, had presented him with two Golden Images: But all these Conjectures fail'd him, so that hearing nothing, he landed,
 where he found the 
Spanish
 Garrison utterly destroy'd, and the Royal Fort burnt down to the Ground, and lying in a heap of Ashes. Then they fired several Guns, to give notice, that if any of them had conceal'd themselves, and lay sculking in the Woods, or otherwise, they should discover themselves, and come to the succour of their Friends: But all in vain, for none came; for as they were afterwards inform'd, the Inhabitants had slain them, because of their insupportable behavior, insolently commit∣ting Robberies, Rapes, and Murders: Hereupon he sent Messengers to the King 
Guaccanarillo,
 to inquire why they had fired his Fort, and what they had done with his Men, who brought him this Return, That over that mighty Island were many Princes, of which two being provok'd by the reports of the Strangers that were entertain'd in the Island, came marching upon them, each with their Armies; but that he endeavor'd what he could, and came with a Power to assist the Strangers; yet all he got for his Kindness, was a Wound in his Leg, which had been so sore and troublesom, that forc'd him to keep his Bed, and no less than seven Concubines to attend him, and dress the Wound: But he told his Tale so ill, and feign'd his Lameness worse, that 
Sibilius,
 one of the Messengers sent by 
Columbus,
 lifting up the Coverlet, saw that he ail'd nothing, which soon confirm'd his doubt, that he was confederated with the rest, and alike guilty of the Slaughter. At last 
Guaccanarillo
 being desir'd, came in Person to 
Columbus,
 in whose presence he held a long Discourse with an 
In∣dian
 Woman, which they had brought from the Island of 
Santa Cruz,
 there Christned by the Name of 
Catharine:
 At length 
Guaccanarillo
 was dismiss'd, and the Night following this 
Catharine,
 with seven more of the 
Indian
 Women, leap'd over-board, and swom almost a League to Shore, so going thence di∣rectly to their King 
Guaccanarillo.
 This Accident gave more suspicion to 
Co∣lumbus,
 who thereupon sent three hundred Men, commanded by 
Melchior, Hoi∣eda,
 and 
Gorvalano,
 to march through the Island three several ways, and with special Commission to secure as their Prisoner 
Guaccanarillo. Melchior
 discover'd a wide River, full of Reaches and winding Bays, gliding between high Hills cover'd with Woods, resounding with the ecchoing noises of harmonious

Birds, and disemboguing his Waters, enlarg'd by two other Rivers, into the Sea, so making a convenient Harbor for Ships. Here a hundred of the Island∣ers, well Arm'd after their manner, met them, crying aloud, 
We are no
 Canni∣bals, 
but
 Taynos, that is, 
a People more civil than they are cruel.
 The 
Spaniards
 ma∣king Signs of Peace, the 
Taynos
 approach'd, and joyn'd their Forces in a friend∣ly manner. Near the place of this Meeting appear'd a House built in an Oval fashion, being thirty two Paces in the Circumference, the Roof curiously pleited of divers colour'd Rushes, round about which stood thirty lesser Dwel∣lings. Mean while, in his March 
Hoieda
 discover'd a River that descended from a high Mountain, where the Inhabitants gather'd much old after this manner:
 They dig a Hole about two Foot deep; then taking up their left Hand full, of Sand, with their right Hand they cull out the precious Ingots, which little accounting of, as they gather'd they dealt away to the 
Spaniards.
 Most of the Pieces were as big as Pease, yet some so large, that they weigh'd nine Ounces.
 
Peter Martyr,
 Councellor to the Emperor 
Charles,
 tells us, That he hath seen of them in the 
Spanish
 Court, that were brought over thither by 
Columbus.
 Moreover, 
Hoieda
 was inform'd here, That this Gold-River took its Original in the Province belonging to 
Cacicus Caunaboa,
 signifying, 
The King of the Golden Palace.


Mean time 
Columbus
 selected a piece of Ground on a rising Hill, on the North part of the Isle, where he intended to build a City, because close by the Hill on one side rises a Mountain, pregnant with Stone and Chalk; on the other, a Plain, so exceeding fruitful and pleasant, that the Sun scarce shines upon a more delightful and fertile Soil, which they found afterwards by ex∣perience. Here Melons are set and ripe in thirty six days; Corn, in two Months;
 twice a Year the Trees and Plants bring forth their several Pro∣ducts; the Vines come to maturity, and are loaden with Clusters of Grapes, in two Years, and Sugar-Canes grow as thick as a Mans Arm in fifteen days. On this pleasant Soil, accommodated with a convenient Haven, 
Columbus
 after∣wards built the City 
Isabella,
 fortified with Walls and Trenches against all In∣vasions, over which he made his Brother 
Bartholomew Columbus
 first Governor.


Mean while the Admiral 
Columbus
 himself march'd up into the Countrey with three hundred Men, in quest of the Gold Mines. Seventy two Leagues the Valley 
Cibava
 lies distant from 
Isabella,
 to which 
Columbus
 pass'd over swift Currents and high Mountains, where he built a Fort, which he call'd 
St. Tho∣mas;
 and exchang'd with the Inhabitants Toys and Trifles, for Pieces and In∣gots of Gold, which the Inhabitants, as before-mention'd, found in the Sand of their Rivers: And besides, they inform'd him, That about half a days Journey further, greater Quantities of Gold were to be found, in a browner colour'd Soil: Whereupon 
Luxanus,
 one of his Officers, was sent with a suf∣ficient Party thither, who march'd through a delightful way, cool with shady Boughs, and pleasant with the prospect of spacious Meadows, where they mow'd Grass for their Horses, which in four days time grew up again higher than our tallest Wheat.


Mean time 
Columbus
 being return'd with great Riches to his new City 
Isabel∣la,
 went soon after by Sea, with three Vessels, to discover new Countreys more remote; which his Design fell out also successfully; for he fell first up∣on 
Jamaica,
 where he found more stout Opposition than elsewhere, by the Na∣tives, at his Landing; but finding themselves over-power'd, they came to Agreement, and accepting an amicable Composure, presently struck up a

Peace. From thence putting to Sea, he next discover'd 
Cuba,
 which sailing round about, he found also to be an Island; where Landing in a convenient Harbor, on each fenc'd with a high and jutting Rock, he espied two little Ho∣vels, wherein was abundance of Fish, besides two great Snakes or Serpents, each having eight Feet, spitted, and ready to be laid to the Fire to be roasted; but neither Man, Woman, nor Child to be seen, they being gone with part of the Fish they had dress'd, into the adjacent Woods; whither the 
Spaniards
 following, saw hanging by small Strings, on the Branches of Trees, abundance of Snakes, some of which had their Mouths tied together, others their Tongue and Teeth pull'd out. Hence marching on, a little beyond they saw a Com∣pany of the Natives, which they judg'd to be about seventy Men, covering the top or summit of a Hill, to whom the 
Spaniards
 made Signs, and to entice them near, shew'd several of their gawdy Trifles; but in vain, till at last one adventur'd, descending from the Hill, to whom one of the Natives (who in the first Voyage that the Admiral made, was. taken from the Island 
Guanahaini
 near 
Cuba,
 carried to 
Spain,
 and there Christned) call'd aloud, telling him they need not fear, they should have no harm done them; which said, they came down all together, and inform'd them, That they were sent by their King to catch Fish for another King, which was with him at Dinner; and if they had not eaten the Serpents, they gave them many thanks; for they were provided for the second Course, and very scarce to be got, being a greater Dainty than any Fish.


Columbus
 From hence proceeding on further Westward, discover'd a fruit∣ful Coast, verging the Mouth of a River, whose Water runs boyling hot into the Sea. Somewhat further he saw very strange Fishes, especially the 
Guaican,
 not unlike an Eel, but with an extraordinary great Head, over which hangs a Skin like a Bag. This Fish is the Natives Fisher; for having a Line or hand∣som Cord fastned about him, so soon as a Turtel, or any other of his Prey, comes above Water, they give him Line; whereupon the 
Guaican,
 like an Ar∣row

out of a Bowe, shoots towards the other Fish, and then gathering the Mouth of the Bag on his Head like a Purse-net holds them so fast, that he lets not loose till hal'd up out of the Water.


Here the 
Spaniards
 having Din'd on delicate Fish, went on still Westward, and came to an uninhabited Isle, but well stor'd with Geese, Pelicans, and ugly Dogs that could not bark. Here they came amongst so many Shoals, that the Keels of their Ships raked upon the Ground almost forty Leagues together, the Water thick and white like Milk. Lastly, they came again into deep Water, and Landed at the Foot of a high Mountain, on the Island 
Cuba;
 where they found two Springs of very sweet Water. A Musqueteer going into the Woods whilst the rest fill'd their Vessels with Water and cut Wood, he spied a tall Man in a Coat like a white Fryer's Frock; behind whom came two more, and soon after thirty more follow'd, all alike Habited: the Musqueteer running away, they beckned him to stay, but he march'd off; arid informing 
Columbus
 of his Adventure, he sent a Party well Arm'd to see farther into the Countrey; but they neither saw nor heard any Men, onely found on the other side of the Wood a great Plain, but so overgrown with deep Grass, that it was impossible to get through: The next day he sent out twenty five more, which found no∣thing else than the Prints of the Steps of great Beasts and Lyons, and also abundance of large Grapes, which hung on the Branches of Vines, clasping about the Bodies of the great Trees.


Hence 
Columbus
 again putting to Sea, and Sailing Westerly, found a Shore overflow'd with Water, and abounding with Pearl-Mussles, and after that the whole Countrey full of Mountains, whose tops smoaked. By this time the Fleet was much damnified by the Shole-water; where, as we mention'd before, they often struck, and their Keels rak'd upon the Ground; so that having sprung several Leaks, and their Provisions growing mouldy with the Damp, they were forc'd to return; and Tacking about they ran against Turtles, which lay as thick in the Sea as if they had been sow'n.


Columbus
 now on his return home, and Landing once more on 
Cuba,
 found an antient Man stark naked, who speaking to him (
Didacus
 interpreted, the Language in some part agreeing with that of 
Hispaniola
) to this effect:


You have to all admiration come to see this Countrey from another World, my advice to you is, That you hurt none; for the Souls of evil-doers go to dark places: But on the con∣trary, they shall enjoy the heighth of all Pleasures that are Friends to Peace.


Columbus
 reply'd, 
That he came a Scourge for the cruel Cannibals, but a Shield to protect the quiet and well-meaning Indians.


After this, returning to 
Hispaniola,
 much contrary to his expectation, he found all things which he had setled there turn'd topsie-turvy: for first the Governors at 
Isabella
 jangled, and were at private contentions amongst them∣selves, and the 
Benedictine
 Monk 
Boilus
 and 
Peter Margarites
 were return'd to 
Spain,
 there to make their complaints at Court: and besides, the 
Spaniards
 had dealt very inhumanely with the Natives, by their frequent Rapes, Thefts, and Murders; wherefore the 
Indians,
 not unjustly incens'd, destroy'd all the 
Spani∣ards
 they found stragling in any part without the Lines of their Fortification. 
Caunaboa
 also lay about the Fort St. 
Thomas,
 and closely besieged 
Hoieda;
 but receiving intelligence of 
Columbus
's arrival, he broke up his Siege, and march'd from thence, but soon after was taken Prisoner by the 
Spaniards.
 Mean while upon Design (a Plot none of the wisest) the Natives of 
Hispaniola
 had neither Till'd or Sow'd the Ground, or us'd Agriculture the year before, contriving

by want of Provisions (not considering themselves) to starve out the 
Spaniards;
 but the mischief fell upon the Contrivers: for so great a Famine hapned, that spreading over the whole Countrey, in a few Moneths fifty thousand were starv'd to death; but the 
Spaniards
 made a saving, though hard shift with their own store, then, though too late, the Islanders repented of their folly, for they saw the 
Spaniards
 making an advantage of their misery, not onely built more Houses in their City 
Isabella,
 but prepar'd their Weather-beaten Vessels, with which Sailing to, the Gold Mountains of 
Cipangi
 on the Hill, whence sprung several Fountains, they rais'd the Castle of the 
Conception.
 Great benefit they reap'd by this Fort, to which they carry'd daily abundance of Amber, Brim∣stone, mix'd Ore of Silver and Gold, and 
Brazile
-wood, besides great store of Gold: and they might have gotten ten times more, had they not been so much inclin'd to slothfulness, and minding other vain pleasures: yet notwithstand∣ing all, the Fleet carry'd that year above one thousand two hundred pound weight of Gold to 
Spain.


In the mean while the Natives complain'd to 
Columbus
 of the 
Spanish
 Soldi∣ers, which under pretence to seek for Gold, committed many insufferable Out∣rages; therefore they desir'd that they might be retain'd in their Forts, and not straggle so much abroad, and they would willingly bring them every three Moneths a certain weight of Cotton; Amber, 
Brazile
-wood, and Gold, more than equivalent to what they snatch'd; but Columbus (whose Soldiers, not∣withstanding his severity, and using Martial Law upon some of them for their Crimes, and proud with their success) yet prevail'd at last, that they consented thereto; but the Inhabitants never perform'd their promise, who being almost famish'd, had much to do to preserve themselves alive, spending their time in picking Sallads.


Whilst the Business remain'd in this ill posture, or rather confusion, 
Cibanus,
 Brother to the imprison'd 
Caunaboa,
 rais'd an Army of five thousand Men: the 
Spaniards,
 divided into five Companies, march'd to meet him; and their Enemies being naked, and having no other Arms than Bowes, Arrows, and Clubs, after some little resistance, were soon dissipated and put to flight, but overtaken by the 
Spanish
 Horse, many of them were taken Prisoners, and others forc'd to skulk and hide themselves on the tops of Mountains.


Shortly after this Battel hapned a Huricane, mix'd with Thunder-claps,
 renting great pieces from the Rocks, and the Wind blowing out of the East, threw down Houses and Trees, some of which were carry'd a vast heighth in∣to the Air; three Ships that rode in the Harbor, broke their new Cables, and split against the Rocks. The 
Spaniards
 expected nought else, but that with this excessive Tempest the Day of Judgment was at hand. And on the other side, the Islanders ascribed this raging of Heavens to the 
Spaniards
 wickedness. This Storm past, and the Air setled, 
Columbus
 gave order for the building of two new Ships there, with which in 
March, Anno
 1495. he return'd to 
Spain;
 where in 
Medina del Campo
 he gave an account at the Court about the discover'd Coun∣treys; where also Sentence was pass'd on several 
Spaniards,
 and chiefly con∣cerning the 
Benedictine
 Monk 
Boilus,
 who out of meer malice pass'd by him at Mass with the Host, while he gave it to others, without any distinction. Then he gave a further account, that his Brother 
Bartholomew
 had found,
 sixty Leagues beyond 
Isabella,
 several deep Pits, the uppermost Ground of which Sifted, produced abundance of Gold. Moreover, that he had built the Castle 
Aurea
 there in three Moneths time wish little trouble: but because Provisions



 grew scarce there, he found himself necessitated to remove, but left ten Men in the Garrison, and had sent three hundred of the Islanders with their Governors to 
Spain.
 He also built the Castle 
Dominico,
 on the South-side of 
Hispaniola;
 from whence he had travell'd into the Countrey to the River 
Naiba:
 where, upon this Shore the King 
Beuchio Anacauchoa
 Encamp'd himself against the 
Nai∣bans,
 to bring them, besides several other People, under his subjection. That 
Bartholomew
 demanded Tribute of 
Anacauchoa,
 which he immediately promis'd to pay, and disbanded his Forces, conducting 
Bartholomew
 above thirty Leagues on his Way, along a Path on both sides sown with Hemp, and planted with Cotton-Trees,
 to his Palace 
Xaraqua,
 in the West of 
Hispaniola,
 where he was received in great state: Thirty of the Kings Wives walk'd before, carrying in their Hands Boughs of Palm-trees, and both Sung and Danc'd very strangely; behind these came a considerable number of naked Virgins, very handsom; at last 
Bartholomew
 entring the Palace with the King, found a Table furnish'd with all manner of Dainties, and a very courteous Entertainment. The next day walking forth to a large Plain, and looking about he saw two Parties that deep∣ly engag'd in Fight behind a Hill, with great slaughter on both sides, and had not he desir'd that they might be parted, there had been much more Blood shed. After he had been several days friendly entertain'd, he return'd to the Forts 
Isabella, Sperancia, Catharina, St.Jago, Turrita, Conception,
 and 
Dominico;
 where he found above three hundred 
Spaniards
 starv'd of hunger, besides many that were sick.


At that time 
Guarionexius
 having been oppress'd by the 
Spaniards,
 and a long time watching for an opportunity, now thinking he had found it, rais'd an Army of fifteen thousand Men, with which he was resolv'd to try his fortune against 
Columbus;
 who privately receiving intelligence thereof, fell upon him so on a sudden and unexpectedly, that he spoil'd his Design, and took all his Commanders Prisoners: But to oblige the Inhabitants, who begg'd for their King, 
Columbus
 set him at liberty, advising him to be careful of raising a War







view


ANGRA op TERCERA








against him any more. But he not being able to endure the oppressions of 
Roldanus Ximenez,
 a 
Spanish
 Commander, fled to the wild 
Ciquano's,
 descended from the Canibals, and living on steep Mountains: Of these he desir'd aid against the 
Spaniards,
 and obtain'd not onely their Promise, but some Men; with which he robb'd and pillag'd the Countrey round about, and what 
Spa∣niards
 he met with he kill'd, and with his Men did eat, as if a Venison Feast. Mean while 
Ximenez
 made himself Leader of seventy Rebels, which like raging blood-hounds fell upon the Natives after a terrible manner.


Whilst all things were thus in disorder at 
Hispaniola,
 the Admiral 
Christopher Columbus
 set Sail a third time with eight Ships from the Haven 
Barrameda,
 in the Year 1498. To shun the 
French
 Pyrates, which watched for the 
Indian
 Treasures, he directed his Course to 
Madera,
 a fruitful Island of Corn, Wine, Sugar, Wax, and Cattel, desolate till 
Anno
 1420. Here coming to an Anchor, he sent six Ships away to 
Hispaniola,
 which himself afterwards followed with the remaining two, steering by the 
Flemish
 Islands, or 
Acores,
 first so call'd from the 
Flemings,
 the first Planters: Here he dropt Anchor before the City 
Angra
 on the Isle 
Tercera,
 which is sixteen Leagues in circumference,
 and very Mountainous; the tops whereof are like Spires, and abound with Grapes: the Plain Countrey produces great store of Corn, but it will not keep above twelve Moneths. The Ground is oftentimes terribly shaken by Earthquakes, and between several sulphurous Places, both Flames and Smoak ascend up to the Sky. Near the City 
Angra
 is a Fountain which turns Wood into Stone. The Winds in this Place blow so fierce and strong, that they not onely beat down Houses, but wear out Iron, and all manner of Stone-work. In 
Angra
 the chief Commander of all the 
Flemish
 Isles hath his Residence. The City, surround∣ed by steep Rocks, lies towards the Sea like a Crescent, or Half-Moon; for at both ends thereof the Mountains extend with deep Points into the Ocean. The uppermost part towards the West stands likewise fortifi'd by a high Rock, as also by another on the East: on both are continual Watches kept; whereof those on the first can discover Ships fifteen Leagues off at Sea, coming either from the 
East
 or 
West-Indies;
 and on the other, all those that come from 
Europe:
 When they see above fifteen Sail, they put out the Kings great Flag upon the top of all the Rock.


This City of 
Angra
 is divided into several Streets: the Governor and Arch∣bishop live each in a stately Palace; five handsom Churches are no small orna∣ment to it; the Sea before it abounds with Fish, but are not to be taken in 
December,
 by reason of the turbulent Waves.


Christopher Columbus
 having refresh'd at 
Angra,
 Sail'd along the 
African
 Coast between the 
Hesperides:
 under the Equinoctial he was so miserably tormented by the Heat, that his Vessels seem'd to burn, the Hoops sprung from the Casks, so that the Water run about the Hold; and they could expect nothing but death from the insufferable Heat, and want of Water: eight days they had endur'd this hardship, when they met with a fresh Gale out of the South-East, so that they made great Way towards the West. On the last of 
July
 he dis∣cover'd three high Mountains; and approaching near the Shore, he smelt as in a Posie, all the sweet breathings of fragrant Flowers commix'd, and at last saw a convenient Haven; where going ashore he found cultivated Grounds, and steps of Beasts, but not a Man appear'd: the next day they spy'd a Boat with twenty young Men come rowing from the Shore into the Ocean. The Admi∣ral hal'd them in vain to come aboard, for they made the greater hast ashore,

still looking about continually with great admiration on the Ships: whereup∣on he commanded them to beat their Drums, and sound their Trumpets, that they might by that means entice them aboard; but they rather taking it as a sign of War, made themselves ready for resistance: mean while the 
Spaniards
 overtook the 
Indian
 Boat, into which they threw a Hat, and other trifles; the Islanders amaz'd thereat, made signs to them to row ashore; but soon after they fled.


Columbus
 proceeding on his Journey came to 
Paria,
 where he found a Fish∣ers Pink loaden with Oysters; which opening and taking out the Meat, were found full of Pearls,
 which because of their abundance were not regarded there; for a broken Dish and a rusty Knife, the 
Spaniards
 had four long Strings of Pearl,


From thence anchoring in the River of 
Cumana,
 several naked Men came aboard, adorn'd with Golden Armlets, and Strings of Pearl, These inform'd him, that they gather'd their Gold from the Mountains and Rivers, and caught their Pearl-oysters in the adjacent Seas. Some of the 
Spaniards
 were nobly entertain'd by the King and his Son, who leading them into their Palace, pla∣ced them on Benches of Ebony-wood, curiously wrought, and on a sudden se∣veral Servants came in with variety of Dainties, and well-tasted Wine. But because Provisions grew scarce amongst the Sea-men, and their Meat tainted, 
Columbus
 thought it convenient to leave the Pearl-trade till some better opportu∣nity. Then setting forward, the farther he went, the shallower he found the Sea, insomuch that his Ship scarce had Water enough to swim. This inconveni∣ence was followed by a second; for the Sea being full of Weeds and Grass, scarce suffer'd any Passage. A River thirty Yards deep, and twenty Leagues broad, came rushing out betwixt two Shores into this Sea with such force, that the Waves went high like Mountains,
 which made 
Columbus
 judge himself in the greatest danger imaginable, and withall Tack about; so that he came on the eight and twentieth of 
August Anno
 1498. to an Anchor before 
Hispaniola,
 where all things were still in a sad confusion, as we before related.


Roldanus Ximenes
 refus'd to follow 
Christopher Columbus
's, order and writ Let∣ters to the King of 
Spain,
 in which he exceedingly aspersed both the Admiral 
Co∣lumbus
 and his Brother; who were not backward in giving an account quite contrary by their Letters, of the horrid Villanies perpetrated by this 
Ximenes,
 and desir'd aid, that so great an Offender might receive condign punishment. Mean while the 
Ciquano's
 came marching down with six thousand Men, which 
Bartholomew
 went to meet with eighty Foot and some few Horse:
 The 
Indians
 which he was to encounter with, rather seeming like Furies than Men, for all of them were daub'd over with black smuts on their bare Skins from Head to Foot, and their hard Hair pleited in terrible, not in Lovelocks, hung playing, or dangling over their Shoulders. When the 
Spaniards
 in their March draw∣ing up to a River where it was best fordable, had no sooner left the Bank, and taken the Water, endeavoring to wade over, but the Salvages rush'd forth out of the Woods, and let flye a showre of Arrows, that had they not been provi∣ded with Shields and Targets, to keep off such a deadly Storm, so thick they flew, and so well aim'd, most of them had perish'd there: but having re∣cover'd the opposite Bank, the Enemy play'd all hid, and in a thought shel∣ter'd themselves under the protection of the Woods; where the Conqueror pursuing, found the Service very difficult and dangerous, for their Armes, especi∣ally their Shields, stopping and intangling them as in a Net, among the shrub∣by

and twining Branches; which they passing, rigled themselves, and made their way, like questing Spaniels following their Game, and still gawling them with their Arrows: whereupon they left their vain pursuit, marching another way to intercept 
Mayobanexius,
 who with eight thousand 
Ciquano's
 were then coming down against them; which prov'd a harder task than was expected; for e're he could reduce him and his stubborn Party, he spent three Moneths in the Service.




SECT. III.


But the great and worthy Service of these two excellent Brothers deserving rather Statues and Trophies of everlasting Honor, Monuments never to be demolish'd, in their due praise, who had found out after so many baffled Ages, a new World, richer, and not much less than the old, by the aspersing calum∣niations of one malicious Person, lost his whole Interest and Credit in the 
Spanish
 Court, quite out of favour with his Prince, who by his insinuations had hinted so much the matter of Gain among the Courtiers, that every one studied no less than to get a Commission, and so going a Commander to the 
Indies,
 make up his Mouth, and become suddenly rich. First 
Francisco Bombadilla
 prevailing, was sent with full Commission to succeed 
Columbus
 in 
Hispaniola;
 where no sooner Landing, but he exercis'd the extremity of his Authority, and seizing the Admiral and his Brother, fetter'd their Hands and Feet, and put them aboard on two several Ships for 
Spain:
 where no sooner arriv'd, but the King, not altogether forgetting former Services, commanded them to be unmana∣cled, and waited on, not as Prisoners, with a civil Retinue to his Court; where they were well entertain'd three years. But they being active Persons, weary of so long repose, got a second Grant to make farther discoveries,
 and set forth the ninth 
May, Anno
 1504. with four Sail well appointed from 
Cadiz,
 and had a fair Passage from thence to 
Hispaniola,
 where begun the Storm. for 
Bombadilla,
 who had by the Kings Commission so evil treated 
Columbus
 and his Brother, as aforemention'd, would not suffer him, though reconciled to the King, so much as to Land, and there refresh themselves and their Men; so he was forc'd to steer on to the Islands 
Guamixa
 and 
Veragua,
 where a Huri∣cane, or sudden stress of Weather sunk two of his Vessels; the other two stan∣ding off to Sea escap'd bilging, but so shatter'd and leaky, having also shipp'd abundance of Water, they were resolv'd to put in at 
Jamaica;
 where weary with the long Voyage, and hatter'd with the Tempest, many of his Sea-men, spent with sickness, after their Landing, died. To these his sufferings from Wind and Weather, and his Enemies abroad, a greater and intestine mischief hapned: 
Francisco Poresio,
 one of his chief Commanders, absolutely rebell'd, and deserting him, with another Party of his Sea-men went into 
Hispaniola:
 which the Islanders observing, resolv'd to famish him, keeping from him both Water and all other Provisions; which had not 
Columbus
 stav'd off by a hand∣som Invention, they had compleated their Design, which was this: He told them that he was the offspring of the Moon, and if they refus'd to supply his want, the Moon, in vindication of her Son, would famish them, by spoil∣ing what e're they had planted or sow'd; and that this would prove true they should know by a sign, that on such a Night, she rising in her full glory, should first look red, and afterwards by degrees lose a great part of her light; which indeed so hapned, being Ecclips'd, as he could well prognosticate; and after that, they being ignorant of the cause, suppli'd him with all Necessaries.

But 
Poresio,
 not able to endure the Sea with his small Boats, resolv'd to sur∣prize one of the Ships that lay before 
Jamaica;
 but 
Columbus
 so much prevented him,
 that meeting him in his return, after a hot dispute made him his Prisoner. But thus ended not his misfortunes; for the Vessels which he fought in soon after sunk, and no ship to be found in 
Jamaica
 to transport him thence. Lastly, he agreed with some 
Indian
 Fishermen, to carry 
Didaco Mendoza
 to 
St. Dominica,
 that there he might hire two Vessels to carry him back to 
Spain:
 which De∣sign taking effect, he arrived there in safety: where after he had refresh'd him∣self at the 
Spanish
 Court,
 after his so long and unfortunate a Voyage he fell sick, and died on the eighth of 
May
 1506.


Mean while, the Affairs of 
Hispaniola
 grew more out of order: for 
Bomba∣dilla
 joyning with 
Ximenes,
 resolv'd to hoard up a huge Treasure of Gold, though with the infinite oppression of the Natives: of which King 
Ferdinand
 having intelligence, sent 
Nicholas Olanda
 thither with thirty Sail; who being nominated Vice-Roy, anchor'd in forty days before 
Hispaniola.
 No sooner arriv'd, but 
Bombadilla
 and 
Ximenes
 fled, leaving their vast Treasure, amount∣ing to ten hundred thousand Ducats; which guarded with four hundred 
Spa∣niards
 in twenty four Ships was sent to 
Spain:
 but so it hapned, that they were all swallowed up in the main Ocean, none knowing to this day in what La∣titude they were lost.






SECT. VI. Pietro Alponso Nigno 
his Voyage.


PIetro Nigno,
 encouraged by some of those that had been with 
Columbus
 at the Isles of Pearl, Rigg'd out a Ship at his own charge, with special order in his Commission, that he should not touch on any Coast within fifty Leagues of any Place 
Columbus
 had formerly discover'd. But he little observ'd his Orders, and what he was commanded; for Sailing into the Haven 
Curiana,
 he barter'd Shells, Needles, Glass, and such like Trifles, for abundance of Pearls, which the Islanders brought aboard, for he himself having but thirty Men, durst not ven∣ture ashore. Twenty days this bartering Trade continued, Orient Pearls for Toys;
 but finding at last, that they were a civil and hospitable People, he Landed, where they entertain'd him in Hovels built of Wood, and cover'd with Palm-Leaves; before their Doors lay great Hills of Oyster-shells, the Fish being eaten, and the Pearls us'd for an ornament ; Conies, Hares, Phea∣sants, Pigeons, Geese, Ducks, Deer, and wild Swine, are their usual Food; and their Bread is made of the Roots of Trees. Moreover, 
Curiana
 abounds with thick and shady Woods, which resound in the night with the cries and roar∣ings of wild Beasts: but though they are terrible fierce and voracious, yet the Natives stoutly venture in amongst the thickest of them, arm'd onely with Bowes and Arrows. The Inhabitants are of Complexion tawny, their Hair long and curl'd; their Teeth they keep white with an Herb, which they con∣tinually hold betwixt their Lips. The Women perform their business of Husbandry, Ploughing and Sowing. The Men are Soldiers, following the business of War: but in Peace their Exercises are Hunting and Dancing. They keep annual Fairs, where from all Parts of the Countrey they bring their Commodities to buy and barter. They have their Gold from 
Cauchieta,
 six days Sail Westward from 
Curiana.




Thither 
Nigno
 next directed his course, and came to an Anchor there on the first of 
October, Anno
 1500. The Inhabitants entred aboard without the least shiness, or fear of danger, and brought with them to barter, Gold, Civet-Cats, Parrots, and Cotton.


These People, though so civil, are extreamly jealous of their Wives: for when a 
Spaniard
 made address to one of them, and coming something close, her Husband stept in suddenly between, and seem'd to forbid the Banns. But coasting onward along the Shore from thence to another Isle, he found Na∣tives far more wild and salvage: for two thousand in a Body well Arm'd, stood ready to intercept their Landing; wherefore he thought it his safest course to Tack about, and return to 
Curiana
 whence he came.


In his Way not far from thence, he fell amongst eighteen of the Cannibals Boats, which according to their custom had been a Man-stealing, and now were so hardy, that setting upon the 
Spanish
 Ship, they suddenly clapt him aboard with their 
Canoos
 on all sides; but being beaten back by the terror of their Guns, they soon retir'd: yet the 
Spaniards
 took one of the Boats with two Men, all the rest saving themselves by swimming. One of the two Men lay bound Hand and Foot, who told them, that he was to have been kill'd the next day and eaten, as he saw his Companions, with whose Flesh they ban∣quetting kept a jovial Feast. 
Nigno
 unbinding the Prisoner, gave him leave to do what he pleas'd with the taken Cannibal, who falling upon him, cudgel'd and whipp'd him to death.


Then 
Nigno
 in his Way to 
Curiana
 touch'd upon the Coast of 
Paria,
 where he found a strange kind of Salt, which the Sea in tempestuous Weather casts on the Shore, which afterwards hardens by the Sun. This Salt must be taken up before any Rain fall, else it melts and soaks away into the Ground; yet some∣times grows so hard as a Stone, insomuch that they make Pots and other Ves∣sels of it; which the 
Parians
 barter for foreign Commodities.


Nigno
 not making here any stay, return'd a second time to 
Curiana,
 where he spent twenty days in pleasant Pastimes, being Lodg'd in a Noble-mans House, at whose Door was fix'd a Cannibals Head, as a Trophy of his Vi∣ctory. He saw there also the dead Bodies of divers eminent Persons set drying at a Fire, so hardned to be set amongst their Idols.


At length 
Nigno
 set Sail homewards, and carried with him an invaluable Treasure in Pearls to 
Spain:
 but by the way fell out with his Sea-men, because he kept most of the Purchase to himself, and would not give them their shares, nay more than that, kept back the fifth part from the King; whereupon being complain'd of by 
Ferdinando de Vega,
 Governor of 
Gallicia,
 he was put in Prison, and at last sent to the Court,
 where the Pearls were declared free Prize, because 
Nigno
 had barter'd for them at 
Curiana,
 contrary to the Kings Orders, not to touch at any Coast, within fifty Leagues of what 
Columbus
 had discover'd. But since he had no way regarded those Commands to preserve that Pearl-Trade, King 
Ferdinand
 sent Governors to 
Curiana,
 who in his Name should look after, and employ Men for the catching the Pearl-Oysters. These, accompanied with a considerable number of Soldiers,
 besides six Monks, forc'd the Inhabitants to furnish them with abundance of Pearl: which oppression grew to such a heighth, that one Morning a great Party of them conspiring together, fell suddenly upon them, most of them being massa∣cred: after they had a while insultingly triumphed over the dead Bodies, and finish'd; as they thought, their good work (feasting on their Flesh at a joyful





 Banquet) those few that escap'd Sail'd to the Island 
Dominic,
 the Gover∣nor of which 
Didacus Columbus,
 Son to the famous 
Christopher,
 being incens'd, immediately sent Captain 
Ocampo
 with three hundred Men to 
Curiana;
 where in his first fury, without distinction of Sex or Age, he slew all he met with▪ But because they themselves could not follow the rich Oyster-catching, he spar'd some for that purpose, whom he commanded to build twenty five lit∣tle Houses, or Hovels, on the Shore, which he call'd 
New Toledo.
 After this they went on afresh in their Pearl-fishing.






SECT. V. 
The Voyage of
 Vincent Agnes Pinzon.


THe first of 
December, Anno
 1499. 
Vincent Pinzon
 set Sail with four Vessels out of the Haven 
Palos:
 he had been Commander of a Ship under 
Columbus
 in his first Expedition, by which means he got great experience in Navigation. When he came a little beyond the 
Hesperides,
 he was surpris'd by a great Storm, which in three days drove him before a plain Coast; where Landing, he found nothing but the Footsteps of Men; and in the night he saw great Fires, such as are generally made in Camps; about day-break twen∣ty 
Spaniards
 march'd thither, whom thirty two Men, arm'd with Bowes and Arrows, made ready to encounter; but as they approached, the 
Spaniards
 prof∣fer'd them Peace, but they refused all Composition; yet having faced one an∣other a while, they retreated without fighting.


After this 
Pinzon
 discover'd a wide, but shallow River; where Landing, on a Hill he met a great company of 
Americans:
 He, to invite them to Trade, threw them a Shell; in return for which they cast him a lump of Gold; which when the 
Spaniard
 went to take up they all fell upon him;
 and indeed he could not have defended himself long, had not some of his Company quickly





 come in to his speedy rescue, which occasion'd a bloody Conflict, wherein seve∣ral 
Spaniards
 were wounded, eight kill'd, and one of their small Boats sunk; for the 
Americans
 fought so valiantly, that they pursu'd the 
Spanish
 Ships into the Sea. 
Pinzon
 being at last freed of these Assailants, got into a fresh-water Sea, caus'd by the confluence of many Rivers falling in there: from hence he got sight of the 
Parian
 Coast, and with admiration beheld a Tree which sixteen Men could not compass: Between these Trees he saw as strange a Monster,
 the foremost part resembling a Fox, the hinder a Monkey, the Feet were like a Mans, with Ears like an Owl; under whose Belly hung a great Bag, in which it carry'd the Young, which they drop not, nor forsake till they can feed themselves. 
Pinzon
 caught one of them with three Young, which died in the Voyage, but the Dam he presented alive 
Granada
 to the King.


This Captain having Sail'd six hundred Leagues along the 
Parian
 Coast,
 in a great Tempest two of his Carvils in his view were overset, their Keels turn'd upward; the third driven from her Anchor, and the fourth so shaken, and full of Leaks, that ready to sink they ran her ashore to save their lives; and though he escaped himself the danger of drowning, then being ashore, yet he was no ways freed from far greater inconveniences; for he saw nothing but death either for want of Provisions, or barbarousness of the Inhabitants: whereupon they resolv'd to free themselves of their miseries by self-slaughter, killing one another; but some better advised to spend their Lives like 
Christi∣ans
 upon the unbelieving Salvages: Whilst they were in this desperate condi∣tion, the Storm ceased, and Providence presented their safety, the Ship driving in before the Wind; at which every one taking fresh courage, they mended the two shatter'd Ships as well as they could; wherein venturing to Sea, and setting Sail, they came on the last of 
September, Anno
 1500. into the 
Spanish
 Haven 
Palos.








SECT. V. 
The Expedition of
 Americus Vesputius.


AMericus Vesputius
 a 
Florentine,
 Commanded four Ships, fitted out at King 
Ferdinand
's Charge, set Sail the twentieth of 
May, Anno
 1497. and refresh∣ing at the 
Canaries,
 from thence he steer'd to 
Paria;
 where he so much gain'd upon the Inhabitants, that for Pins, Bells, Looking-glasses, and other Trifles, they daily brought aboard in Barter great store of Gold, the best of Mer∣chandise.


These People, both Men and Women go stark naked, not so much as co∣vering their 
Pudenda;
 their Complexion swarthy; they shave off all their Hair, onely some Women leave a Tuft on their Heads. From their Faces, being broad and flat, one may judge them to be deriv'd from 
Tartary;
 they much ex∣ceed the 
Europeans
 in Running and Swimming, insomuch that the Women of∣tentimes without any Boats, or floating pieces of Timber, venture two or three Leagues into the Sea; they have so great skill in Shooting, that they exceed almost all other Nations, having Arrows headed with sharp Fish∣bones; they also use Lances and Clubs. The Women follow the Men in the Wars, and serve in stead of Horses to carry Ammunition and other Necessa∣ries; to which Labor they are so us'd, that they will bear on their Shoulders forty, nay fifty Leagues together, such Luggage, as three 
Spaniards
 are scarce able to lift from the Ground.
 They acknowledge no Commander or Supe∣rior either in Wars or Government; they keep up old Feuds, fighting with an inveterate hatred against their Neighbors, upon antient scores and revenges, still kept in memory of their Relations slain in former Battels; and also still creating fresh animosities upon their Losses in later Engagements. Their Language is smooth and pleasing, being spoken with a kind of lisping, and absolutely different from the neighboring Nations. When they eat they sit upon the Ground, and sleeping lie in Hammocks, each end whereof being fast∣ned to a Post; underneath they kindle a Fire; over them they hang Fish-nets and Hooks, Fish-baskets and 
Calabashes.
 When they have occasion to ease Na∣ture by evacuation, they retire into some private Place; but the Women think it no immodesty to make Water, even in the presence of strange Men. They observe riot single Matrimony; for every Man takes as many Women as he pleases, under bonds of Wedlock such and so sleight, that he turns them off at his pleasure: and Women take the same liberty in casheering their Husbands when not pleasing them. They bring forth Children with little or no pain, and wash them in a River so soon as born; which done they return to their usual work and business. When they are incens'd against their Husbands, they revenge themselves by poysoning their Children. Their Houses are built in the fashion of a House-clock, with a Roof rais'd from the Wall upon four Pil∣lars like the Bell, and cover'd with Palm-Leaves; some of which are so big, that they afford room for six hundred Men: every seventh or eighth year they remove, because (as they say) the Air is oftentimes infected by Mens Breaths, by their long continuance in one place. Their Riches consist in Feathers of divers colours, Strings of Fish-bones intermingled with green and white Beads, with which they adorn their Heads, Arms, Legs, Ears, and Cheeks: Gold and Pearls they make little account of; and as to Trade and Commerce





portrait of Amerigo Vespucci


AMERICUS VESPUTIUS






with other People, they know not what belongs to it. Their greatest Friend∣ship consists in prostituting their Daughters or Wives to one another. Their Dead they bury in moist Grounds, and put with them both Meat and Drink into the Graves: When any Person grows very weak by lingring Sickness, they carry the Diseased into a neighboring Wood, where they lay him in a Silk Hammock, tied between two Trees; then dancing the whole day about him, at night they set Bread and Water enough by him to last four days, and then de∣parting look no more after him, who thus neglected seldom escape: but if so it happen that one recover, all his Relations for the future honour him as a god. When any one falls into a Fever, his Friends immediately bathe him in cold Water, and afterwards set him before a great Fire, then drive him before them till he falls down almost breathless, and at last put him to Bed. They neither Let blood in the Arms nor Feet, but in their Sides and Calves of their Legs. Sometime they fast four days together, which they suppose a great means to preserve their Health. Their Bread consists of a sort of Fruit call'd 
Jucha, Chambi,
 or 
Igname.
 Laftly, no Lyon devours his Prey with more voraci∣ous eagerness, than they their taken Enemies.


Vesputius
 being fully inform'd concerning the Situation of 
Paria,
 weighed Anchor, and on the sixth day after entred a convenient Harbor, where going ashore, he found twenty Houses built in the middle of a Lake on great Posts:
 every House had a Draw-bridge, over which they pass'd from one to the other. So soon as the Inhabitants set eye on the 
Spaniards,
 they immediately drew up their Bridges: yet some of them in twelve little 
Canoos
 came towards the 
Spa∣nish
 Ships, but amaz'd to see their Looms so big, durst not, though hal'd with signs, to come aboard, but hasted away to a high Mountain; yet seem'd to sig∣nifie that they would return, as indeed they did, bringing sixteen Maids along with them, of which they put four into a 
Spanish
 Boat, themselves in the inte∣rim rowing between the Ships from one to another, shewing all tokens of friendship,
 when on a sudden a Company of old Women came running to the Shore, and tearing the Hair from their Heads, made a terrible noise and excla∣mation, expressing the greatest sorrow they could possible: whereupon the four 
Indian
 Maids suddenly leap'd over-board, and the Men shot abundance of Arrows out of their Boats at the Ships; nay, some of them swimming under Water, endeavor'd to sink the Cock-boats which were made fast behind their Ships. Upon this sudden Onset the 
Spaniards
 making use of their Guns, quick∣ly lessen'd the number of the Assailants, insomuch that they fled to the Shore; yet five of them being overtaken, were carry'd Prisoners aboard.


Vesputius
 observing these their misdemeaning Carriages, judg'd it no way convenient to stay any longer among such barbarous and deceitful Salvages: but having weighed Anchor, and Sail'd eighty Leagues along the Coast, he ran into another convenient Haven, whose Shore swarm'd with People, which on a sudden running away, hid themselves in a neighboring Wood.


Here the 
Spaniards
 Landing were amazed, when in their Huts they saw Snakes and Serpents roasting before a Fire, whereof one had Wings, and ano∣ther whose Mouth was tied together with a Rope, stared with open eyes in a frightful manner.


Here they left several Trifles to entice the fled Natives to correspond with them. And this their Design prov'd successful; for the next day the 
Americans
 came aboard without the least fear, and offer'd to shew their hospitable kind∣ness to the 
Spaniards,
 if they pleas'd to travel three days Journey with them up

into the Countrey, telling them, they had onely rais'd those few Huts by the Sea-side for a small time whilst they Fish'd in those Parts.


About twenty of the 
Spaniards
 well Arm'd resolv'd to undertake the Jour∣ney; and travelling over Hills, Dales, and Rivers, they came at last into a Village consisting of nine of the foremention'd Houses, but mightily peopled▪ where they were in a wonderful manner received by their glad welcomes, by Dancing, Singing, Hunting, and other joyful Acclamations, presenting their Wives and Daughters, as the chiefest part of their hospitality, to caress the Strangers at their pleasure. The news was no sooner spread, but the adjacent Villages came in throngs to gaze upon, and salute the Strangers, inviting them also to their Towns. The 
Spaniards
 taking it in good part, spent nine days among them, highly treated with all manner of jollities, but especially at their choice with the varieties of 
Venus:
 from thence then returning to their Fleet, accompanied with thousands of the Natives, every one carrying Presents to the Admiral 
Vesputius
 of whom as many as they could at once receive, they enter∣taining aboard, then dismiss'd them, and admitted others; but the Guns going off, they suddenly leap'd from the Decks, and div'd like Ducks under Water: But afterwards being inform'd, that such thunder-claps were sent them from Heaven to destroy their Enemies, they were somewhat better satisfi'd, and call'd the 
Spaniards, Charabi,
 that is, 
Wise Men.


This Island lying in the 
Mexican
 Bay, in twenty Degrees of Northern Lati∣tude, 
Vesputius
 left on his Starboard, and Sail'd along a Meandring Coast (which he always kept in sight) eight hundred and sixty Leagues, and at last entred a Haven, the like whereof he had not seen before. Here he spent a Moneth in repairing his Ships, to which the Inhabitants freely gave their assi∣stance; and among other things complain'd, that a salvage People came yearly thither from an Island about a hundred Leagues distant, who fell upon them with horrible rage, and whomsoever they took they eat, but first inflicted all manner of tortures upon them, sparing none, but together murthering aged People and sucking Infants; wherefore they crav'd assistance to be reveng'd, which if the 
Spaniards
 would grant, they would follow the Fleet with their Boats. 
Vesputius
 promis'd his aid to destroy such a blood-thirsty People; and to assure them that he would perform his Word, he order'd seven of them to go in 
Canoos
 before and shew them the Way. On the seventh day they came to an Anchor before the Island 
Hy,
 where the Shore was guarded with naked Men, whose Bodies being strong and brawny, were painted, and their Arms, Legs, and Head, adorn'd with divers colour'd Plumes, having not onely offen∣sive Weapons, as Bowes, Arrows, and Launces, but also defensive, huge Tar∣gets, and square Shields. So soon as they judg'd the approaching 
Spaniards
 to be within reach,
 they shot a great flight of Arrows at them; but 
Vesputius
 lying close along the Shore with his Ships, fir'd upon them with Chain-shot, which did great execution: yet notwithstanding about forty 
Spaniards
 leaping ashore out of their Boats, found themselves in no small danger; for the Cannibals upon the sound of Horns flocking together, so press'd upon them that they were forc'd to lay aside their Gans, and fall to Blows, and had not timely as∣sistance come to them, they had undoubtedly been all slain: two hours the Victory was doubtful on whose side it would fall; yet at last the Cannibals quitting the Field, left the 
Spaniards
 Victors; who the next day pursu'd their gotten Victory with such success, that they drove their Enemies before them, burnt their Villages and Boats, and carry'd two hundred and two and twenty

of them Prisoners to 
Spain,
 where they safely arriv'd the 15. of 
November, Anno
 1498.


This good success so encourag'd 
Vesputius,
 that having stay'd scarce seven Moneths ashore, he obtaining the Command over six Ships, with which he set Sail from 
Cadiz,
 and touching upon the 
Canaries,
 Steer'd from thence Southerly; and having Sail'd five hundred Leagues, he discover'd a Countrey overflow'd and made Marishy by great Rivers, and abounding with Trees, but saw no sign of any Inhabitants; yet not long after, coming before an Island, he took a Boat with two Prisoners, newly guelt, and sent as a Present to feast the 
Cannibals,
 which refus'd to Treat on any other account whatsoever; where∣fore he Sail'd eighty Leagues forward along the Shore of an unknown Island, where he Barter'd for some Gold, and got five hundred Pearls for one single Shell; these Pearls, the Inhabitants said were not found there, but taken from their Neighboring Enemies, which liv'd Westward, and had abundance of them.


Nothing worthy of remark happen'd in this Voyage, onely the strange con∣stitutions of a wild People, living on a barren Isle, deserve to be mention'd.


About their Necks hung two hollow Vessels, the one full of white stamp'd Worts, and Herbs; and the other, full of Grass, which they greedily cram'd into their Mouths, feeding like Cattel; then a Stick wetted with Spittle, they put into the bruis'd Herbs, taking upon the end of it, as upon the point of a Knife, some of the bruis'd to their Mouths, which (as if chawing the Cud) turn∣ing therein, then taking out again, and strowing more of the same Herbs out of the Vessel upon it, swallow'd it down. No fresh Water was to be had amongst them, but what they gather'd from the Dew in great Leaves: Neither had they any Houses, but dwelt under great Trees, and fed on dry'd Fish.


The next remark in this Voyage, was the discovery of an Island not far from the former, where he found the Footsteps of a Gigantick People, upon which nine 
Spaniards
 went a League to search the Countrey, where they saw five great Huts, standing in a spacious Valley, and in them two old, and three young Women, each of them being twice as tall as an ordinary Man: The old ones invited the 
Spaniards
 to eat, who when they were fat down, consult∣ing how they might take and carry one of these Giantesses to 
Spain,
 there to shew her for Money, thirty six Giants came in to them, (never did the Sun shine on a more terrible People) which so amaz'd the 
Spaniards,
 that their Hair seem'd to stand an end at the fear thereof: Every Giant was arm'd with a Bow and Arrows, and a Club: They wondering at the nine strangers, stood talking very earnestly one to another, which gave the 
Spaniards
 time to think of making their escape; some judg'd it convenient to discharge their Guns up∣on them, and in the Smoke to run away; others thought, that it would be bet∣ter to take a milder course, which they all agreed on; and taking their leave, went out of the Hut, but were follow'd by the Giants, who kept a Stones cast behind them, and went faster or slower, as the 
Spaniards
 slacken'd or mended their pace; who at last getting to the Shore, and from thence into their Boats, they suddenly put off; but the Giants then pursu'd them with eager speed, all of them leaping into the Water, and Swimming, shot abundance of Arrows after them; but frighted by the Thunder of two great Guns that were dis∣charged from the Ships, return'd ashore, and fled into the neighboring Hills.




Vesputius
 at last began to consider of returning home, his Provisions begin∣ning to grow scarce, and his Sea-men faint, having continu'd in the Equino∣ctial heats a whole year; wherefore he directed his course towards 
Spain,
 in his Voyage, driving along the Coast an advantagious Trade, by bartering Shells and Glass for Pearls.
 The Inhabitants presented him with Oysters, of which some inclos'd one hundred and thirty Pearls; when they attain to their full growth, they fall out of the Shells themselves, but those that stick, decay. So upon the tenth of 
November,
 the Fleet came safe to an Anchor before 
Cadiz.
 After which,
 
Vesputius
 retired to 
Sevil,
 with intent to settle himself there, but he had not long repos'd, when 
Emanuel
 King of 
Portugal
 sent for him to 
Lisbon,
 and gave him the Command of three Ships, to discover new Countreys; be∣tween the 
Canaries
 and 
Africa,
 they pass'd thorow so many Fishes (not unlike a Bream) that in an hours time they loaded their Boats with them; this Fish hath a round, thin Scale, sharp Teeth, Stones in their Brains or Foreheads, a sharp pointed Heart, a Bladder full of Wind, red Tail and Fins, feeds on Sea Weeds, Gurnets and Oysters, and is of a delicious Taste.


From thence, five degrees Southward of the Equinox, he found a naked People on the top of a high Rock, that beckon'd the 
Spaniards
 to come towards them; upon which, two of them resolv'd to venture thither, having order not to stay at the most above five days:
 The first incounter they had was of some Women, who offer'd their bodies to prostitution; but a Youth, as if affrighted with some sudden danger, came running amongst them, whom, whilst they stood gazing upon, and wondering at, an old Woman with a great Club, run∣ning down the Hill overtook, and knock'd him down dead upon the ground; which done, the Women that were making Court to the 
Spaniards,
 took him by the Heels, and dragg'd up the Hill, where soon after they saw him chop'd in pieces, Broyl'd, and eaten: They also made signs to the 
Spaniards,
 that they would devour them also in the same manner. The Shore was crouded with Men, which showr'd upon them several flights of Arrows; wherefore they thought it best to Weigh Anchor, so taking Aboard their two Men, and having Sail'd 150. Leagues, they got sight of the Coast of 
Brasile,
 along which he Sail'd Southerly to fifty two Degrees, where three 
Brasilians
 came Aboard of their own accord, and were easily perswaded to go with him to 
Portugal;
 but the Weather growing very bad, and the Cold intollerable, the Storms swelling the Waves into the bigness of Mountains, 
Vesputius
 left the Coast 
des Patagones,
 and the 
Streights,
 afterwards call'd 
Magellan,
 behind him, burnt one of his Ships before 
Cape Sierra Leona,
 and brought two safe to 
Lisbon.


His fourth Expedition happen'd, 
May
 10. 
Anno
 1503. at which time he Steer'd directly with six Sail to 
Sierra Leona,
 and approaching the Coast, could not come to an Anchor, because of the strong eddying Currents: Three De∣grees beyond the Equinox appear'd a rising Island, two Leagues long, and one broad, destitute of Inhabitants; his best Ship being six hundred Tun, split here against a Rock, and nothing of her was saved, but the Sea-men: But 
Ve∣sputius
 Rowing ashore with a Boat, found a convenient Haven, with abun∣dance of sweet Water,
 high Trees, Sea-Spiders, and horrible Dragons, which have a sharp Head, round fiery Eyes, and wide Mouths, Wings not unlike a Bats, a speckled Breast, curl'd Tail, blew Back, and two Bags like a drawn Satchel Triangular, were under their Bellies: No less strange are the Sea-Spiders, by their hard Feet, long upper Teeth, two long Sheers or Pinchers, and double Belly; between the Head and the Belly lies a black Skin, with





 which they darken the Water; when any one goes to take them in the night, they make a great shadow; they feed on Fish, the Female lays little white Eggs, not unlike ordinary Hail-stones.


Vesputius
 having left this desolate Isle, three hundred Leagues a Stern, enter'd a Haven, to which he gave the name of St. 
Abdy,
 where he stay'd two Months, expecting the return of those which he had sent into the Countrey; but seeing it in vain to wait any longer, he proceeded on his Journey, and Sailing in be∣tween the 
Abrelhos,
 in the River 
Curubabo,
 he built a strong Fort, Garrison'd it with twenty four Men, twelve pieces of Ordnance, and Provisions for six Moneths: Five Moneths 
Vesputius
 had spent in the building this Castle; when he return'd home with one Ship, laden with 
Brasill
 Wood, where approaching 
Lisbon,
 beyond all expectation, the Inhabitants of the City ran to Congratu∣late his happy return. And from this 
Americus Vesputius,
 the 
New World
 is to this day call'd 
America.






SECT. VII. 
The Expedition of
 Alphonso, Fogeda, Diego Nicuesa, Ancisus, 
and
 Roderick Colmenares.


AMericus Vesputius
 was scarce fitted out in 
Lisbon,
 when 
Fogeda
 set Sail with three hundred Men from 
Beata,
 the chiefest Haven of 
Hispaniola,
 to the Island 
Codego,
 inhabited by Naked People, but of comely Personage, and withal expert and most excellent Archers: Here he found a very strange Tree,
 which bears a Fruit not unpleasing to the Palate, yet deadly Poyson, and be∣sides, whoever chances to sleep under their shadow, loose both their under∣standing and Eye-sight, and never attain to their former Sences, except they take some 
Opiates,
 as dangerous, and so by long sleep, recover.


Here 
Fogeda
 set upon a poor Village near the Sea-side, where without mercy

he put them all to the Sword, except a few Youths which were onely saved, that they might inform 
Fogeda,
 what was become of the slain and taken 
Spani∣ards;
 Who told him, that according to their Custom, they had Roasted the dead, and also their living Prisoners, and feasted on their Flesh. Here having burnt the Houses, and sifting the Ashes, 
Nicuesa
 found some Gold. But now they began to be distress'd for Provisions; for prevention of which, 
Nicuesa
 had given order to 
Ancisus,
 Marshal in 
Hispaniola
 that he should follow with a Ship of Victual,
 for the Army to 
Codega.
 But he being kept back by incon∣veniencies, most of the 
Spaniards
 were famish'd, so that the three hundred Men which 
Codega
 brought from 
Hispaniola,
 were reduced to sixty. And he was al∣ready under-Sail to 
Hispaniola,
 when 
Ancisus
 Anchor'd in the Haven of 
Codegoos,
 and sent some Men ashore to mend his Boat, and fetch fresh Water, which whilst they were doing, the Natives came flocking about them: Three days they fac'd one another,
 using no Hostility, when at last a 
Spaniard
 that under∣stood the 
Codegan
 Tongue, adventuring to fetch Water, he was immediately encompassed; when speaking to them, and informing them in their own Lan∣guage, That he was none of 
Fogedas
 or 
Nicuesas
 People, which not long since had committed so great slaughter, they left him, and the rather, because he told them, that 
Ancisus
 would take revenge on them, if they did any wrong to him. Thus quieted, they brought all sorts of Provisions Aboard. Mean while, 
Ancisus
 Sail'd to the Main Continent 
Uraba,
 where in the Mouth of a Haven he ran his Vessel a-ground, which was bilg'd; the Sea-men taking some Arms along with them, sav'd their lives by swimming ashore; where, their first sustenance they found was store of Peaches and Cherries, which was a great refreshment in those hot Countreys, but yet had undoubtedly been starv'd, but that in search∣ing the Wood for Fruits, they found Wild-Swine, which preserv'd their lives; yet they were not free from apparent danger, having to deal with a Salvage People, into whose hands they were so unfortunately cast by Shipwrack; how∣ever 
Ancisus
 set a good face on the business, marching with a hundred Men up into the Countrey, where some of the 
Urabanners
 from an ambuscade unawares, with their Arrows wounded several of his Men, hereupon they retreated to the Shore of the River 
Daria,
 whither also they had brought the small Boats, sav'd from the Wreck; where whilst they were in consultation how to return to 
Hispaniola,
 the Inhabitants having muster'd themselves, and making a Body of five hundred Men, set upon them, who after a sharp Conflict, made them retreat, and at last to flie, whom 
Ancisus
 pursuing, found in a Thicket of Canes or Reeds a great Treasure of Gold. Mean while, 
Nicuesa
 Sail'd to the plen∣tiful Golden Countrey 
Veragua
 with three Ships, of which, he lost two, the one Commanded by 
Lupus de Olana,
 and the other by 
Peter Umbria Olana,
 which was stranded in the River 
Veragua,
 which gives name to the whole Island, but he built a new 
Carvil,
 whereas that of 
Lupus Olana
 was bilg'd among the Rocks. Little better success had 
Nicuesa,
 whose Ship over-turning with a Tempest, he with a few of his Men made land upon 
Veragua,
 where he rang'd up and down in a miserable condition, on a barren, and in a manner desolate Shore seventy days: All that time, finding no other Food than Wild Roots, who wandring up and down, at last met with 
Olana,
 a little before cast away on the same Isle, whom he secur'd, because he presum'd to usurp the Title, and be prime Com∣mander of that Countrey. Upon which, the 
Spaniards
 being divided, some for 
Ancisus,
 some for 
Olana,
 the difference more and more encreasing, would not be reconcil'd, till the Famine over-powering, master'd both, so that not being

able to handle their Arms, the Salvages slew them at their pleasure, by this means in a short time, of seven hundred eighty five, remain'd scarce ninety; yet did not all this misery work any thing upon the ambitious humor of 
Vas∣ques Nunnez,
 who rebelling against 
Ancisus,
 split that small remainder of Men, and with the help of those he had drawn over to his Party, made himself Go∣vernor of 
Uraba,
 not possible to be long enjoy'd without speedy supply, which soon after they receiv'd; for 
Colmenares
 Sailing from 
Hispaniola
 with Provisions,
 arriv'd there the 15. of 
October, Anno
 1510. having been toss'd twenty three days at Sea; then making into the River 
Gaira,
 to furnish himself with fresh Wa∣ter, he lost forty seven Men; for whilst they were filling their Casks, seven hundred of the Salvages came down upon them, and with their Poyson'd Arrows wounded and kill'd most of them.
 
Colmenares
 came in a good time to the remainder under 
Ancisus
 Command, being in danger of death for want of Provisions, and finding the factions that were among them about Superiority, he thought it fit, consulting with some of the chiefest of them, to find out 
Ni∣cuesa,
 who was indeed the Governor that had the Grant from the King: This agreed, 
Colmenares
 went to search, and at last lighted upon him, building a For∣tress against the assaults of the Enemies on the Promontory. 
Mormor,
 he was glad to find him, but griev'd to see the misery and hardship they endur'd, most of his Men being kill'd, partly by the excessive Heats, partly by Famine, and partly by the cruelty of the Natives, so that he had onely sixty remaining, and those many of them also sick and weak.


Colmenares
 having deliver'd his Message, 
Nicuesa
 broke up his Quarters, and sleighting the Fort, went with him, but both himself and his Men were op∣pos'd from Landing by 
Nunnez;
 wherefore 
Nicuesa
 was necessitated to Steer for 
Hispaniola;
 whom, or what became of him was never known.


Nunnez
 having thus quitted himself of 
Nicuesa,
 and now, more than ever, wanting Provision, he resolv'd to take out his own Commission at large, and setting up for himself, make no discrimination of Persons, 
Spaniards,
 or Na∣tives, but to make out his Fortune.


And first, he fell upon 
Careta
 King of 
Coita,
 whom he took Prisoner, Plunder∣ing him of all his Treasure and Provisions; yet this sufficed not long, for soon after, King 
Poncha
 invading 
Careta, Nunnez
 took hold of that opportunity, and pretending to assist 
Careta,
 being well recruited with his Forces, set upon 
Pon∣cha,
 who immediately fled, and left all to the spoil of his Enemies.


This News so amaz'd 
Comogrus,
 another King, that he proffer'd Peace;
 where∣upon 
Nunnez
 going thither, was nobly entertain'd in his Palace, being one hun∣dred and fifty Paces long, and eighty broad, the Floors Pav'd with Stone, and the Roofs Vaulted, his Cellars were stor'd with Wine, made of the Root 
Jucca, Ages,
 and 
Mais;
 the Privy-Chamber was hung round with dead bodies, Mummy'd artificially with Lent Fires, and were the Corpses of 
Comogrus
 Ance∣stors, and others of the Royal Blood, and nearest Relations, of whom some dy'd at least four hundred years before; each of these fasten'd by Cordage made of Reeds, were Habited in Cotton, richly adorn'd with Pearls and Gold. Mean while, a Hurricane happening, terrible with Thunder and Lightning, and hideous Gusts, swell'd and so enrag'd the Sea, that breaking its bounds, over-running, drown'd the whole Champain; thus the hopes of a fruitful Har∣vest being utterly lost, they suffer'd under a great Famine.


The 
Spaniards
 which Encamp'd near the River 
Daria,
 on 
Uraba,
 perceiving this, and knowing they had no manner of supply from 
Hispaniola,
 and having

already Pillag'd the Neighboring Kings, that they had nothing left. 
Nunnez
 marching thirty Leagues up the River,
 Plunder'd the Village, of which 
Dai∣baiba
 was King, where he found an unvaluable quantity of Gold, but little or no Provision. Here were many Flitter Mice, or Bats, bigger than Turtle Doves, whose biting was mortal, unless immediately wash'd with Salt Wa∣ter, according to the information of the Prisoners.


Now as 
Nunnez Uraba
 Pillag'd towards the South, so did 
Colmenares,
 setting up also for himself, make prize of all, to the East with sixty Men, Rowing against the Stream up the River 
Daria,
 above twelve Leagues, where he found in several Villages and Hamlets, and at King 
Turvi
's Palace, abundance, both of Provision and Gold; from thence he March'd to the mighty Province 
Abe∣namchei,
 which though making some resistance, at last they subdu'd.


And the neighboring King 
Abibeiba
 narrowly escap'd the like fortune, whose Pallace was built on the tops of Trees, Plash'd, and Pleited together, Timber Beams lying athwart; necessity forcing them to choose such high Habitations, partly, to avoid the Inundations of Rivers, swoln above their bounds by sudden and almost assiduous Showres from the Mountains;
 and partly, to be free from the excursions of sculking Robbers; also being better able to defend themselves in these Castles in the Air, and also secur'd by their heighth from their Shot, being above the reach of their 
Indian
 Arrows: The bodies of the Trees downwards, upon which the Houses are built, are generally twenty four Fathom thick, so that they cannot easily be cut down, nor fired; but 
Colme∣nares
 against these, as they suppos'd, impregnable Forts, having made a Galle∣ry with several great Hurdles, set his Men to work under that safeguard, with Axes on the Tree whereon 
Abibeiba
's House stood, who seeing his imminent danger, wondring at this new manner of Storming, came down, promising to furnish him with Gold out of the neighboring Mountains, notwithstand∣ing it would be with the danger of his Life; because the 
Cannibals
 generally kill those that adventur'd to dig in the Mines: To this promise, 
Colmenares
 hearken'd,
 and having set him at liberty, for the performance, he in stead there∣of, on the contrary, stirr'd up, and joyn'd with all the Conquer'd Kings, to destroy him and his Men: Nor were they slack to have executed their design, five thousand of them being already drawn together at the Village 
Tirichi,
 the appointed place of Rendezvous, and so privately carry'd, that undoubtedly it had been effected, if not happily discover'd by this accident.


Nunnez,
 amongst his other Slavesses, had one exceeding beautiful, on which he was much Enamour'd, and she likewise seem'd to bear as great an affection towards him, which she manifested, by declaring the secret to 
Nunnez
 which her Brother had imparted to her, being an intended gene∣ral Massacre the night following, that so she might the better make her es∣cape the day before; yet so much she prefer'd the safety of her Lover, before the liberty of her Native Countrey, that she discover'd the Plot. 
Nunnez
 not sleeping on this advice, on a sudden set so fiercely upon the Conspirators, that he utterly broke their design; yet the Feuds and Contests for Superiority still continu'd amongst them, which look'd with so had a Face to the ruine of all, that news thereof arriving in 
Spain,
 it was judg'd fit to send for 
Colmenares,
 and 
John Quicedo
 to the Court, there to render an account of all their Transactions, Both going Aboard a small Vessel, were by Storm driven on the Coast of 
Cuba,
 where they were inform'd from a Prisoner, that 
Valdivia
 and 
Zamudio,
 driven ashore by Shipwrack, and not able to defend themselves, were surpriz'd by

the Natives, kill'd and eaten; that 
Fogeda
 driven up and down along the Coast, had lost most of his People by hunger, and other hirdship, and him∣self with much ado getting to 
Hispaniola,
 dy'd as soon as Landed of the Wound which he receiv'd by a Poysonous Arrow, near the River 
Daria.


But much happier was 
Ancisus,
 who soon after 
Fogeda
 coming to 
Cuba,
 found a King, who suffer'd himself to be Christen'd, and call'd 
Commendator;
 and building a Church, Consecrated it to the Virgin 
Mary;
 in it he erected an Image of Clay, resembling a Woman, which he clothed in a Cotton Gar∣ment; round about were plac'd Pots with Meat and Water, according to their old Idolatrous fashion, otherwise, they believ'd their Idols would devour the Souls of the Dead, and this, though Christians, they did not forget.


Nay further, when he went to War, he carry'd the Image of the Virgin 
Mary
 with him in the Front of his Army, often saying, 
Ave Maria;
 and this was the end of that Voyage: But afterwards 
Ancisus
 complain'd against 
Vascus Nunnez
 in the 
Spanish
 Court, where he receiv'd a Sentence very prejudicial to him. 
Col∣menares
 and 
Quicedo
 had also Audience there, whereupon matters being settled, a firm Government was establish'd in 
Uraba.






SECT. VIII. Peter Arias 
his Expedition, and remarkable Passages of
 Vascus Nunnez.


PEter Arias
 Knight, accompany'd with his Wife, 
Elizabeth Boadilla,
 set Sail 
Anno
 1514. but surpriz'd by a violent Storm, lost two Ships, and return'd to 
Spain,
 yet not long after began his Voyage afresh, notwithstanding he had lately had such bad success, and heard of the great hardship which 
Nicuesa
 suf∣fer'd,
 having not onely kept himself alive a considerable time by feeding on flesh of Dogs, and other such like Creatures; a great Frog being sold in 
Vera∣gua
 for a lump of Gold.


But 
Vaschus Nunnez
 inform'd of 
Arias
 arrival, the chief Governor of 
Uraba,
 afterwards call'd 
New Andaluzia,
 minding to inrich himself before he should de∣pose him, and hearing that several Gold Mines lay Southward from 
Uraba,
 march'd thither with a hundred and ninety Men, thorow great Rivers, Thick∣ets, and Woods full of Wild Beasts, deep Vallies, and broad Rivers, not with∣out many hazards and difficulties. In the Mountainous Territory 
Quarequan,
 the Inhabitants ingag'd him valiantly, with Bows, Arrows, Clubs, Woodden Swords, Pikes and Launces, but frighted with the meer report of their Mus∣quets, like flocks of wild Fowl, dissipated and fled, but not so fast, but that six hundred of them fell by the hands of the 
Spaniards,
 or were worry'd by their Dogs, train'd up on purpose for the 
American
 Wars. Soon after,
 coming into the Palace, there sate his Brother dress'd up in Womens Apparel, whom the King kept to abuse, as if a Concubine; whereof 
Nunnez
 being inform'd, in detesta∣tion of Sodomy, set the Dogs upon him, who suddenly tore him in pieces.
 Amongst the slain were found several 
Negroes,
 which suffering Shipwrack had been cast on the 
American
 Shore, and maintain'd a continual War with the 
Qua∣raquanen,
 so that it seem'd the 
Blacks
 which were found dead amongst them were their Slaves: Yet 
Nunnez
 was forc'd to leave a considerable number of his Men here, who being half starv'd, and quite tired out, were not able to follow him; but with the remaining party he march'd on,
 and at last came to the high Mountains, from whence he saw the great South-Sea, and going thi∣ther,





 was met by King 
Chiapes,
 leading an Army of thirty thousand Men, which great Body stood not long to make resistance, being terrifi'd with the Vollyes of Shot, whose Report the ecchoing Valleys presented to their Ears, double and trebble: And that which most amaz'd and disanimated them in the rout, were the Dogs, who fiercely pursu'd and seiz'd the flyers, tearing away great morsels of Flesh. After the Battel, the Conqueror proffer'd Peace, which was agreed on, upon the delivery of several great Presents of Gold. Af∣ter that, 
Chiapes
 the King, accompany'd with 
Nunnez
 the 
Spanish
 Commander, and March'd with him over a broad River to 
Coquera,
 where at first some For∣ces made resistance, but were routed; whereupon, they also suddenly struck up a Peace, upon conditions, that the Prince, nam'd also 
Coquera,
 should return him a great quantity of Gold.
 Here he found a handsome Bay running up in crooked Reaches, above sixty Leagues, which 
Nunnez
 call'd St. 
Michael,
 being sprinkled with Islands, and treacherous with hidden Rocks. There 
Nunnez,
 (though disswaded by 
Chiapes,
 because he knew the South-Sea at that time be∣ing the three last Moneths of the Year, was exceeding turbulent, that no Vessel could hardly live in it, yet) ventur'd with nine 
Indian
 Boats, and eighty Men from the Shore into the 
Offin;
 where, notwithstanding the high rolling of the Waves, he got to an uninhabited Island, on which, being necessitated to stay a night, the Tide flow'd so much, according to the property of the South-Sea, that the highest Ground thereon, lay almost cover'd with Water, every one of the 
Spaniards
 having enough to do to save themselves from being wash'd away. Day approaching, discover'd a second inconveniency, for the 
Indian Canoos
 ei∣ther were extremely Leaky, or else so shatter'd, that they were unfit for service; yet notwithstanding all this, they ventur'd to return, rather choosing to be de∣vour'd in the Waves, than die of that hunger, whose misery they had suffici∣ently tasted, during the small time they had been out. Not long after, 
Nunnez
 Conquer'd the King 
Tamaccus
 in a Field Battel, who thereupon purchas'd his Peace with great Presents of Gold and Pearl. He also shew'd the 
Spaniards
 an

Island, whose spiring tops were seen from the Main Land, which so abounded in Pearls, that in no place were either more or fairer to be found: But the King who liv'd on it was exceeding powerful.


Nunnez
 immediately resolv'd to Sail thither, notwithstanding it was the middle of 
October,
 when the South-East Winds make such a turbulent and hol∣low Sea, as many times wash'd away Trees and pieces of Rocks: Besides, the Weather was more terrible, by continual Lightning and great Thunder-Claps; the Nights very cold; the Days exceeding hot; yet all these difficulties could not prevail, for 
Nunnez
 would not stay to expect fairer Weather, but went on, and coming thither, he saw how the 
Indians
 Fish for Pearls,
 which was Diving for Oysters; but the Weather being rough and foul, they durst not venture for the best which lay far from the Shore.


But 
Nunnez
 leaving his sick and weary'd Men with 
Chiapes,
 March'd quite another way back than he came; and crossing a great River, was receiv'd by Prince 
Teaocha,
 who furnish'd him with Gold, Pearls, Provisions, and Guides, which carry'd his Luggage and Goods.


Pacra,
 a great Oppressor of all his Neighbors, hearing of the approach of 
Nunnez,
 fled, but terrifi'd with threats, return'd with three other Princes, which were all so Deform'd, that more horrible Monsters were never seen, scarce any part about them resembling those of a Man:
 The Guides which 
Teaocha
 had provided for the 
Spaniard
 desir'd that he might be put to Death, for the Cruelties which he had long committed; whose Request being granted, he with the other three Princes, were given as a Breakfast to the 
Spanish
 Doggs. Mean while, the 
Spaniards
 were in danger to have perish'd for want of Water; yet at last, in a Thicket of Brambles, they found a small Brook, but none of the 
Indians
 durst venture to go to it, for fear of Tygers, and other Wild Beasts; relating, That the Tygers took many people in the nights out of their Huts, if they were not careful in making fast their Doors.


John Ledesma
 had himself eaten part of a Tyger, which for six Moneths toge∣ther, had every night feasted on Mans flesh, or Beasts, which they caught in this manner: In the Path along which he pass'd, coming out of his Den to seek for Prey, a deep Pit was digg'd, and cover'd very sleightly on the top, into which the Tyger fell; yet though taken, so fiercely withstood the Pikes, Darts, and Stones thrown at him, that every one was amaz'd to see the fury of the Beast. After that they sought for the Female, but found onely two young ones with∣out a Dam, which taking along with them, they put Iron Collars about their Necks, intending to carry them to 
Spain;
 but seeing no likelyhood of breed∣ing them up, they brought them back again, purposing to fetch them away when grown somewhat older, and accordingly coming afterwards to look for them, they found the Den empty, so that it was supposed they had been de∣vour'd by their Dam.


In the Province of 
Bononiama,
 the 
Spaniards
 inrich'd themselves with Chains, and Breast-Plates of Gold, which in great plenty hung on the Walls in every House: At the River 
Comogrus,
 they discharg'd 
Teaocha
's Guides, and made use of 
Cotog
 and 
Ciuriza,
 two Governors of a barren Tract of Land, full of Hills and Mountains, which they left on their right Hand, and wandred three days over a 
Morasse,
 in which they often sunk to their Knees.


In all these Travels, Victual was so scarce that they were much weaken'd by their wants; and though they took fresh courage when they got footing on King 
Buchebua
's Jurisdiction, yet they found nothing but empty Huts; and the

like in the Countrey of 
Chiorisus,
 both having a little before been pillag'd by their more powerful neighboring Enemies. But although they could not fur∣nish 
Nunnez
 with Provisions, they presented him with weighty Ingots of Gold: but this rich Metal not able to purchase the least morsel of Bread, drove them into a great strait; and indeed they had without doubt been all famished, had not 
Pocchorosa,
 mother King, fed them forty days together with stamp'd Roots. Thus refresh'd, and instigated by 
Pocchorosa,
 they broke by night in 
Tubunama
's Palace, and took him Prisoner with eighty Concubines, who fearing to be put to death, gave an incredible Treasure of Gold to purchase his Ransom.


Nunnez
 thus enriched came at last to his People which he had left on the River 
Daria,
 where two Ships sent from 
Hispaniola
 rode at an Anchor.


Whilst things were thus carry'd in 
America, Peter Arias
 Sail'd with fifteen Ships, Mann'd with fifteen hundred Men, to 
New Andalusia,
 by the Islands 
Martinina, Guadalupe,
 and 
Galanta,
 all in 
America:
 a considerable time he Sail'd through the Sea overgrown with Weeds. Afterwards anchoring in the Haven 
St. Martha,
 he receiv'd a great repulse from the Natives, who no ways daunted at the bigness of the Ships, waded up to their Breasts in the Sea, and shot many great flights of poisonous Arrows at the 
Spaniards,
 of whom two being wound∣ed immediately died. 
Arias
 sending some of his Men ashore, they found ma∣ny Boats lying full of Nets, made of tough Weeds, and Ropes pleited of Rushes.


In the Haven 
St. Martha,
 being three Leagues wide, are abundance of Fish, which may be seen under Water twenty Fathom deep.


But now the 
Spaniards
 that were ashore breaking into the Houses, and taking Women and Children Prisoners, the 
Americans
 prepar'd for another Fight, which at the beginning was very fierce; but at last they were forc'd to quit the Field.


Their Houses and Furniture in them are worthy of observation: their Cie∣lings being cover'd with Shells strung on small Thred, which make a pleasing noise, when mov'd by the least breath of Wind. The Walls are hung with fine Stuffs, woven full of Imagery, as Cranes, Lyons, Tygers, and some Figures of Men; the Floors are cover'd with parti-colour'd Mats, made of Sea-Reeds, and several tough Roots; and their Carpets beset with Pearl add also a great beauty to their Rooms.


In the Valleys the 
Spaniards
 found several precious Jems, as Saphires, Jas∣per, Emeralds, and great pieces of Amber, and in some Huts, Baskets, and Chests full of dry'd Locusts, and Crabs.


Here also grows the Root 
Yuca,
 as also on several other 
West-Indian
 Coasts, of which they make their best Bread, and is call'd in 
Hispaniola
 and 
Angola, Yuca;
 by the 
Brasilians, Mandiba
 and 
Mandihoka;
 by the 
Mexicans, Quauhcamotli:
 it grows with a thick or midling Body, according to the fruitfulness or barren∣ness of the Soil; the Leaves are like those of a Tulip, and have small Flowers and Seed, but no ways useful; the Root, not unlike Horse-Raddish, hath a milky Juice, which swells it exceedingly; the Sprigs, which in the eighth and tenth Moneth shoot out of the Root, serve for new Plants; and if at any time it happen, that either by a moist Season, or by Worms, or Pismires, the Plant is spoil'd, then it occasions such an inconvenience amongst the Inhabitants, that half of them in that year die of Famine.


The Leaves of the 
Mandihoka
 serve them for Sallads. Out of the Root,





 which they lay soaking five days in Water, they make Meal, which the 
Cortu∣guese
 call 
Farina fresca,
 but the 
Americans, Vipeba.
 Moreover, 
Mandihoka
 serves them to make Bread, which they bake over the Fire; and mix'd with Water, Pepper, and the Flour 
Nhambi,
 makes an excellent Pud
ing, by them call'd 
Mingaude Carima,
 no less pleasing to the taste than wholsom Food: and with Orange-Flour, Water, and Sugar, it makes that excellent Julep 
Tipioca.
 The Powder of 
Mandihoka
 put into a Wound, cures very speedily. It is very plea∣sant to see the 
Americans
 eat this Bread; for they toss it by handfuls at a pretty distance from their Mouthes without letting fall the least Crum. Lastly, it requires great art and trouble to make the 
Mandihoka
 fit for Bread: first they must peel off the Shell, then put into a Mill turn'd by two 
Indians
 it falls, being Ground, into a square Trough. The Juice proceeding from it is mortal, if eaten when raw, but wholsom if boil'd: the Meal they put in a Press, and when all the moisture is drawn from it, they strow it in an Oven to dry. But the wild 
Mandihoka,
 by those that live on the Sea-shore call'd 
Cuacu Mandiiba,
 and up in the Countrey, 
Cuquacucuremia,
 differs both in shape and goodness from the first.


But to return to our matter: 
Arias
 coming to an Anchor in the River 
Daria,
 was cheerfully receiv'd by 
Nunnez;
 his first Business which he undertook was the building of three Forts, to secure the Passages to the 
South Sea;
 to which purpose 
Joannes Aiora
 received the Command over four hundred Workmen. Moreover, 
Arias
 took great dislike in the Place call'd 
Maria Antiqua,
 which the 
Spaniards
 were forc'd by necessity first to Plant in: it lay in a deep Valley be∣tween high Mountains, so that it not onely wanted the benefit of the rising and setting of the Sun, but when in or near the Meridian, it shin'd down upon them, and scorch'd all their Plants, and the tepifi'd Morassy Grounds about the same infected the Air, and the Water which they took up to wash their Houses, immediately bred Frogs, the River 
Daria
 overflow'd the Grounds with his muddy Water three Leagues distance from the Sea; the Passage thither

also was very troublesom, because of the uneven Ways; and besides, the Ty∣gers and Lyons devour'd many People and Cattel.


The first Night that 
Arias
 lay in 
Maria Antiqua,
 the House wherein his Chi∣rurgion Lodg'd was fir'd with Lightning, who running out with his Wife, be∣ing both scorched by the Flames, saw a very great Crocodile, which snatch∣ing up his Dog ran away with him towards the River.


The neighboring Territory 
Coiba
 produced Trees, whose Timber us'd for Shipping never breeds Worms, because of its acerbity; whereas on the con∣trary, all other Vessels in that Countrey are very subject to that inconvenience. Here also grow those famous Plague-Trees, whose very Leaves, if but falling upon one, are like Gods Arrows, mortal, and immediately kill, unless the Place whereon they light be straightway anointed, with fasting Spittle: and the 
Coi∣bensers
 say, that they know another poysonous Wood, which they use to de∣stroy their Enemies withall.


Whilst 
Arias
 was consulting about the beforemention'd Affairs, he sent seve∣ral Comanders to divers Places, to take a survey, and give him an account of their Return of all their Discoveries.
 Amongst others 
Gasper Moralis
 was order'd to march towards the 
South Sea,
 to confirm the Peace which 
Nunnez
 had begun with the Kings 
Chiapes
 and 
Tumaccus;
 and chiefly to go to the Pearl-Island with sixty Men, which 
Nunne,
 was forc'd to leave, being stress'd by tempestuous Weather. 
Chiapes
 and 
Tumaccus
 were according to their promise, to prepare an Army 
ady for his assistance against his coming; which indeed they per∣form'd, so t
t they wanted nothing but Vessels, for the biggest of theirs could not carry above three or four Men; yet they undertaking their Enterprise, Landed seventy Men o
 the Island; upon which the Inhabitants under their Kings Conduct ran to meet the new Landed Forces, and crying out aloud 
Guazzavara, Guazzavara,
 they ran in amongst the Musqueteers with their wood∣den Swords; but the report of the Guns, mix'd with Fire, Smoak, and Bullets, soon amaz'd them: the King flying, thought by alarm to raise all the Islan∣ders; but they being inform'd, that no People whatsoever could withstand the fire-spitting People, made Articles of agreement with 
Moralis,
 and Condition'd to deliver a hundred pound weight of the choicest Pearls to the use of the King of 
Castile;
 and as a testimony of his Friendship he was Christen'd 
Peter Arias,
 from the Governors Name of 
New Andalusia.


How great the Treasure was which 
Moralis
 brought from the Pearl Island may appear by one of the Pearls, for which Pope 
Leo
 the tenth gave forty four thousand 
Ducats
 to a 
Venetian
 Merchant.


Amongst the Commanders which were sent out by 
Arias,
 was also 
Johan∣nes Solisius,
 who Sailing six hundred Leagues Southerly, along the Coast of the 
Caribbies,
 beyond 
Cape St. Augustine,
 he found the Inhabitants of 
Pernambuck
 to be no less cruel than subtile; for being invited ashore, he with some of his Men Row'd thither,
 where no sooner Landing, but were all kill'd and eaten in the sight of the other Sea-men aboard; at which being amaz'd they weighed Anchor, and Sail'd away, Freighted onely with 
Brasile
 Wood, to 
Cadiz.


Aso in an unhappy hour did 
Johannes Pontaeus
 put some of his Laundresses ashore on the Island 
Guadalupa,
 to wash some Linnen for him; for the Islan∣ders coming on a sudden out of the Woods surpriz'd them, and forthwith kil∣ling without mercy, cut them in pieces, and carbonadoing, eat their broil'd Flesh hot from the Coals, while 
Gonsalus Badajocius
 Sail'd with eighty Men

Westerly, and having gone sixty Leagues he went ashore, and spent some days in vain, to Court the 
Americans
 to a friendly correspondency; which whilst he was doing, he was recruited with fifty Men from 
Daria,
 Commanded by 
Lodowick Mercado:
 so both agreed together to travel over the Mountains to the 
South Sea.


The Governor 
Juana,
 whose Jurisdictions abound in Gold, flying with most part of his Treasure, was never heard of, onely they took some of his Slaves,
 whose Faces were strangely Carv'd with sharp Fish-bones, the Wounds fill'd with red and black Powder, which so discolour'd the Flesh that it could never be got out. After that they travell'd through the Wilderness five days together, being onely met by some 
Indians
 carrying 
Maiz,
 who signifi'd to them, that King 
Periguete
 liv'd along the Sea-shore, and up into the Countrey the blind 
Totonoga;
 of both which they got an unvaluable Treasure of Gold.
 Amongst other Pieces of that rich Metal was one which weighed two pound.


Taracura
 rais'd in this Expedition eighteen thousand weight of Gold: and little less did they take out of the Territories belonging to the Princes 
Pana∣nome, Tabor, Cheru,
 and 
Scoria:
 The Prisoners serv'd them in stead of Horses, they not being able to carry all the Gold themselves, the meanest Soldier having above three thousand Pounds 
Sterling
 for his share.


They were now got to 
Panza
's Kingdom, not without leaving sad remarks of their avarice and cruelties. When 
Pariza
 surrounding this Party thus loaden with Gold, Charged so fiercely, that at the first Assault seventy of them were slain; those few that escap'd brought the tidings of their sad misfortune to 
Peter Arias.
 Amongst those that escaping return'd, was 
Franciscus Delapuente,
 whose observations concerning catching Parrots and wild Fowl, we will briefly relate, the digression being but short.


The 
Indian
 where the Parrots are most frequent climbs into a Tree, and chattering like them, with his Voice imitating their Notes, allures his fellow-prater to draw near, and suffer him to take them in his Hands. But more belongs to the taking of wild Fowl, as Geese, Ducks, Swans, and the like: From the bottom of their standing Pools and Lakes in that Countrey grow Weeds, which spreading upon the Water ripen, and rotting breed Water-Flies, Spiders, and Frogs, upon which the Fowls feed. Near these Pools in the Gardens grow Cabbages as high as Trees, which often dropping into the Water serve the Birds both for Nests and Food: but the skilful Fowler finds it his best way to take one of these Cabbages, and making it hollow in the middle, claps it on his Head like a Helmet, then going into the Water up to his Chin, and passing softly along in such manner, that nothing is seen but the floating Cabbage, and coming near the Birds, he takes them one after another by the Legs, and puts them into a Bag ty'd about his middle for that purpose.


But what is more worthy observation is the 
American
 Bird 
Toucan Xochitena∣chate,
 having a fleshy Bill, like a Mouth full of Teeth, which continually opens and shuts to draw Breath, having no Nostrils; the Back, Neck, and Wings, are black, the Breast yellow like Gold, the Belly and end of the Tail of a Vermillion colour.


This Bird 
Toucan
 feeds for the most part on Pepper, which tarries not long with them, but muted almost as soon as swallowed: which Pepper thus eva∣cuated the Natives value above their common, because the unpleasing sharp acidity, or biting quality is thereby much mitigated.


But to return: Whilst the Expeditions under the Command of 
Peter Arias
 had such bad success, 
Arias
 himself and 
Vaschus Nunnez
 hapned to clash: 
Nun∣nez


who since his discovery of the 
South Sea
 was held in some repute at the 
Spanish
 Court, had built four Ships on the Shore of the same Ocean, to make farther inspections along the Coasts thereof: but being commanded to come to 
Arias
 the Governor, he was committed to Prison, and accused of high Trea∣son, as if he had intentions to settle himself in 
Peru,
 and absolutely to have left 
Daria:
 all which though he disown'd, and utterly deni'd with great protesta∣tions when brought to a Trial, and no witness to affirm the contrary, yet was by 
Arias
's special Order Beheaded.


Not long after which 
Lupus Sosa,
 Governor of the 
Canary
 Islands, was sent to succeed 
Arias
 in 
New Andalusia.






SECT. IX. 
The Expeditions of
 Francisco Fernandez, Lupus Caizedus, Christophero Morantes, Bernardo Igniguez, 
and
 Juan Grisalva.


FErnandez, Caizedus,
 and 
Morantes,
 antient Planters in 
Cuba,
 obtain'd a Licence from the Governor 
Diego Velasques,
 to Rig out three Ships, with a hundred and ten Men to discover new Lands.: 
Velasques
 thought fit to add one more to their number upon the Kings account; which Trust he committed to 
Igni∣guez:
 all of them consulted with the experienc'd Navigator 
Antonio Alamines.
 Six days the Fleet had been at Sea, when they discover'd Land, which by a mistake was call'd 
Jucatan,
 because the Inhabitants being ask'd what was the Name of the Coast, answer'd 
Jucatan;
 which, as the 
Spaniards
 were afterwards inform'd, signifi'd, 
We understand you not.


Upon the Shore they found a City, whose Stone Buildings, with stately Fronts and high Turrets, shew'd most magnificently. 
Fernandez
 call'd this City for its wonderful bigness, 
Cairo,
 from the 
Egyptian
 Metropolis, famous through the World.


The 
Spaniards
 coming to Land were courteously receiv'd, and conducted in∣to the City; the neatness of whose Market-places, and exactness of their Streets, they beheld with admiration; as also the costly Stuff Garments both of Men and Women: but their wonder increas'd when they beheld very arti∣ficial Crosses, concerning which upon inquiry they related, That a Man more glorious than the Sun, being busie in erecting the Crosses, died. But these People, though so courteous and civil at first, seem'd in few days to be weary of their company; which the 
Spaniards
 observing sounded a Retreat, and Sail∣ing Westerly, proceeded on their intended Design, and soon after anchor'd before 
Campechium;
 the King of which conducted 
Fernandez
 and 
Morantes,
 with some others, into the City, consisting of three thousand Houses. In his Palace they were entertain'd with all manner of Fowl roasted: After which refresh∣ment they survey'd the City; in which, amongst other curious Buildings, was a high,
 but square Theatre of Marble, on which stood the Image of a Man, on all corners assaulted by four wild Beasts, which were of a no less strange than horrible shape. Not far from this Image they saw a Serpent fashion'd up of Chalk and little Stones, whose coyl'd up Tail was forty seven Foot long, and of a proportionable thickness. This Serpent, sprinkled with Mens Blood yet warm, seem'd to prey upon a Marble Lyon: both these were inclos'd with a Stone Rail, within which Malefactors were daily executed. Bloody Bows and Arrows broke in small pieces lay between the Bones and dead Bodies. 
Igniguez






 call'd the King 
Lazarus,
 because he discover'd his Countrey on 
St. Lazarus
's Day.


Making no long stay here, they return'd to their Ship, and weighing An∣chor Sail'd fifty Leagues more Westerly, the Fleet got sight of 
Moscobo,
 in the Territory 
Aguanil,
 whose King assaulted the 
Spaniards
 with so much fury, that two and twenty of them were slain,
 and scarce one escap'd which was not wounded: wherefore they return'd with bad success to 
Cuba.
 Yet 
Velasques
 no ways discourag'd thereat, not long after fitted out four Vessels, Manning them with three hundred Men under the Command of 
Juan Grisalva
 and 
Ala∣mines;
 who having Sail'd seventy Leagues, discover'd the fruitful Island 
Cosumella;
 along whose Shore stood fair Stone Edifices, intermix'd wich Temples, whose Steeples appear'd above the Houses. 
Grisalva
 being led up into one of these Steeples by a Priest, saw at a distance off at Sea the Territory 
Jucatan:
 and in the Place where they were, there were spacious Halls, full of Marble and Stone Images of deformed Men and Beasts, which with a murmuring noise, and burning of incense they religiously worship. The 
Spaniards
 call'd this Island 
Sancta Cruz.


Sailing from hence they directed their Course to 
Campechium,
 where the year before they had been so civilly treated; where arriving, and without any fear coming ashore, they found the 
Campechiums
 quite of another humor than they were the former year, telling them, They would not suffer any Strangers to be amongst them; and placing a burning Torch between theirs and the 
Spa∣nish
 Forces, threatned, That if they did not depart in quiet, they would force them: which accordingly they endeavor'd,
 making a fierce Onset upon the 
Spaniards;
 who being now come under their Battlements, when they saw their advantage, pour'd what they had kept as a reserve, whole Volleys of small Shot amongst them; which struck so much terror, that they all ran away, shifting for themselves, and crowding into the City.


The 
Spaniards
 found afterwards 
Jucatan
 to be but a 
Peninsula,
 and came be∣fore





 a River which fell with so strong a Current into the 
Mexican Sea,
 that it retain'd its sweetness for the space of two Leagues.


This River, flowing out of the Province 
Tabasco,
 was call'd 
Grisalva:
 upon whose Banks stood above six thousand 
Americans;
 and in the Water appear'd a hundred Boats with Armed Men, which Row'd aboard the 
Spanish
 Ships. The Interpreters of 
Cuba,
 whose Language agrees for the most part with the 
Tabascers,
 prevail'd so much, that the King himself came to the chief Com∣mander 
Grisalva,
 and bartering with him, gave him as much Gold as his Iron Helmet, Breastplate, and other Armor weighed.


Soon after they Landed on the 
Island of Sacrifice,
 so call'd from the horrid Sacrifices which the Inhabitants made daily.


Amongst other strange Images, there stood a great Lyon of Marble, seem∣ing almost decollated with a great gash; into which Wound they pour'd hu∣mane Blood warm, which was receiv'd into a Stone Trough set for that pur∣pose underneath; then the Figure of a Man Carv'd in Alabaster, bowing for∣ward, as if looking into the Trough upon the Blood. Those which were sacrificed were Prisoners taken on the neighboring Coasts, whom bringing before their Idols, they ripping open make no farther inspection, but onely to whip out the Heart; with which having smear'd the Lips of their Idols, they throw it into the Fire: the Heads and Corps they let lie unburi'd; whose fleshy parts, especially their Cheeks, they feast upon.


The next Island is inhabited by Women;
 to which Annually their Neigh∣bors go, pretending merry kindness, but upon amorous inclinations: and Plough and Till their Ground, and Weed their Gardens.


The chief City of 
Tabasco
 is 
Pontenchianum,
 and contains above fifteen hun∣dred Houses, all built of Stone hardned with baking after their manner; which in some Places, besides their Turrets and Temples, yield a pleasant Pro∣spect at a great distance. Fourteen eminent Towns more did the 
Spaniards
 also see in 
Tabasco.








portrait of Ferdinand Magellan


FERDINAND MAGELLANUS.






When in conversing with them they observ'd their strange manner of Seal∣ing their Bargains and Contracts one with another, they were amaz'd, for not using Wax, they usually Seal'd their Compacts with their own Blood, common∣ly drawn with a Stone Knife, either from their Tongue, Hand, or Arms.


Their. Priests live single, and if found to be Unchast, are punisht with Death. An Adulteress is sold for a Slave: Unmarry'd People may not frequently con∣verse with Marry'd: Thirty five days in the year makes their 
Lent,
 in which they abstain not onely from Flesh, but Fish also, feeding onely upon Roots and Herbs. In this place the 
Spaniards
 were receiv'd in great, state, Canopy'd with green Palm-Tree-Branches, and in like manner conducted aboard again, not without many Presents, 
viz
 the Effigies of a Man curiously wrought in Gold, wherewith they return'd to 
Cuba.






SECT. IX. 
The Expedition of
 Ferdinand Magaglian, 
commonly call'd
 Magellane.


THe Bishop 
Bartholomew de Casis,
 living a considerable time in 
Hispaniola,
 in the City 
Dominico,
 being inform'd of the abundance of Pearls which were caught before 
Cubagua,
 and the unsupportable cruelty of the 
Spaniards
 there under 
Ocampus,
 us'd against the Inhabitants, went to 
Spain,
 with a design to obtain of the Emperor 
Charles the Fifth,
 the Government over 
Cumana
 and 
Cubagua,
 under pretence, to draw the ignorant Natives from their Idolatry, to 
Christianity;
 which his request was especially promoted by 
William
 of 
Nassaw,
 the Emperors prime Favorite; so that having his Letters Patents granted to that purpose, he took Ship, and arriv'd with three hundred 
Spanish
 Gentlemen of Quality in 
Cumana:
 And that they might have the greater respect shown to them there, they had each a Red Cross given them, such as the Knights of 
Calatrava
 generally wear. Yet little did 
Ocampus,
 the old Governor of 
Cumana,
 regard either them or their Authority; for in stead of receiving and submit∣ting, he kept the Bishop 
de Casis
 out by force of Arms; who then made com∣plaint to the 
Vice-Roy
 of the 
West-Indies
 in 
Hispaniola,
 and in the mean time, put his 
Cargo
 into a hew Store-house.


But whilst he made his Addresses, 
Ocampus
 having sufficiently inrich'd him∣self departed, which incourag'd the 
Cumaners,
 who already were incens'd, and weary of their former sufferings, to venture on a design, whereby they might revenge themselves of the 
Spaniards,
 which their undertaking prov'd so success∣ful, that very few escap'd the Massacre: Of which, 
de Casis
 being inform'd, and much discontented thereat, betook himself to a 
Dominican
 Cloyster in 
Hi∣spaniola.


Yet not long after, the 
Cumaners
 paid dear for that slaughter, for one 
Castellio,
 though not without several Engagements, with various success, lasting forty days together, having at last utterly vanquish'd them, put to an ignominious Death, Hanging up seventy of their Princes, and to them of meaner quality, shewing as little mercy.


As little success had 
Lodowick Lampagnano,
 sent out by some 
Spanish
 Merchants, with Letters Patents from the Emperor to Fish for Pearl, before the same 
Cuba∣gua;
 to which purpose he carry'd peculiar Nets and other necessaries with him. But the 
Cubaguan Spaniards
 unanimously withstood him;
 so that not being able to effect his design, over-power'd with a Melancholly Distemper that broke his Heart, he dy'd.




In the interim, while these scarce considerable Voyages turn'd to so small account, 
Ferdinand Magaglianus
 (for so 
Peter Martyr
 calls him, and not 
Magella∣nus,
 which herein deserves to be credited, because they were intimately ac∣quainted, and great friendship between them,) undertook to Sail round about the World; the occasion of which we will here relate at large:


This 
Magaglianus,
 or 
Magellanus,
 a Gentleman of 
Portugal,
 having perform'd things of great importance for his King, in 
Africa,
 although with no less trou∣ble than Charge, desir'd an addition of half a Ducket a Moneth added to his Annual Pension; an inconsiderable Sum to make a Request for, yet though so little, was as niggardly deny'd: Whereupon, highly incensed, he study'd no little revenge; to which effect, soon after an opportunity was presented, by means of 
Franciscus Serranus,
 who writ from 
Ternata
 to him, that he should speedily come thither, which he soon after did upon this account:


Pope 
Alexander
 the Sixth, having fixt Terminaries between the Kings of 
Ca∣stile
 and 
Portugal,
 both busie at that time in discovering new Countreys, Or∣der'd, That 
Castile
 should possess all the Coasts lying to the West of the chief 
Meridian,
 and 
Portugal
 to the East: By vertue of this partition, the rich Spicy 
Molucca
 Islands fell absolutely to the 
Portuguese:
 Now 
Magellanus
 perswaded 
Charles the Fifth,
 that they might be Sail'd to with a Westerly Course, and there∣fore belong'd to 
Castile;
 Which advice, 
Charles the Fifth
 considering, and ap∣proving, Rigg'd out five Ships, with which 
Magellanus
 set Sail from 
Sevil,
 the tenth of 
August, Anno
 1519. five Moneths he ply'd up and down the Coast in∣habited by the 
Patagones,
 where he found none but one single Person, or ra∣ther a Monster, a Giant ten Foot high, who coming Aboard his Ship, devour'd a great Hamper full of Biskets, and at one Draught drunk up nine Pottels of Water. He also saw several Trees which had been Hew'n with Axes, and Cros∣ses made on the tops of them. Whilst he lay in that Harbor, which was call'd 
St. Julian,
 he Cashier'd his Vice-Admiral, 
John Carthagena,
 with his Father Con∣fessor, and sparing their lives, set them ashore, and there left them to seek their Fortunes, though they had Conspir'd to Murther him.


Magellanus
 from thence Sailing afterwards Southerly along 
America,
 to forty two Degrees Southern Latitude, was engag'd with the eddyings of a very strong Current, which driving one of the Ships into a Bay, split against a blind Rock, but the Men being sav'd in their Boat, were driven farther and farther into a Channel, between high and Snowy Mountains; whereupon he immediately judg'd (as the famous Negromancer 
Roderick Talerus
 had often told him) that there was the Passage, through which the Northern Ocean flow'd into the Southern; wherefore he resolutely adventur'd to Sail into those 
Sraights,
 which in some places narrow, and in others broad, is an hun∣dred and twenty Leagues long, and full of small Isles and dangerous Rocks. Whilst he still Sail'd on, the Ship call'd 
Antonio,
 Tacking about, return'd to 
Cadiz.


But 
Magellanus
 enter'd the great South-Sea with three Sail, on the 25. of 
Octo∣ber,
 where the Sea-men suffer'd extremely by excessive Heat, Drought, and Fa∣mine, three Moneths and twenty Days, without sight of Land: And now, their Shooes, and the Leather which cover'd their Shields, began also to grow scarce (which before had been counted a Dainty) when they discover'd two Islands lying two hundred Leagues distance one from another, yet both Deso∣late and Barren, wherefore they were call'd the 
Unfortunate Isles:
 After that, they came amongst a great number of Islands, whose Inhabitants were much

inclin'd to Thievery; for which cause they Denominated them 
Ladrones,
 the chiefest Island call'd 
Borneo,
 hath two hundred fifty four Leagues in Circum∣ference, whereon a Tree grows, whose Leaves when faln off, seem to be alive and creep like Worms. The King of this Island entertain'd the 
Spaniards
 very courteously, two Elephants bringing his Presents to them on the Shore, out of a City consisting of twenty thousand Houses.


Near 
Borneo
 are two lesser Islands, call'd, 
Zubo
 and 
Matan;
 The King of 
Zubo
 free∣ly submitted himself to the 
Spaniards,
 and 
Magellanus
 leaving his Fleet at Anchor in the Haven, went with his own and other 
Indian
 Boats, and attended with some of the 
Zubensers
 to 
Matan,
 where setting a Village on Fire, he carry'd great Riches from thence: This not satisfying, he resolv'd within eight days to set upon the Royal Head-City; but the King in his own Defence, Encountering with 
Magellanus,
 slew him, and seven 
Spaniards
 more, besides twenty two dangerously wounded; those which escap'd by flight, got to 
Zubo,
 where being invited to Dinner by the King, they were all of them (in stead of a second Course) Mur∣ther'd at Table. The occasion of this was out of Revenge, because the 
Spaniards
 had fall'n too foul upon their Women and Maids, Devirginating, and forcing them to their Pleasure, than which rudeness nothing was among them more Detestable. The Sea-men weakned by these Misfortunes, were necessitated to burn their third Ship, call'd, 
St. Jago;
 but Sailing to the 
Molucco
 Islands with the other two, they Freighted them both with Cloves; with which the Ship 
Tri∣nitas
 Sail'd to 
New-Spain
 through the South-Sea, and the 
Victoria,
 Commanded by 
John Sebastian de Lano
 went the same way which the 
Portuguese
 us'd, and so to 
St. Lucar de Barrameda,
 near 
Sivile,
 where he came to Anchor with his Ship and eighteen Men.






SECT. X. Ferdinando Cortez 
his Voyage.


ALthough several Expeditions of the 
Spaniards
 to 
America
 prov'd very un∣successful at the first, yet they still undertook them afresh, and with re∣newing Courage: 
Ferdinando Sottus,
 though he Landed five hundred Men in 
Florida,
 yet brought no Treasure from thence, onely he cut off the Hands of fifteen Princes, because they would not discover their Mines of Gold.


Yet far worse success had 
Pamphilus Narvaez,
 who lost both his Fleet and Men, saving onely ten out of six hundred, in the River 
Palma,
 and they also af∣terwards dy'd there, or eat one another to satisfie their raging Hunger.


But much better was the fortune of 
Ferdinando Cortez,
 Sailing from 
Spain
 to 
America,
 in the Year 1519. who having the Command given him over ten stout Ships, and three Frigats with five hundred Foot, and an additional Force of sixteen Horse, rais'd by the new 
Spanish
 Inhabitants on 
Cuba;
 with which For∣ces Landing on the Island 
Cozumella,
 he prohibited Humane Sacrifice to their Idols, and Erected a Cross with the Image of the Virgin 
Mary,
 in one of their Temples, and releas'd 
Hieronimus Aquilaris,
 after a seven years Slavery,
 having suffer'd Shipwrack with 
Valdivia;
 at which time some that sav'd themselves in the Boat, were by the Current in thirty days driven to 
Jucatan,
 in which time seven dy'd of Hunger; the rest going ashore, were no sooner Landed, but Sa∣crific'd by the Natives to their Gods or 
Zemes.
 Among the six that remain'd, yet left alive, and to be offer'd after the same manner the next day, was this 
Aqui∣laris,
 who with his Companions, breaking Prison, in the following night fled

to a Neighboring Prince their Enemy, and one that maintain'd a continual War against these 
Cannibals.


Here 
Cortez
 sent Articles of Peace to 
Taxmarus
 the King of the Countrey, but he sleighting his proffer, came down upon him into the Field with forty thou∣sand Men, drawn from the City 
Potanchanum,
 which contain'd above twenty thousand Houses, all built of Stone: And indeed the 
Spaniards
 had here seen their last day, had not 
Cortez
 drawn by a seeming advantage the Enemies under his Canon, and sent his small Party of Horse to attend the motion of the Rear; when so soon as they had fir'd their Canon, making great Execution, the Front routed, and the Rear terrifi'd with the noise and smoke of the Guns, they also broke, being at the same instant Charg'd with the Horse, which were so terrible to them that never saw Horses, nor such Service on Horseback before, that in a short time the whole Body of so great an Army was utterly dissipated, and the triumphing Conquerors took possession of the empty City 
Potanchanum,
 where Solacing, they staid a whole Moneth. Then from hence they Sail'd to 
Colvaca,
 where, upon the request of the Natives, they settled a Colony. Amongst the Presents which were there given to the 
Spaniards,
 were some of their own Volumes,
 Books, whose Leaves were made of the innermost Rind of a Tree, and a kind of Paste, made of their Meal, glew'd together; the Cha∣racters stood at some distance one after another, rang'd like our 
Christ-Cross Row,
 or 
A, B, C.


Here 
Cortez
 was amaz'd to behold their stately Temples, the Floors whereof were cover'd with Embroyder'd Tapestry, beset with Precious Stones, to which great multitudes flock'd, being very zealous to perform their Devoti∣ons.


When their Seed is put into the Ground, or come to its full growth, they of∣fer young Children to their 
Zemez,
 richly Cloth'd, having been fatten'd some Weeks before: When they want Children they kill their Slaves, and in de∣fault of them, they pacifie them with Dogs.


The 
Victims
 that go to be Sacrific'd, they Worship with all Adoration, Bow∣ing and Congying before them.


Their Zeal in this their Idol-Worship may appear from a strange Custom, observ'd by them when they enter their Temple, 
viz.
 they either draw Blood out of their Tongues, Lips, Ears, Breast, Knees, or Palm of their Hands, which they throw into the Air, supposing thereby to be pardon'd by their indulgent Gods.


In the City 
Zempoal, Cortez
 found five Slaves, who being kept close Prison∣ers, were to be Sacrific'd the next day; but he releasing them, did upon the importunate request of the 
Quines,
 or Priests, and promises of great ransoms, and their telling of him that the 
Zemez
 would spoil all their Seed and Plants that year, if they did not go on with these Offerings, restor'd the Prisoners again; who, though the enjoyments of all happinesses in the other World were promis'd them by their Priest, and great assurance given thereof; yet they were not forward, but return'd, unwilling to suffer, though by so gainful a Sa∣crifice.


At the 
Zemez
 Feet hung abundance of Mens Bones bundled up together, and under them were Written the Names of their Enemies, whose Flesh had been either Sacrific'd or eaten.


Twelve Leagues beyond 
Zempoal, Cortez
 built a new City near the River 
Grisalva,
 and call'd it 
Vera Crux,
 which 
Diego Velasques
 resented so ill, it being

done without his knowledge, that he petition'd the Council of 
Cuba
 to give Sen∣tence of Death against the Founder: But whilst 
Cortez
 expected an answer from the Embassadors (which were sent to the 
Spanish
 Court to give account of the necessity of building a City there) he travell'd eighty Leagues Westerly. The 
Zempoalensers
 accompanied him in great Troops, hoping by that means to shake off the yoke of the mighty King 
Montezuma,
 against whom they were then design'd. 
Cortez
 coming into the Territory of 
Sincuchimalar,
 was in the Name of 
Montezuma,
 by one of his Princes, courteously entertain'd in a great Village, scituate on a steep Mountain, without any Path or Way leading to it, but by two high Ladders. 
Sincuchimalar
 lies surrounded with Hills, whose tops seem to touch the Clouds. Coming down from the Village, they tra∣vell'd through a barren and cold Valley, where they suffer'd such great Incon∣veniences by want of Provisions and Water, and exceeding coldness of the Weather, that many of them perish'd. After that, they ascended a pleasant Hill, on whose summit stood a Chappel, with a handsom Steeple, and hedg'd about with great heaps of Wood, brought thither by the Inhabitants for the use of their Sacrifices. At the foot of this Mountain was a fruitful Valley water'd by a pleasant River, on whose Banks a certain Prince nam'd 
Cacatami∣nus
 had a Palace, built of Stone, and containing many Rooms, and convenient Lodgings. Somewhat higher to the Land, appear'd more of the like Stru∣ctures, which were all under 
Montezuma
's Jurisdiction; but the neighboring Countrey 
Tlaxcalla,
 whose Inhabitants were famous for their Valor, would never receive any Laws from 
Montezuma.


Cortez
 no sooner set footing in this Countrey, but he was set upon by a thou∣sand of the Inhabitants, who at the first Assault kill'd two of the 
Spanish
 Horse, yet after this bold Charge, the Assailants fled, and on the next day desir'd Peace; whereupon the 
Spaniards
 march'd quietly into the Countrey, when a confus'd Company, or Forlorn-Hope, making a horrible Noise, set upon them; but after a slight Skirmish, they fled to their Main Body, which immediately drawing up, being at least a hundred thousand, hemm'd in the handful of 
Spa∣niards,
 and so were ready to swallow them, leaving them no Angle to escape at. Thus invironed, they were assailed on every side, fighting till Sun-set, and had undoubtedly been utterly destroy'd, had not 
Cortez
 ply'd his six Pieces of Cannon, discharging continually Volley after Volley upon them; and though the Execution was very much, yet the Sound and report of their Ordinance was more terrible to them that were out of the reach of the Bullet, and made more to the gaining so great a Victory, Fear conquering more than Slaughter; so that by the Evening, despairing either of their Safety or better Fortune, the whole Army disbanding fled: But the pursuing Conquerors firing five of their Villages, remain'd Masters of the Field; yet they, though thus totally routed, taking fresh Courage (a wonderful thing!) reinforc'd them, and set upon the 
Spanish
 Camp, with no less than 150000 Fighting Men: Yet not∣withstanding so vast an Army, 
Cortez
 so well order'd his small parcel of Men, and so valiantly led on upon all Advantages, that he in like manner defeated this, as they thought, Invincible Preparation. Thus flesh'd with so much Blood of the Natives, he raged every where, giving no Quarter where-ever he went.


Mean while 
Quesitangal,
 a neighboring Prince, having also raised an Army with which he design'd, being assisted by darkness, craftily to fall into the 
Spa∣nish
 Quarters by Night, subtilly dissembling, sent Embassadors the day be∣fore,

with several Presents, and Overtures of Peace, which indeed were onely Spies, to take notice where they might best break in upon them; which 
Cor∣tez
 mistrusting, and soon being inform'd of the whole Design, he cut off the Spies Hands, so sending them back to 
Quesitangal
 with Defiance: Hereupon the 
Indians
 immediately setting forward, took advantage of the ensuing Night, and with great fury fell upon the 
Spaniards,
 who preacquainted with the De∣sign, were in so good a posture to receive them, that not able to endure such hot Service, they quickly retreated, and utterly gave over the Enterprize: But 
Cortez
 as much encourag'd by these Victories, pursu'd them, and the same Night Storm'd 
Tlaxcalla,
 a City containing above twenty thousand Houses, which in few Hours he carried. This City was curiously built, of bak'd Stones, and a place of great Trade; insomuch that the Market-places swarm'd with Buyers and Sellers, bartering one with another all manner of Provisi∣ons, as Fish, Flesh, and Bread, also Plumes of Feathers, Pearls, imbroyder'd Tapestry, Chalk, Stones, Timber, and Herbs.


Twenty days 
Cortez
 staid here to refresh his Army, and then march'd to the neighboring City 
Chiurutical,
 with the Auxiliary Forces of the 
Tlaxcallans,
 to the number of above a hundred thousand; they told him, That the People of 
Chiurutical
 had barricado'd up their Streets, laid upon the tops of their Houses great heaps of Stones, that their upper Rooms were cramm'd with Archers, and all things made ready both for Offence and Defence; which Advertisement he not much hearkned to, because he was conducted into the City with all their State-Formalities of Singing and Tabering upon their 
Tamboes,
 and every where courteously entertain'd.


Mean while 
Montezuma
 had rais'd a great Army, which were in their ad∣vance, not onely to the defence of his Border, but to surprize them them while they staid in that City, the Townsmen having invited him thither to their re∣scue and his own defence, had not the Plot been accidentally discover'd by a 
Chirutecan
 Woman, who giving advice to one of her Friends that follow'd 
Cor∣tez,
 that he should immediately make his escape, because that all the Strangers would be destroy'd within few Hours, who came and inform'd 
Cortez
 there∣of whereupon he desir'd all the Magistrates of the City to come and speak with him,
 who no sooner entred the Hall where he was, but his Men by Command immediately shot them to death, which terrible Rumor spreading, and alarm'd with the report of the Executing Musquets, the City was suddenly in an Uproar, gathering thither Arm'd from all Places, and began a sharp Conflict, which lasted five Hours; but then wearied out, and despairing of Success, loosing their Courage, they desir'd a Cessation, and at last concluded Peace with the 
Spaniards.


This News of his discover'd Intention, so startled 
Montezuma,
 that he sup∣pos'd it better to desist, and procure the Favor of 
Cortez
 by Presents; where∣fore he sent him 15000 Cotton Habits, trim'd up very richly, ten great Char∣gers of Gold, and some Vessels of Wine, desiring him for a while to forbear his Intentions of marching to 
Tenustitan
 his Chief City,
 and that he would in the mean while treat with him for an Accommodation. But 
Cortez,
 though he accepted of the Presents, yet nevertheless held his Resolution of marching on.


Eight Leagues from 
Tenustitan
 he saw the double-spired Mountain 
Popocate∣peque,
 so call'd from the Smoke which continually ascends from its top; for 
Popoca
 signifies 
A Smoke,
 and 
Tepeque, A Mountain.
 The Smoke rises upright, and





 with so much strength, that by the greatest Wind it deviates not one jot from mounting upwards in a direct Line, to whose forked Head ten 
Spaniards
 re∣solv'd to climb; but having got scarce half way up, they were forc'd to re∣turn, the Ashes lying knee-deep;
 yet at last two more resolute conquer'd all those Difficulties, and got to the top, where the mouth of the Cave, as they guessed, measur'd four Miles in Circumference: The shaking of the Moun∣tain, and roaring of the Flames, frequently bursting forth, so much terrified them, that they staid not long there; for, as we said, the Ground not onely trembled under them, but the Fiery Gulph ejected great Stones, which falling down on all sides of the Mountain, rolled to the bottom; and without doubt they had there perish'd, had they not speedily run to a hollow neighboring Hill, from whence they came at length to the rest of their Company, where they were admir'd by the 
Indians
 for their undaunted Resolution, and present∣ed with several rich Gifts. These 
Indians
 had a Tradition, That for wicked Princes, and such as had not govern'd the People well, this was the 
Tophet
 ap∣pointed for their Torments.


Cortez
 being got through the poor Territory of the 
Guazazingers,
 and having suffer'd great Cold upon the Mountains, discover'd 
Amaquameca,
 the chief City of the Province 
Chialco,
 seated in a great Lake, to which he row'd in a kind of Boats, by the Inhabitants call'd 
Acales.
 Passing from thence, he was courte∣ously receiv'd in 
Iztapalapa,
 another City, which boasts above eight thousand Stone Buildings, besides admirable Palaces, with spacious Rooms, delightful Gardens, and Ponds full of Fish, and almost cover'd with Fowl; from whence a Wall or Cawse-way of a great breadth,
 that cross'd over both Land and Wa∣ter, led from 
Iztapalapa
 to 
Tenustitan.
 This Cawse-way hath many Bridges, which are drawn up in time of War, under which the Water runs out of a Salt Lake into a Fresh, that ebbs and flows, although lying between high Mountains, and seventy Leagues from the Sea.


On both sides this Wall, being ten Leagues in length, appears three great

Towns, 
viz. Mesiqualisingo; Colvacana,
 and 
Vuichilabusco,
 all Populous, and well-built.


Colvacana
 is supplied by the Salt Lake, to its no small benefit and inriching; for the Water being by Pipes convey'd into the City, in all the Places and Ci∣sterns for its reception makes a Scum, which being coagulated by the Sun, and after boyl'd, becomes Salt, with which they drive a great Trade; for no Salt being to be had in any place but here, all Foreign Merchants come thither for Supply.


Cortez,
 being in his March within a League and a half of 
Tenustitan, Montezu∣ma,
 preceded with a thousand of his Nobless, came to meet and salute him, all of them rather like Pilgrims, bare-footed, and congying, kissing their right Hands, with which they first kiss'd the Ground: After them appear'd 
Monte∣zuma
 himself, who put a Chain of Gold, imboss'd with Pearls, about 
Cortez
 his Neck, and immediately conducted him to the City, where having entred, and being come into the Palace,
 
Montezuma
 plac'd 
Cortez
 on a Golden Throne, and surrendred up his Right to his Catholick Majesty of 
Spain,
 in the presence of all his Peers, to their no small amazement.


But whilst all things had a good face, and went on thus fairly beyond their expectations, 
Cortez
 was inform'd, That King 
Coalcopoca
 had a Design on the new City 
Vera Crux,
 and had treacherously murder'd two of the Garrison, and wounded two more: Whereupon 
Cortez
 having such fair beginnings, who had swallow'd already in his Hopes the whole Empire and Wealth belonging to 
Montezuma,
 laid hold of this Occasion, pretending Treason, and breach of Contract; wherefore he put 
Montezuma
 under Custody, notwithstanding he had clear'd himself of the Conspiracy, by bringing 
Coalcopoca,
 with his Sons, and fifteen of his Peers, Prisoners to 
Tenustitan,
 who by the command of 
Cor∣tez
 suffer'd a lingering death, being all burnt with Green Wood. But in vain did 
Montezuma
 think to reconcile himself with 
Cortez,
 since all he did could render no manner of satisfaction; however he continu'd to oblige him by fresh Favors, whose Relation we will be more particular in, as meriting the same.


Montezuma
's Grandees seem'd to be much disontented, because he had with∣out the least resistance or consideration setled a handful of Strangers to domi∣neer over his whole Dominions, by which his weakness and pusillanimity, he was now a Prisoner, like a common Malefactor, who had formerly govern'd so mighty Territories. Amongst several Princes which seem'd thus to be concern'd, was 
Catumazin
 Governor of the Province 
Hacolvacan,
 who had he not been surpriz'd and attaqu'd the Night before by the information and dis∣covery of 
Montezuma
 himself, he would have hazarded the ruine of all 
Cortez
 his Successes: But now Fortune still daily more smil'd, giving won∣derful Advantages to the 
Spaniards;
 Silver and Gold continually flow∣ing like Rivers from all Quarters, that their onely trouble and puzzle was where and how to dispose it: but yet for all this, they were not free from jealousie, that 
Montezuma
's Forces might swallow theirs, though he was secur'd; of which you may judge by the vastness of his Imperial City 
Tenustitan,
 seated in the Province of 
Mexico,
 where a Salt Lake mixes its Wa∣ters with a fresh River, both which in circumference contain, as we said, se∣venty Leagues, and distant from the Main Land five or six Miles; the Water about it continually cover'd with small Boats rowing up and down. It hath four Stone, besides Draw-Bridges in several Places, and strengthned with







view


Vetus MEXICO




A.
Piazza


B.
Tempio da Orare


C.
Argini adefensione delle Casa


D.
Ʋ
tapalapa▪


E.
Ilgiardino del S.


F.
Casa de li solazzi del S.


G.
Da questo siume Conducon
 lacqua nella Cita


H.
Tesqua








Gates 
 l
so artificial than costly, which lead from the City to the Main Land. The Fresh Water is convey'd through the Salt in a Wall'd Channel, out of which none may take up Water, except they pay Excise to the Kings Farmers. This City boasts above sixty thousand Houses, all divided into Islands, but joyn'd with great Wooden Bridges: The Market-place surrounded with Gal∣leries, drives a quick and constant Trade, being always full of Buyers and Sel∣lers. In every Street they have a publick Inn, in each of which they keep Or∣dinaries, wherein the Tables are stor'd with well-dress'd Flesh and Fish, not wanting plenty of Wine. Their Trades are divided into several Companies, and they have their peculiar Places to dwell in. They deal very much in 
Ca∣caos,
 a Fruit not unlike an Almond, which beaten to Powder,
 and prepar'd with several other Ingredients, gives name to that excellent Drink now in use with us, call'd 
Chocolate:
 They grow onely on moist and warm Grounds, and are us'd so currently in Trade, that they go in stead of Money. Amongst ma∣ny beautiful Edifices, their Guild is very magnificent, wherein twelve Judges, attended by a considerable number of Officers and Servants, sit daily, hearing and determining all manner of Causes.
 The next is their Chief Temple or Minster, built quadrangular, all of Free-Stone, having four Portals, opening into the four principal Streets or Triumphs, that end at the four Stone Bridges. On the Walls, being of an exceeding height, stand several Turrets, so high, that they seem to hide their Spires in the Clouds; and have Apartments, wherein the Priests Diet, Lodge, and Study, which are ascended by Marble Steps. These Religious Persons are generally of Noble Extract, which at se∣ven years old are carried thither, where leading a very strict Life, they never come forth to see the World, till they enter the State of Matrimony. The fa∣mous 
Colossus,
 that stood over the 
Rhodian
 Haven, between whose Legs all Ships did Sail, that came in or went out of the Harbor, cannot stand in competition with the stupendious Idol 
Vuichilabuchichi,
 whose Head touches the Arch'd Cei∣ling of the high Temple. Near his stand several lesser Images,
 made of Meal and all sorts of Herbs bak'd together, and kneaded with Mens Blood. Along the Walls are exceeding dark Vaults, in which the Priests onely walk; over them are large Halls, full of Presentations of their Gods, which serve for the Burying-places of their Kings.


Whilst 
Cortez
 and 
Montezuma
 were viewing the Temple, two 
Spaniards
 rush'd suddenly into one of the Cells, where they found abundance of Lamps and Torches burning, and the Walls bedaub'd two Inches thick with Humane Gore: Over-head hung vast numbers of their Sacrificing Knives; and the stench of the place was intollerable.


But 
Cortez
 going on, 
Montezuma
 and his Attendants resented it very hainous∣ly, that he pull'd down some of their Idols, and durst presume to look in the Kings Face; for those People bear so great Reverence to their Kings,
 that none dares so much as once look up in their presence: His Council stand bare∣footed, stooping with their Faces bow'd almost to the Ground before him: Four times a day they change their Apparel; and a Suit which they have once worn, is put to no other use, but presented to such Soldiers as have done some eminent Service. Whatever manner of Chargers, Dishes, Pots, Cups, and other Vessels the Emperor is serv'd in at his Table, are every Meal new. The King hath in 
Tenustitan
 three great Structures, whose Magnificence,
 for Cost and rare Architecture, can hardly be parallell'd. The first is the Residence for all deform'd People: The second, an 
Aviary
 for all manner of Birds and Fowl,





 being a spacious open place, Roof'd with Nets, and surrounded with Marble Galleries. The third, being a Den for Wild Beasts, was divided into several Rooms, wherein were kept Lions, Tygers, Wolves, Foxes, and all manner of Four-footed Animals.


But whilst 
Cortez
 having staid waiting eight Months in 
Tenustitan,
 for the return of the Messengers sent to the 
Spanish
 Court, receiv'd Tidings, That 
Pam∣philo Narvaecy,
 by order of 
Velasques,
 was come with eighteen Sail, Mann'd with eight hundred Foot, and eighty Horse, from 
Cuba,
 and now riding before the 
Mexican
 Coast; from whence soon after he receiv'd unexpected Command, to come presently aboard unarm'd, and resign up his Authority: But he in stead of submission, compell'd 
Narvaecy
 in a short time to relinquish his Title, and own him for Superior. Mean while the 
Spaniards
 which remain'd in possessi∣on of 
Tenustitan,
 ran the hazard of a general Massacre; for the Citizens much stomacking the Oppressions of the 
Spaniards,
 who grew very insolent, inslaving their King, bringing their inveterate Enemies the 
Tlaxcallans
 and 
Guazuzingans
 into their City, exacting them to pay Tributes, pulling down their Gods, and demolishing their ancient Idols, they brake out from all Parts in a tumultuous manner, ran to Arms, and besieg'd them Day and Night in their Fort, al∣though 
Montezuma
 endeavor'd to perswade the contrary. 
Cortez
 hearing of it, came to their relief with the New Forces Landed from 
Cuba;
 but he fighting his way ere he could get in, was so roughly entertain'd by the 
Mexicans,
 that they kill'd him forty Men, wounding as many more; and notwithstanding fifteen Field-pieces with continual Shot made foul Breaches, lessening the number of the Assailants, yet they suddenly fill'd up their Vacancies again with fresh Men, which clamber'd over the Heaps of those that lay slain. Three Days the Battel had continu'd very fierce, when 
Montezuma
 being with the 
Spaniards
 in the Castle, went to a low Window, to see if he could com∣mand his Subjects to retreat; but a continual Cry so deafned their Ears, and showres of Arrows and Stones so took away their sight, that he did nothing:

Then 
Montezuma,
 thinking to be more easily either heard or seen, went to a higher Window, where looking out, he was unfortunately his with a Stone, of which he died three days after: Besides their Enemies, the 
Spaniards
 suffer'd extremely by Famine; and though they had beaten down a Tower, which had done the Castle great mischief, and set five hundred Houses on fire, yet they Could discern no likely issue thereof, but judg'd it best to make their escape by Night over the nearest Bridge: 
Cortez
 therefore dividing his gotten Treasures, which amounted to above seven hundred thousand Duckets, amongst his Soldiers, carried 
Montezuma
's Son, and two Daughters, Prisoners with him, though not without infinite danger and loss; for the 
Tenustitans
 as∣sail'd him on both sides, and falling in also upon his Rear, spar'd not to kill 
Montezuma's
 own Children. In this last Fight the Service was so hot,
 that 
Cor∣tez
 lost forty two Horse, a hundred and fifty 
Spaniards,
 and two thousand Auxi∣liaries; and although gotten over the Lake, they were still pursu'd by the 
Mexicans,
 who would then undoubtedly have made a general Slaughter, had not 
Cortez
 amused the Enemies, by leaving in the Night great Fires in several Places, his suppos'd Camps, whilst he silently stole away: Yet the 
Tenustitans
 would have pursu'd the 
Spaniards,
 had they not wanted Provisions: But 
Cortez
 sending his Treasure before him, through the Countrey 
Colva,
 to 
Vera Crux,
 with a Convoy of five Horse, and forty four Foot, were all cut off by the 
Col∣vaans,
 and feasted upon in a Thanksgiving Sacrifice. The same misfortune be∣fel twelve 
Spaniards
 in 
Tepeacu,
 which great City surrendred it self up to 
Cor∣tez,
 being assisted by a mighty Army of 
Tlaxcallans
 and others. But after all these Losses, he took 
Guaccachiulla,
 and 
Izzuca,
 both fortified with strong Walls and Gates; in which last he burnt above a hundred Temples, built for Hu∣mane Sacrifices. All the Countrey through which he thus ransack'd, he call'd 
New-Spain.
 From the City 
Tazuco,
 which he had newly taken, intending to besiege 
Tenustitan,
 he digg'd through the Lakes a broad Trench, of above three Leagues in length, to bring up thirteen new Ships to 
Tenustitan;
 and the neighboring People envying, that that City should not be conquer'd, as well as theirs, rais'd an Army of above a hundred and fifty thousand Men, making 
Cortez
 their General: Himself incamped on one corner of the City, appoint∣ing the other two sides to be invested by 
Gonsales Sandovalo,
 and 
Pedro Alvarado;
 but the Besieg'd resolutely broke out, and made a fierce Sally with five thou∣sand Boats, setting upon the thirteen Ships; but the great Guns made such ex∣ecution and havock amongst them, that they retreated with great damage. Whoever were taken Prisoners in this Fight by the 
Spaniards,
 the 
Tlaxcallans,
 being Commission'd by 
Cortez,
 feasted upon.
 On the seventh day the City was taken, but not without great Slaughter, and the new King imprison'd.


After this mighty Conquest, 
Cortez
 resolv'd to discover those Territories that lay Southward; and whilst he was making all things ready for the Voy∣age, he sent two Ships with an invaluable Treasure to 
Spain,
 who fearing to be taken by the 
French
 Pyrats, ran in at 
Tercera,
 where a miserable Accident hapned to the Seamen of the biggest Ship, wherein were carried two Tygers, which though taken young, and bred up amongst men, yet had not so quite forgotten their natural ferocity, but that one breaking loose in the Night, tore seven of them in pieces, hurting a far greater number, of which some had the Brawns of their Arms, the Calves of their Legs, and fleshy parts of their Thighs bit out.


Several Places in 
America
 breed Tygers, that far exceed Lyons in fierceness;

so that where any considerable number of them frequents, though the Soil be never so fruitful, yet it is left desolate and forsaken. But the Baboons that frequent the Woods are more pleasant,
 and less dangerous. 
Peter Arias
 relates, That his whole Army incountred with these Beasts, which climb'd from one Tree to the other, shrieking, and making very strange Gesticulations to those that were gone before, and gathering their Mouths and Hands full of Stones, which they threw as exact and strongly as a Man. When one of these Baboons, shot by a Musquet, fell to the Ground, the rest gave such a horrible shriek, that the Woods resounding with the noise, strook a terror into the 
Spa∣niards.
 Amongst several things that hapned in this Counter-scuffle, take this one: A 
Spaniard
 taking aim with his Musquet at an old Baboon, which sate pearch'd up in a Tree, and being now just ready to give Fire, the Baboon Sol∣dier, at the very instant, to break the Shot, taking a Stone out of his Mouth, threw it exactly into the Mans Mouth, with such force as beat out some of his Teeth; with which sudden blow surpris'd, he lost his Mark; and the proud Foe, shewing signs of Triumph, went his way.


But whilst 
Cortez
 staid in the Countrey of 
Tenustitan
 (now call'd 
Mexico
) 
Franciscus Garajus
 sail'd out of the Haven of 
Jamaica,
 with eleven Ships, to the River 
Panucus,
 there, according to the Command of the Emperor 
Charles,
 to plant a Colony: Whereupon he went ashore, ordering his Fleet to sail along in sight of Land: So wading through the River 
Montaltus,
 which glides be∣tween high Mountains, he came to a Morassy Ground, in which he and they often sunk almost up to the Middle, and lost his way in a Thicket of young Trees; yet at last being come to the River 
Panucus,
 he found several high Walls,
 being the Ruines of Fortresses, Temples, and Towers, destroy'd by 
Cortez;
 so that the City lay quite desolate. Twenty Leagues further, upon the Banks of the same River, 
Cortez
 had in like manner sack'd and destroy'd 
Chiglia,
 a Town which before its burning reckon'd above twenty thousand Houses, besides many fair Palaces, Walls, Towers, and Temples: Which Cru∣elties and Spoil had bred so great an 
Odium
 in the Inhabitants against the 
Spani∣ards.
 that they immediately sent an Army against 
Garajus,
 who had only a few half-starv'd Men with him; yet he receiv'd the Enemy twice in his Retreat to the new Colony 
St. Steven,
 rais'd out of 
Chiglia
's Ruines; but finding no Provisions where-ever he came, he judg'd it fittest to send his Horse into the Countrey to Forage; which 
Cortez
 meeting, took Prisoners, under pretence that 
Garajus
 came to take Possession, where he had neither Authority nor Right. 
Cortez
 also made himself Master of 
Garajus
 Ship and Fleet, commanding him withal to appear in 
Tenustitan,
 which not knowing how to avoid, he obey'd: His People mean time ranging up and down without a Head or Commander, either died by Famine, or were murther'd and eaten by the Natives; for at one time the 
Americans
 made a general Feast with two hundred and fifty rosted 
Spa∣niards:
 But their days of Triumph lasted not long; for 
Sandovalus,
 one of 
Cor∣tez
 his Prime Officers, set with so much fury upon those 
Cannibals,
 that he kill'd several thousands of them, and burnt sixty Persons of Prime Quality, all Com∣manders, in the sight of their Friends and Relations. But 
Garajus,
 whose Son was married to 
Cortez
 his Daughter, liv'd not long after the Wedding, which occasion'd a murmur as if 
Cortez
 had poyson'd him, to rid himself of a Partner in his Government;
 for it had been generally observ'd, that his Ambition suf∣fer'd no Equal. The 
Americans
 fell all down before him; all were Servants alike: The Court which he kept swarm'd with Attendance, on which he spent

vast Sums of Money; yet his Incomes were able to bear such excessive Dis∣bursements. He kept in constant Pay five thousand Soldiers, and several Ships ready rigg'd and prepar'd on all occasions, to hold in awe the enslav'd People, or else for the Discovery of New Countreys: Yet after all these extraordina∣ry Charges defray'd, to shew his Wealth and Greatness, he caus'd a Piece of Cannon to be cast all of massie Gold: for the Kings which formerly acknow∣ledg'd 
Montezuma
 for their Sovereign, gave him a yearly Revenue, most of which were valu'd to be worth twenty three Tun of Gold; for so much the King of 
Tescuscus,
 a stately City, paid, whose Houses Plaister'd with White-Lime, seem'd afar off to be rather a Chalky Hill or Mountain, cover'd with Snow: Full as much did the King pay which reigned in 
Otumba,
 notwith∣standing he had receiv'd with his 
Christianity
 the Name of 
Ferdinand Cortez;
 yet others gave less: The King 
Guacinalgo,
 with his Mother, and some Slaves, bringing Gold, came to present it to 
Cortez;
 and entring the Palace, through a Guard of five hundred Horse and four Hundred Foot, which were always ready Arm'd for fear of Insurrections, he fell down prostrate on the Ground. Thus all things even out-went whatever he could desire, hope for, or imagine: And 
Alvaredo,
 one of his Commanders, being sent Eastwardly, brought great Treasures back with him, which the conquer'd Kings were forc'd to raise.


But Fortune, who seldom continues her Favors long, at last began to frown; for 
Cortez
 having sent an unvaluable Treasure of Gold and Pearls to the Em∣peror 
Charles
 the Fifth, 
Floryn
 the 
French
 Pyrate met with and took it, which went so much to his Heart, that for a considerable time he sent no Advice to the 
Spanish
 Court, which made them grow jealous of him, doubting that he intended to make himself King over 
New-Spain;
 and this Suspicion was not a little augmented by his Enemies.


In the Neck of these, follow'd another Misfortune; for 
Christopher Olitus,
 sent out by 
Cortez
 to discover new Countreys, rebelling, took up Arms against him, being then in the Haven 
Figueras,
 five hundred Leagues beyond. Not∣withstanding the 
Spaniards,
 although amongst a new-conquer'd People, which without doubt long'd for Revenge, were not to take notice of their danger, but to go on with undaunted Resolution; whereupon 
Cortez
 drawing out a strong Party, march'd a long and troublesom way to meet 
Olitus,
 making great Slaughters where-ever he came. 
Francisco de las Casas
 was commanded to go upon the same Account by Sea, and arriving first, found him setling his new Colony, which he nam'd 
Triumph de Sancta Crux;
 and notwithstanding the Water with a Northerly Wind was very rough and boysterous in the Haven 
Figueras
 (which the 
Spaniards
 call'd so, because they found Trees there, which growing at the Foot of the Mountains, bore a Fruit not unlike a Fig) yet they came to a present Engagement, wherein 
Casas
 worsting 
Olitus,
 having sunk one of his Ships, stood out again to Sea; but surpriz'd by a violent Storm, and driven on the Shore, fell into 
Olitus
's Hands, who had a little before also taken 
Egidius
 or 
Giles Gonsales.
 These two Prisoners consulted together how they might poyson or murder 
Olitus,
 which fell out according to their desires, be∣cause the Servants of the House where they lodg'd sided with them; so taking hold of the first opportunity, as they were at Supper together, they stabb'd him with their Knives in several places; yet the Wounds were not so great or mortal, but that he retain'd strength to escape in the dark to a neighboring Hut; but the Assassinates immediately sent out Messengers, publishing, That he who did not, knowing where 
Olitus
 was, immediately bring him to them, should





 receive condign punishment; which terrifying 
Olitus,
 he discover'd himself, and was immediately beheaded.


During the time that the 
Spanish
 Officers had these Civil Broyls one against another, 
Lodowick Pontaeus,
 a Man well experienc'd in the Law, came from 
Spain
 to 
America,
 there in the Emperors Name to settle all things in good order; ha∣ving also particular Instructions, to shew great kindness to 
Cortez,
 and to make him a Knight of the Order of 
St. James,
 that by that means the Emperor might be the more esteem'd for his Noble Subjects and Servants, amongst the 
Mexi∣cans,
 who are themselves of a proud and ambitious spirit, and chiefly the No∣bility, which doth manifestly appear by their Apparel, more gorgeous than the meaner sort of 
Americans;
 and though the Slaves go stark naked (having onely a Cloth tied about their Privities) and with a Bowe and Arrows walk before their Lords,
 yet the Better Sort go very costly Habited; for about their Necks they wear Strings of Pearl; on their Heads, a Cap, from whence hang down two Scarfs, one longer than the other; then a party-colour'd Cotton Coat covers their whole Bodies to their Knees, under which they wear a Vest girt about their Middle.


But at last, after all these Services, 
Cortez
 disagreeing with the Vice-Roy 
Don Antonio Mendoza,
 being about that time sent over, went male-contented into 
Spain.






SECT. XI. Diego Gottierez 
his Expedition.


ANno
 1540. 
Gottierez
 being chosen Governor of 
New Carthage,
 weigh'd Anchor from 
Cadiz,
 and sailing to 
Nombre de Dios,
 upon his Landing clash'd with 
Roderick Contreras,
 in whose Place he was sent to succeed. Two Years he spent without effecting any thing; but at last coming to Agreement with 
Contreras,
 he took the Governorship upon him, having first forewarn'd him not to de∣pend

too much upon his Authority; for the Countrey being full of Woods and Mountains, might hide many of his Enemies: But he not regarding the Advice, went a Journey from 
New Granada,
 and having march'd fifty Leagues Easterly, he cross'd into the River 
Suere,
 with sixty 
Spaniards,
 and was present∣ed by the Princes of the Countrey with as much Gold as amounted to seven thousand Duckets. Here he spent some Weeks, effecting little; but now all things growing scarce, though he was very earnest with the Natives for Provi∣sions, yet he could get little; which kind of Life the Soldiers disliking, and growing weary of, went away in the Night to 
Nicaragua.
 
Gottierez
 thus left alone, got into a Boat, with intent to follow them; and being just put off from the Shore, was met by Captain 
Barjanto,
 who brought new Forces and fresh Provisions with him: This wrought upon him to stay there. Not long after 
Alphonso de Pisa
 went with twenty seven Men from 
Nombre de Dios
 to the same River 
Suere;
 but it being then very rough at the Entrance, he was neces∣sitated to pass on to a small uninhabited Isle, where whilst he lay at an Anchor, the Weather began to grow worse and worse; the Gusts of Wind,
 mix'd with Showres of Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, seem'd to threaten a general De∣struction; for in the Ship two 
Spaniards
 and one 
Moor
 were kill'd by the Lightning: In seventy two Days, the Sun did not shine four Hours: At last weighing Anchor, he sail'd over to the Main Land, where he saw nothing but vast Mountains and Wildernesses. Here for a time they liv'd upon Cockles found on the Shore, and wild Fruits in the Woods: At length coming to 
Got∣tierez,
 he sent him with his People in five Boats to fetch new Forces from 
Nom∣bre de Dios.
 In his way thither he saw a House built of Canes, cover'd with Palm-leaves, forty five Paces long, and built after an Oval fashion: Round about it stood several lesser Hovels, all which making up a Village, the 
Spani∣ards
 nam'd 
Francisco,
 because they came thither on 
St. Francis
 Day.
 About half way they met with the Lords of 
Suere
 and 
Chiuppa,
 going to attend 
Gottierez,
 to whom being admitted, and sitting with him at Table, he gave them, as a Dainty, rosted Chickens and fresh Pork; but they gave it to their Servants,
 not delighting in the taste of such Victuals. 
Gottierez,
 by means of an Interpre∣ter, told them concerning the 
Christian-Religion,
 at which they bow'd their Heads, without making any Answer: But how little mind they had to em∣brace it, quickly appear'd; for not long after, they set their Villages on fire, and all the Provisions which they could not carry with them, they spoil'd, and so retiring, hid themselves upon inaccessible Mountains. Another Incentive leading them to this Fight, was, because the Governor 
Camachiren,
 and his De∣puty (notwithstanding he had given 
Gottierez
 as much Gold, when he came first into the Countrey, as amounted to seven thousand Duckets, as we menti∣on'd before) yet was put in Prison by his Order, contrary to all Promises: Nay, 
Gottierez
 threatned to burn him (not regarding, that he had besides re∣ceiv'd of him several Pieces of Gold, resembling all manner of Beasts, as Ty∣gers, and others; and also Fishes and Fowls curiously wrought, which were valu'd at two Tun of Gold; yet this Present seemed too little for him, whereupon bringing the Prisoner to a Chest,
 he swore that he would rost him by degrees, if in four days time he did not furnish him with four times as much more Gold as that Chest would hold: Whereupon 
Chamachiren
's Servants went away to get the requir'd Gold; but he, through carelesness of the Watch, made his escape in the Night, so that 
Gottierez
 lost his Booty. But the other Prisoners, though threatned to be torn asunder with Dogs, remain'd firm,

disowning that they had any Gold; and among the rest, one speaking boldly to the 
Spanish
 Officer said, 
That he stood amaz'd at his treacherous dealings, why did he keep him Chain'd against Law and Promse, and often threaten'd him with death, but yet would not kill him, for he, said he
, had rather choose to die, than live so miserable a life.


Gottierez
's Conscience troubling him, he would willingly have releas'd the 
Indian,
 and the rather, because he promis'd to procure a great ransome of Gold; but the inferior Commanders would not consent to it. After this they march'd six days through great Wildernesses, and over high Mountains, find∣ing no Footsteps of any People. Lastly, They came down a very dangerous and steep Mountain, where had not the Shrubs and jutting Stones serv'd them to hold by, they had all broken their Necks.


Fifteen Leagues, the hanging of this Mountain spread it self along a sweet River,
 on whose opposite Shore stood strange Huts full of dead Tygers, Deers Heads, and Legs; here they staid two days to rest themselves, where the Trees 
Mamei
 and the 
Cazabi
 Plants yielded them good Food.


Travelling forward, 
Gottierez
 ask'd an 
Indian
 which was the nearest way to a Village, but he pretending not to know any near hand, had his Head imme∣diately cut off. In like manner, and for the same reason the 
Indian
 Prince should also have been Executed, had not 
Gottierez
 given order to the contrary; seeing his resolution, that with no less Patience than undaunted Courage, stretch'd forth his Neck to the Executioners. Mean while, their Provisions de∣creasing, they suffer'd extreme hunger; insomuch, that some fainted quite away. The Souldiers also rebelling against 
Gottierez
 for Food, he commanded them to kill their Dogs, and stamp the Barks of Trees; two days they tra∣velled much discontented in this manner, and at last came to the entrance of a Wood, where they espy'd an 
Indian
 standing behind a Tree, which on a sud∣den ran away with incredible swiftness: early the next morning, above four thousand 
Indians
 came Marching against the faint 
Spaniards,
 making a terrible noise with Horns and Drums; they were all except their Princes Painted black and red; some wore Plumes of Feathers on their Heads, and Collars of the same about their Necks; the fight began very fiercely, by casting abundance of Stones, and shooting of Arrows, wherein, though 
Gottierez
 was at first Wounded,
 yet after half an hour the Assailants fled, but recruited with fresh Forces renew'd the fight, breaking into their Ranks, and making so great slaughter amongst them with Woodden Swords, and Palm-Tree Clubs, knocking down, and dealing such deadly Wounds, that of the 
Spaniards,
 three onely escap'd, saving themselves by flight, who two hours after, much amaz'd and terrify'd, came to their reserve, consisting onely of twenty four Men, which 
Alphonso de Risa
 Commanded; the insulting Enemy at their Heels, waving over their Heads the Swords, Shields, and Cross-Bows which they had gotten from the slain 
Spaniards;
 and some withal crying in the 
Spanish
 Tongue, 
Come Christians, come, and take Gold.
 But 
de Risa,
 for all their pride, set them going with some Volleys of Shot; after this, escaping innumerable other dangers, he came to 
Nombre de Dios,
 without having effected any thing of Note.








SECT. XI. 
The Expeditions
 of Peter Alvarado, Francisco 
and
 Gonzalvo Pizarro, 
and
 Diego de Almagro.


IN the City of 
Panama,
 in 
New Spain,
 liv'd three eminent 
Spaniards,
 call'd 
Fran∣cisco Pizarro, Diego de Almagro,
 and 
Ferdinand de Luque
 a Priest, which joynt∣ly design'd to discover farther Southerly along the rich Gold and Pearl Coast, and inspect the Southern Ocean. 
De Luque
 was to look to home-affairs, and 
Pizarro
 set Sail first with a Ship Man'd with one hundred and fourteen Men, which 
Almagro
 follow'd with seventy more, yet both were valiantly repuls'd by the 
Peruvians;
 but although they return'd the first time with bad success, yet they undertook their business once more, but with no better fortune; whereupon discouraged, the undertaking seem'd to be totally laid aside, and the 
American
 Vice-Roy, 
Peter de Rios
 forbad any to attempt a farther Discovery concerning 
Peru.


The former difficulties with this Edict easily wrought upon 
Pizarro
's men, all but twelve, to leave him, for the rest went over with the Ship fitted out by 
Rios
 with succors to the Island 
Gallo,
 where 
Pizarro
 resided, having also fail'd in his second Expedition. But although he had made two bad Voyages, yet having an inclination to a third attempt, he went to 
Spain,
 desiring of the Em∣peror to be Governor of 
Peru,
 which he had discover'd; for besides his Plea of Merits he had taken possession of the Country twice by Landing there, in∣tended for the use of his Imperial Majesty; one of his Sea-men to that purpose flourishing his two-handed Sword over his Head, the glistering of which Sword so frighted the Natives, that none of them durst come near him.


His request being consulted upon, was at last granted, the Government of 
Peru
 being conferred upon him; but 
Almagro
 took it very ill, that 
Pizarro
 went to the Emperor on such a design for himself; yet by the mediation of his Friends the difference was reconciled, then 
Pizarro
 setting Sail with one hun∣dred and fifty Foot besides Horse, and Landing at the Island 
Puna,
 at first was courteously entertain'd, but the 
Spaniards
 by extravagant hunting and search∣ing every where their Houses for Gold, and committing several other outrages, incensing, chang'd the humor of the Inhabitants so much, that they fell upon them. In stead of Ensigns, Standards, and Warlike Trophies, they used long Canes, at the end whereof were ty'd the Bones of their antient Hero's, honor'd by them after their death: But these Reliques sav'd not the 
Indians
 from slaughter, so well as the coverts of a neighboring Wood.


From this Isle, lying three degrees Southward of the 
Equinoctial, Pizarro
 pas∣sed over to the 
Main Continent,
 where they were all in a great confusion, upon the report of the 
Spaniards
 cruelties committed in 
Puna;
 yet all the prepara∣tions of the 
Indians
 to withstand, stop'd not 
Pizarro
 from his intended course; for first, having the success to master 
Tampez,
 thence he made nothing to march his Forces over the River 
Ambato,
 there burning a Temple Dedicated to the Sun. The 
Portico
 stood towards the East, the rising of their God,
 before which hung a Curtain of their fine Cotton Stuff, within stood the presentations of two Golden Rams, shaded with Black, and as many Dragons, before which the Fire never went out, continually supply'd with Offerings of burnt Incense;

on the Pillars hung several Men flead, their Flesh kept firm, and free from all Putrifaction, with the infusion of a sharp Juyce.


Here 
Almagro
 coming to 
Pizarro
 with fresh Forces, they made no little pene∣tration into 
Peru,
 satisfying every where their thirst of Gold, and slaughtering the Toothless 
Tombezes,
 a people who having offended their King, had by his order the upper Teeth of the whole Nation beaten out.


Peter Alvarado
 inform'd concerning the Riches of 
Peru,
 and well knowing how to insinuate with the Emperor in his fawning Letters, at last by his Friends so prevail'd, that he also got leave to go thither; in pursuance of which, 
Anno
 1534. he Weigh'd Anchor with seven Ships from 
Guatimala,
 a Ci∣ty built by him between two Mountains. But Landing at 
Puerto Viejo,
 and Marching Easterly over Snowy Mountains, he was met by 
Almagro,
 between whom a bloody incounter was like to have happen'd, but after some time, a Treaty being set a Foot, they came to a Composition on these Articles: That 
Alvarado
 upon the receipt of a hundred thousand Duckets, should leave his Men with 
Almagro,
 and depart from 
Peru;
 with which sum, being inrich'd, he soon after fitted out fourteen Sail to discover new Countreys to the West; but being busie in his preparations, was sent for to 
Mexico
 by 
Don Antonio Men∣doza
 the Vice-Roy, to undertake a Voyage with him to the new-discover'd Countrey of 
Sibolla,
 abounding in Gold and Saffron, according to the report of four 
Dominican
 Monks; and having already rais'd seven hundred Men, news came to 
Mexico,
 that 
Peter Zunica
 had receiv'd an overthrow by the 
Indians
 of 
Sa∣lisco;
 to whose assistance 
Alvarado
 March'd with all speed, and found the 
Indi∣ans
 incamp'd on a high Mountain, fortifi'd with conjoyn'd Trees, and great Stones ty'd together with Rushes, behind which they were secure from Shot. The 
Spaniards
 climbing up the Mountain, approach'd their Works, when on a sudden the Defendants giving a great Shout, cut the Cords which held their Fortification together,
 whereupon the Stones and Trees tumbled down with such force, that they kill'd both Men and Horse, few escaping alive: In this conflict 
Alvarado
 himself was lost.
 His Wife 
Beatrix Cuova
 made a stately Fune∣ral for her Husband, and caus'd her House to be Painted black, refusing either to Eat or Drink for a set time, yet notwithstanding, all her pretence of sor∣row, she so minded her business, that she took the Government of 
Guatimala
 into her own hands; but her Dominion lasted not long, for on the eighteenth of 
September, Anno
 1541. happen'd a hideous Tempest of Wind and Rain, mixt with continual Lightning, and horrible claps of Thunder, and what was more terrible,
 was answer'd with roars and horrid bellowings from the ca∣verns of the Mountain, at whose foot 
Guatimala
 stood. About midnight the Mountain was deliver'd, whose Birth was the irruption of an Inundating Ri∣ver, a precipitate torrent tumbling down full of Rocks and Stones, which carry'd all before it, so that in few minutes 
Guatimala
 was utterly swept away, not the least mark remaining, nor any left alive except 
Alvarado
's Bastard Daughter by an 
Indian;
 and in the adjacent Fields, some few, and they maim'd, with broken Arms or Legs; after this utter destruction, they re-built another 
Guatimala,
 three Leagues more Easterly. But though 
Alvarado
 was lost in this Enterprize, yet the Voyage to 
Sibolla
 was not laid aside, for 
Francisco Velasques
 March'd thither with eight hundred Men,
 of which most were Horse, but found nought else but Snowy Mountains and barren Plains, insomuch, that his Men and Horses were starv'd for want of Provision; wherefore he return'd without success to 
Mexico,
 having onely burnt some Villages, and had several Rencounters with the Natives.








portrait of Atahualpa


ATHABALIBA 
ultimus Rex Peruanorum






But 
Attabaliba a Peruan
 Prince, inform'd of 
Pizarro
 and 
Almagro
's coming, commanded them both to depart out of his Kingdom; but they not regarding it, march'd directly to 
Caxamalca,
 where 
Attabaliba
 kept his Court, who again sent other Messengers to them with command to leave his Dominions.
 
Pizarro
 made answer, that he could not obey any Commands but those of his Master the Emperor, who had order'd him to speak with the King himself at his own Palace.


Attabaliba
 hearing that 
Pizarro
 resolv'd to come forward, sent him a pair of Painted Shooes and Armlets, that he might put them on when he appear'd be∣fore his Throne: Captain 
Ferdinand Sotto
 march'd before with twenty Horse, pas∣sing close on the Flank of 
Attabaliba
's Army: The 
Indians
 amaz'd at the praun∣cing of their Horses, retreated into their Fortifications, but were for their cowardize immediately slain by the King's Order.


Sotto
 sent a Message to 
Attabaliba,
 That the 
Spaniards
 desir'd peaceably to Treat with him, to which he receiv'd answer, That no Peace could be made, unless they restor'd the Gold and Silver to the Owners, which they had Plunder'd from them, and forsook his Territories; which so doing, they should have Audien
 the next day:
 Hereupon the Bishop 
Vincent de Villa Viridi
 was con∣ducted into the Royal Palace, in the City of 
Caxamalca,
 and brought before 
At∣tabaliba,
 who came thither in great State, with a Guard of twenty five thou∣sand Men; he was carry'd on the Shoulders of his prime Nobles in a Sedan, about which hung Garlands of Gold, and divers colour'd Feathers; himself was cloth'd in a white loose Vest, without Sleeves; his Temples were bound with a red Ribbon, with a long Tassel on his left Cheek; on his Fore-head stuck three curious Feathers; before him March'd three hundred of his Life-Guard, all in one Livery, who clear'd the way through which the King was to pass. The before-mention'd Bishop carry'd in one Hand a Cross, in the other a Book, discoursing with the King to this effect; 
That God is the Trinity,
 Adam 
the first Man; Christ Born of a Virgin, dy'd on the Cross; the
 Pope 
God's Vice-Gerent, who according to the Power he had from Heaven, had given
 Peru 
to the Em∣peror
 Charles, 
as also all other Countreys in
 America; 
and if he should prove obstinate, and resist, he must expect nothing less than utter ruine. Attabaliba
 reply'd, 
That he serv'd
 Pachamaca, 
being the Creator of all things; and next to him the Sun and Moon: How glorious do they appear
 (said he) 
in comparison of a Crucifi'd God? To make Peace and Alliance with mighty Princes, was the true Foundation of wise Government: But the
 Pope 
must needs be senseless, devoy'd of all reason, and withal highly unjust, to give away what was none of his own,
 viz. 
other mens Kingdoms, in which he never had the least or smallest concern. Moreover, he would not desert that Religion which he and his Ancestors had maintain'd so many Ages, and the rather, because there are no apparent or sufficient Testi∣mony of the truth of Christianity.
 The latter clause was thus answer'd, saying, 
This Book, O King, which I hold in my hand, proves and declares all that you question. Attabaliba
 looking upon it, turn'd it over Leaf by Leaf, then look'd more in∣tentively upon the Print, which done he clap'd it to either Ear, and at last as altogether unsatisfi'd, in disdainful manner threw it away.


But 
Pizarro
 gaining time while the King and Bishop thus discours'd, had drawn his Men in Battel-Array, his sixty Horse he divided into three Wings, Commanded by his three Brothers, 
Ferdinand, John,
 and 
Gonzalvo Pizarro,
 left the Captains 
Sotto
 and 
Bavalcazar
 in an Ambuscade; 
Peter de Canada
 march'd in the Van, and he himself in the main Body, leaving 
Sotto
 in the Rear.


So soon as the Bishop could acquaint them in what scornful manner 
Atta∣baliba






 had thrown his Holy Book,
 
The Word of God,
 upon the ground; both Ar∣mies were Engaged, whilst their Trumpets sounded, their Drums beat, their Canons roar'd, the Horses neigh'd, and the Dogs bark'd, they made a speedy march up against the Walls of 
Taxamalca,
 which dreadful mixture of terrible noises struck such a Pannick fear into the hearts of the 
Indians,
 that they all pre∣sently broke, in their flight crowding one another to death at the Gates of the City, which being too narrow to receive them, they themselves made breaches in their own Walls to enter; which opportunity the 
Spaniards
 no ways neglect∣ed, but entering with them, shot and kill'd all they could reach; their Dogs also having no little share in the slaughter; whole companies of 
Indians
 were trode under the Horses feet, yet near 
Attabaliba
's Chair was the greatest resist∣ance, for no sooner fell one of the Bearers, but immediately another supply'd the place; so that the King was surrounded with heaps of his own slain Sub∣jects, to whom 
Pizarro
 himself Charg'd up so close, that having seiz'd him by his long Hair, he pull'd him out of his Throne, and having gotten him under him, secur'd immediately in Fetters; whereupon all his Life-Guard forsook him,
 and fled: But the loss of the Battel, which was 
Attabaliba
's utter ruine, was laid upon 
Runninagui,
 a Captain appointed to lie in Ambush, so to fall in the Rear of the 
Spaniards
 with five thousand men; but was so far from per∣forming his Orders, that terrifi'd at the uncouth noise of the Guns, and the rest, that he fled one hundred and fifty Leagues Southerly, before he stopt, or scarce ever look'd behind him in so long a flight.
 Mean while, 
Attabaliba
 com∣pounded with 
Pizarro
 for his Ransom, 
viz.
 to pay him as much Gold as that Hall in his Court (where they made the Agreement) could hold to the top; they first measur'd the heighth, then the length, which was found to be fifty four Foot, and the breadth nine: In pursuance of this composition, Gold was brought thither from all places, according to 
Attabaliba
's order; yet he could not raise so much as would perform h
 bargain, which made the 
Spaniards
 to grumble: But 
Attabaliba
 desiring some longer time to perform it, telling 
Pi∣zarro,


that most of the Gold was brought on Slaves Shoulders, a long and troublesome way, of two hundred Leagues long, from the City 
Cusco,
 and if this would not satisfie, 
Pizarro
 might send some of his own people thither, to inform him, that he need not fear the least danger, as long as he was Prisoner with his Wife and Children.


The two Captains, 
Sotto,
 and 
Peter del Baro
 being sent away to that purpose, met after some days Journey with one of 
Attabaliba
's Leaders, who was bring∣ing the King's Brother 
Guascar
 with a Party, Prisoner to 
Caxamalca.


Guascar
 had now a fair opportunity to crave assistance of the 
Spaniards,
 tel∣ling them, that he and 
Attabaliba
 were the Sons of 
Guaynacava,
 so that the King∣dom was to be divided betwixt both. But 
Attabaliba
 had by force made himself Master of all, whereas he being the youngest, ought to be satisfi'd with that share which 
Guascar,
 being the eldest, would assign him; for the right of Inhe∣ritance belong'd justly to him, and yet he was carry'd away bound to slaugh∣ter▪ But if 
Pizarro
 would do justice in delivering him out of his Brothers bloody Hands, he would raise him thrice as much Gold as 
Attabaliba
 had pro∣mis'd: To which purpose he desir'd 
Sotto
 and 
Baro
 to put off their Journey to 
Cusco;
 which they not daring to do, went on their way,
 and 
Guascar
 descend∣ing the Valley 
Sucsuhuana,
 was burnt alive by 
Attabaliba
's Soldiers.


Mean while, 
Almagro
 came with fresh Forces to 
Taxamalca,
 which occasion'd no small trouble in 
Pizarro,
 who was onely thirsty after Gold: On the other side, 
Almagro
 as greedy, grew jealous that 
Pizarro
 should keep the promis'd Hall full of Gold for himself, and he should have no share, because 
Attabaliba
 was his Prisoner; therefore he earnestly desir'd that 
Attabaliba
 might privately be made away, and that the Booty might be divided to one as well as the other.


Pizarro
 to prevent all inconveniencies that might happen from his dissent∣ing, gave in the presence of the King to every private Soldier a thousand Duckets in Gold, and six thousand five hundred twenty five Silver Crowns; the inferior Officers receiv'd four and thirty thousand Crowns, and the others sixty thousand; the fifth part of the Booty he reserv'd for the Emperor: And notwithstanding 
Attabaliba
 perform'd his promise in filling the Hall full of Gold, yet he had the sentence of Death pronounc'd against him, neither would his excuse of Innocency serve, or his Requests to be sent to 
Spain,
 there to clear himself before the Emperor; but sighing, and lamenting his misfor∣tunes, was ty'd to a Post, and Strangled in the presence of 
Pizarro.
 For whose Death, though a 
Heathen,
 Divine Vengeance pursu'd these cruel and unjust Ar∣bitrators that thus made their Will a Law, none of them dying a natural Death.


Moreover it was observ'd, that a few days before this Execution a blazing Star appear'd, which 
Attabaliba
 seeing, presaging sadly of himself said, 
That a great Prince would die in a short time;
 but 
Pizarro
's chief pretences for the Kings just suffering was, that he had cruelly murder'd his Brother 
Guascar:
 But this was a meer blind, for that that incens'd them against 
Attabaliba,
 was, that he knowing where the unvaluable treasure lay, which 
Guascar
 had bury'd, would not discover it to them.


Attabaliba,
 before his death, desir'd that he might be bury'd in the Territory 
Quito,
 by his Father 
Guaynacava,
 whom the 
Peruvians
 for his great Justice and Prudence in Government, believed that he would arise, and settle the World so troubled and full of disorder in peace and quiet: The Corps was accordingly

carry'd thither in great State after their manner,
 attended by his Brother, whom 
Illescas Ruminagui
 which ran from 
Attabaliba
 in the Battel, where he lay in ambush when he might have done them good service; in the way to his en∣tertainment, receiv'd with all shews of sorrow; but when they were feasted to excess, bury'd in sleep and Wine, he Massacred and flea'd 
Illescas
 the Kings Brother alive, and made a Taber of his Skin. Whilst 
Attabaliba
's Funeral was thus bloodily solemniz'd,
 his General 
Quizquiz
 rais'd a great Army, which 
Pizarro
 encountring after a valiant resistance, totally routed; then marching victoriously to 
Cusco,
 he saw great Fires in the City, and the Citizens fighting with the 
Spaniards,
 sent before; but the Horse breaking in upon them, most of them fled the next morning to the Mountains: Thus the 
Spa∣niards
 became Masters of the City, where they inflicted the most cruel tortures on all Sexes, by that means to force them to discover, if they knew of any hid∣den Treasures, being not satisfi'd with what they found there, although they had gotten a greater Treasure in 
Cusco
 than that that they had extorted from 
Attabaliba
 before:
 Nay, they gave those that were murther'd for Food to their Dogs: Among the rest, 
Didacus Salazar
 having a very fierce Dog call'd 
Bezerril,
 had also an old 
Indian
 Woman his Prisoner, to whom he gave a Letter to deli∣ver to the General 
Pizarro;
 the Woman had not gone many Paces before the was set upon by 
Bezerril,
 whom 
Salazar
 let loose, that he might delight himself in seeing the Dog tear the poor old Woman; but she observing him come run∣ing at her with so great fierceness, fell down upon her Knees, and holding forth the Letter,
 cry'd, 
Good my Lord, good my Lord Dog, I must carry this Letter to Gene∣ral
 Pizarro, whereupon the furious Curr having more compassion than the 
Spaniard,
 stood still a little, and at last lifted up his Leg in a scornful manner, Urin'd upon her, and returned satisfi'd; at which sportive behavior of the Cur and the Chrone, 
Salazar
 laughing, was so well pleas'd, that he gave the Woman her life.


After 
Cusco
 had been sufficiently Plunder'd, 
Pizarro
 made 
Almagro
 Governor thereof, with the Territories belonging to it, and built near the River 
Lima
 a Town,
 which they call'd 
Los Reyes.
 Mean while, 
Almagro
 receiv'd Letters Patent from the Emperor, in which he was nominated 
Marshal
 of 
Peru;
 en∣courag'd by that honor, he took a great design in hand, for the 
Peruvians
 had reported, that the Golden 
Chili
 lay to the South; and 
Almagro
 being encourag'd, and assisted by 
Pizarro,
 March'd inquest thereof with two Troops of Horse, and five hundred Foot: But mean while there happen'd so great Rains, and such foul Weather, that the Ways were almost unpassable, so that the Expedition grew very troublesome; yet however he went on, in which hard March he lost both Horse and Men.


Whilst 
Almagro
 was upon this undertaking, 
Francisco Pizarro
 receiv'd Letters Patent from the Emperor, in which he was Intitul'd 
Duke of Peru,
 but with a 
Salvo
 for the honor before given to 
Almagro;
 yet these balanc'd honors bred great dissention between the Duke and Marshal, which 
Mango Inga
 another of 
Attabaliba
's Brothers observing, laid hold of the opportunity, and setting upon the 
Spanish
 Garrison in 
Cusco,
 took the City. Whereupon 
Pizarro
 imme∣diately sent his Horse thither, under the Command of 
Alphonso Alvarado,
 and 
Gomes de Todoya,
 against whom the 
Indians
 fought very valiantly, insomuch, that the Battel was a long time doubtful; yet at last the 
Spaniards
 got a bloody Victory, and regain'd 
Cusco;
 hither after some time, 
Almagro
 returning with ill success, having effected nothing, was kept out by 
Ferdinand Pizarro,
 under pre∣tence

that he could not open the Gate without Order from his Brother the Duke.
 
Almagro
 much offended thereat, yet saying little, was so privately let into the City, that he surpriz'd the Governor 
Ferdinand Pizarro,
 and his Brother 
Gonsalvo,
 with 
Alphonso Alvarado
 Prisoners, swearing that he would not rest be∣fore he had rooted all the 
Pizarro
's out of 
Peru.
 But whilst he was passing the intended Sentence of Death upon them, 
Gonsalvo
 and 
Alvarado
 broke Prison, and got away to the Duke, who troubled for his Brother 
Ferdinand
 there in cu∣stody, and in danger of his life, came to Composition; whereupon 
Ferdinand
 was also releas'd: But this was no sooner done, and he had got his Brother safe there, but the Duke regarding nothing less than the keeping of the new-made Peace, sent to 
Almagro,
 that the Emperor having given him the prime Com∣mand over 
Peru,
 he requir'd him to leave 
Cusco,
 or else he would force him. 
Almagro
 sent answer, That if he could see the Emperor's Hand, he would im∣mediately obey, otherwise not; whereupon both Parties prepar'd for War, wherein they had many sharp bickerings in a short time:
 But 
Almagro
 being too weak fell into the Dukes hands, who order'd him to be strangled in the Gaol, and his body afterwards to be drawn to the Market-place, and there publickly Beheaded.


Ferdinand Pizarro
 being not long after sent to 
Spain,
 with the fifths of the gotten Treasure for the Emperor, was Imprison'd in the Castle 
Motto,
 for 
Al∣magro
's Death: But what further happen'd to him there, or became of him, hath never been Recorded by any Pen.


But young 
Almagro,
 instigated by his Guardian 
John Rada,
 resolving, to be reveng'd for his Fathers Death; to that purpose he went to 
Los Reyes,
 where by the help of some hir'd Male-contents,
 he design'd to Murder the Duke upon St. 
John
's day, in the Church at high Service: But this business was not so closely carry'd, but the Duke had some inkling thereof, who therefore stay'd at home, and went not to Mass that day. The Conspirators doubt∣ing the event, hearing that their Plot was discover'd, though defeated in their purpose, yet not fail'd in their Courage, ran at noon day to the Palace, cry∣ing, 
Kill the Tyrant, kill the Traytor.
 But 
Pizarro
 being so much forewarn'd, had lock'd up the Gates, and arm'd himself, which when they could not enter, yet they went back through the City, and waving a bloody Sword, cry'd, 
Pizarro is slain;
 this being believ'd, above two hundred private Friends to 
Almagro
 ap∣pear'd, who all ran to the Palace, crouding about the Gates: And 
Francisco de Chares
 coming out at a private Door, hoping to pacifie the Mutineers, was immediately Stab'd; but they rushing in the way he came, found some stout opposition, for seven Halberdiers of his Guard fought till they were all kill'd in the Dukes presence; but 
Pizarro
 was taken alive, and being brought before 
Almagro,
 he Savagely Butcher'd him with his own hands; which done, they ran crying along the Streets, 
Long live the Emperor, and
 Didacus Almagro.


But after all this, 
Pizarro
's Party joyning together, valiantly withstood the Conspirators, so that a considerable number were slain on both sides, yet 
Al∣magro
 at last getting the better, confiscated the Goods of all those that were against him; and now every one shew'd him the respect of Chief Governor, till the Emperor should either settle him, or send another.


From hence Marching to 
Cusco,
 he had like to have paid for all, but preven∣ted by private intelligence thereof; which happen'd thus,


Garcias Alvarado
 and 
Christopher Sotello
 were Joynt-Governors of 
Cusco;
 but quarrelling, and coming to Blows in like manner, 
Sotello
 was slain: This

Almagro
 took very hainously,
 as being his intimate Friend, giving forth threat∣ning Speeches of Revenge; which 
Alvarado
 inform'd of, and intending some way or other to prevent all Dangers, and save himself, he invited 
Almagro
 to a Feast, but privately resolving to make it a Bloody Banquet, by his Death at the Table. Of this he being inform'd, as we mention'd before, staid at home; and privately sent for some Soldiers that had belong'd to 
Sotello,
 sending word that he was indispos'd: 
Alvarado,
 under a shew of Kindness, goes to 
Almagro,
 hoping to perswade him to come to his prepar'd Treat; but so soon as he was enter'd the Hall, they clapp'd to the 
a
e, and the Soldiers falling upon 
Alvarado,
 slew him: But soon after 
Almagro
 was call'd in question, and not long enjoy'd this his usurp'd Authority; for the Emperor 
Charles
 sending the Learned 
Vacca de Castro
 with full Authority to 
Peru,
 to settle that disturb'd Kingdom, 
Almagro
 now us'd to Govern, had no Ears to become a Subject; therefore he march'd with an Army to meet 
Castro,
 by whom, after a bloody Fight,
 being beaten and put to flight, having four thousand Men, he fell into the Victors Hands near 
Cusco,
 where he was treated very severely; for shortly after he was condemn'd to be Beheaded;
 others were strangled, and some torn in pieces with Horses.


Not long after this great Execution, 
Blasco Nunnez Vela
 came to 
Peru,
 and being appointed Vice-Roy,
 had four Councellors assign'd him, with whom he was to consult in all Affairs; and especially to set the 
Indians
 at liberty, which till then had suffer'd much misery under the 
Spanish
 Tyranny: To perform which, the Emperor had given an Order under his Great Seal, which was to be publish'd and proclaim'd in all Places. 
Vela
 at his arrival faithfully perform'd all his Commands, seiz'd upon 
Vacca de Castro,
 because he had Exe∣cuted 
Almagro
 without any Examination or Tryal; yet by this means he got the hatred of all, so that most of the 
Spaniards
 chose 
Gonsalvo Pizarro
 for their Chief, whereby Affairs grew daily more and more out of Order. 
Nunnez Vela
 laid all the blame thereof upon 
William Xuarez
 Governor of 
Lima,
 whom he sent for in the Night, and correcting over-severely, gave him also two mor∣tal Wounds, of which he presently died: The Body was in the Morning drawn along the Streets, which caus'd so great a murmuring amongst the In∣habitants, that soon after they seem'd to make a general Insurrection: Where∣fore 
Nunnez Vela
 fearing the worst, resolv'd to convey himself from thence 
in∣cognito,
 and pass to 
Truxillo:
 But his four Councellors advis'd him to the con∣trary; yet he took his own way, causing all his Treasure to be sent aboard; and having made ready his Horses to depart, the Common People in a tumul∣tuous manner set upon the Palace, catching, snatching up, and carrying away all the Silver they could find,
 and meeting the Vice-Roy, seiz'd, and thrust him into a Dungeon; which done, they fell at variance amongst themselves; for some would have him executed, but others insisted to have him sent Prisoner to 
Spain;
 which last being the more moderate, getting the upper Hand, 
Vela
 was put aboard, and committed to the custody of 
Didacus Alvarez,
 who Anchoring in the Mouth of the River 
Tombez
 (kindness growing betwixt them) releas'd the Vice-Roy his Prisoner, and set him ashore, who not long after got some For∣ces together.


Mean while 
Pizarro
 was every where acknowledg'd for Supreme Governor, who having Intelligence of the Vice-Roys Design, sent 
Francisco Carvayales
 thi∣ther, between whom and 
Vela
 was a sharp Encounter; but at last being worst∣ed, and retaken by 
Carvayales,
 he was soon after executed, and his Head plac'd on a Pole near the Gallows.




The Emperor 
Charles
 turmoil'd with Wars at home, saw no likelyhood to settle the confus'd Affairs of 
Peru;
 yet at last he thought it convenient to send one 
Peter Gasca
 thither, an Ecclesiastick, of a subtile and ingenious Wit, who landing 
Anno
 1546. in 
Lima,
 with no other Title than 
Chief Councellor to the Em∣peror,
 took quite another course than 
Vela,
 perswading them all, that Affairs should be setled in order, according to their own desires, and former Miscar∣riages never be remembred, being utterly deleted by an Act of Oblivion.


The News of this General Pardon spreading it self far and near, wrought a great change; for 
Pizarro
's Intimates, and those nearest of Concern, shrunk daily from him; which 
Gasca
 observing, march'd against him;
 and that they might make the more haste, they loaded several 
Peruvians,
 chain'd, with their Arms, whom when they lagg'd, they switch'd and whipp'd before them. And now both Armies being met, and discharging their Cannons at one another, with considerable loss to each side, whole Regiments came running over to 
Gasca;
 so that 
Pizarro
 being quite forsaken, yielded himself to the mercy of the Conqueror, who accus'd him of High Treason,
 and caus'd him to be strangled in a Dungeon, and fix'd his Head on a Marble Pillar in 
Lima,
 envi∣ron'd with Iron Rails, and inscrib'd with a brief Account of all his Offences. But 
Gasca
 not thus satisfied, hang'd up several Commanders, and whipping and stigmatizing others, condemn'd them after to the Gallies: But his greatest spight was against the Field-Marshal 
Carvayales,
 a Person of the Age of four∣score years, whom tying to a Horses Tail,
 he caus'd a whole Hour to be drawn up and down the Market-place, scorn'd and derided of all People; which done, he was quarter'd alive.


Not long after 
Gasca
 surrendred the Command of 
Peru
 to the Learned 
Cian∣ca,
 and carried an unvaluable Treasure to 
Germany,
 for the Emperor 
Charles,
 who gave him in requital for his faithful Service, the Bishoprick of 
Valentia.






SECT. XII. 
The Expeditions of
 John Stade, 
and
 Nicholas Durando Villegagnon.


ABout the same time that 
Gasca
 arriv'd in 
Spain, John Stade
 had the Command over a small Fort rais'd of Stone and Earth, on the Island 
Maro,
 adjacent to 
Brasile,
 because the Salvage People of 
Tupin Imba
 sail'd twice a year from the Countrey of 
Brikioka,
 to 
Maro,
 at the time when the Plant 
Abbati
 was ripe, of which they made the Liquor that they generally drink at their Humane Banquets: They also landed on 
Maro
 about the 
Bratti
-Fishing. This 
Bratti
 is a Fish of a very delicious taste, either caught in Nets, or shot by the 
Tupin Imba,
 and carried to their several Habitations. Against these People 
Stade
 kept a continual Guard, when 
Heliodorus Hesse,
 Son to 
Eobanus Hesse,
 the famous 
Latin
 Poet in 
Germany,
 came to visit him. 
Stade
 to entertain his Guest the bet∣ter, went into the Woods to hunt for Venison,
 where he was taken by the 
Tupin Imba,
 of which the King march'd in the Rear with a great Palm-Tree Club, and carried him towards the Sea side, that he, with others that waited on the Shore, might make up a 
Kawewipepicke
 (that is, 
A Feast of Rosted Men
) But be∣cause 
Stade
 being a 
German
 of a large Body, well-skinn'd, young, plump and fat, they all concluded to spare this Dainty, and carry him alive to 
Brikioka,
 that with such a Banquet they might highly caress their Wives: But the Jour∣ney being long, and a just melancholy possessing him with fear, and the terror

of certain death, and to be Food for such ravenous 
Cannibals,
 so macerated and consum'd him, that he was almost dwindled away to Skin and Bone; where∣upon thinking him thus lean to make but few savory Morsels, they chang'd their resolutions, and growing better acquainted, he having learn'd their Tongue, and being able to discourse with them, they lik'd his company so well, that they let him live amongst them. Nine years 
Stade
 had been a Slave amongst these Man-eaters, when the 
French
 coming thither, bought him for a few Trifles, and carried him to 
Normandy,
 where landing 
Anno
 1555. he went from thence to 
Hamburgh,
 being his Native Countrey.


Nicholas Durande
 a 
Frenchman
 set Sail from 
Havre de Grace,
 at the same time when 
Stade
 came thither. This 
Durande
 having lost a Castle in 
Brittain,
 to the great prejudice of the 
French,
 out of a pretence of advancing their Affairs, and to fill up their almost exhausted Treasury, reported, That the 
Spanish
 and 
Por∣tuguese
 Forces were driven out of 
India,
 where they had gather'd so much Wealth; and it would certainly redound to the Honor and Profit of 
France,
 if they could become Masters of the Gold and Silver Mines. King 
Henry
 the Second approving of the Proposal, and the more because the Admiral 
Gasper Coligni
 was also very earnest, looking upon it as a fafe Retreat for the Prote∣stants, at that time cruelly persecuted: and 
Durande,
 sensible of the Admirals thoughts, privately inform'd him, That in his 
American
 Design he chiefly aim'd to plant a True Church of God in 
America,
 where the Professors might enjoy themselves peaceably. This Report being spread amongst those that call'd themselves 
Protestants,
 (fled from 
Switzerland
 in great numbers to 
France
) made many of them venture upon the Design; who having fitted themselves, and setting sail with three Ships, after some time arriv'd on the Coast of 
Brasile,
 and landed on the 
Rock-Island,
 in the Haven 
Januario:
 Here 
Durande
 built seve∣ral Watch-houses, and the Fort 
Coligni,
 which he fortified with a considerable number of Guns: Not long after he writ to 
John Calvin,
 That he would please to furnish this new Plantation in 
Brasile
 with good and able Teachers of the Gospel; which Request being immediately taken into serious consideration by the Classes, one 
Philip Corguileray,
 a Gentleman near 
Geneva,
 set Sail out of the Haven 
Honfleurs,
 with three Ships, freighted with some Provisions, several Per∣sons of divers Trades, and two Ministers, 
Peter Richer,
 and 
William Chartier:
 But he had scarce made 
Africa,
 when they began to have a scarcity of Victuals; wherefore they turn'd their Design of setling the Gospel in 
America,
 to Pyracy, where they made small scruple or difference, whether Friends or Foes, but made Prize of all they could light upon, though indeed their Ministers both preach'd and perswaded the contrary, amongst whom a Controversie happen∣ing, put other Business into their Heads; for one 
John Cointak,
 formerly a 
Pa∣risian Sorbonist,
 was also amongst those that remov'd from 
Geneva,
 who pretend∣ed that 
Coligni
 had promis'd him a Ministers place, so soon as he landed at 
Bra∣sile;
 but 
Richer
 and 
Chartier,
 not satisfied that there was any such Promise, and consequently thinking themselves not obliged by his bare Assertion, told him, That themselves being able, under God, to perform the Work, they needed no such Coadjutor: This bred so great a Rancor between them, that 
Cointak
 ac∣cus'd them for teaching false Doctrine,
 and chiefly that they did not mix the Wine at their Sacraments with Water, which Father 
Clemens
 had strictly com∣manded. 
Durande,
 being prevail'd on by the Cardinal of 
Lorein,
 joyn'd with 
Cointak,
 and thereupon so sharply persecuted the 
Protestants,
 that he starv'd se∣veral of them, which others to escape fled to the 
Brasilians:
 Nay, he took 
John

Du Bordell, Matthias Vermeil,
 and 
Peter Bourdon,
 out of their Sick-Beds,
 and ty∣ing their Hands and Feet, threw them headlong from a Rock into the Sea: Soon after which, the bloody Persecutor return'd with ill success to 
France,
 where he wrote a Book against the Reform'd Religion; but all the Honor which he gain'd was, that all Parties on both sides accounted him a distracted Person.






SECT. XIII. 
The Expeditions of
 John Ribald, Renatus Laudonier, 
and
 Gurgie.


FLorida
 being upon the Continent of 
America,
 and so call'd by 
John Pontaeus,
 who landed there upon 
Palm-Sunday,
 though 
Sebastian Gaboto a Venetian,
 im∣ploy'd by 
Henry
 the Seventh King of 
England,
 landed there before, may well be term'd 
the
 Europeans 
Bloody Stage, Pontaeus
 being slain here: But 
Ferdinand Sotto
 exercis'd against the Inhabitants inhumane Cruelty five years together; yet at last died of a deep discontent, because he could not reach his Aims, having condemn'd so many 
Floridans
 fruitlesly to dig for Gold in the Mines. However, since that, 
Julian Sumanus
 and 
Peter Ahumada
 undertook the Work anew, but with the like bad Success. 
Auno
 1545: one 
Lodowick Cancello,
 a 
Dominican,
 thought to effect great things with four of his Associates; but landing on 
Florida,
 was destroy'd by the Natives. But 
Gasper Coligni
 the Marshal, neither discourag'd by these miserable Proceedings, nor the former Treachery of 
Durande,
 pre∣par'd for a new Expedition thither;
 and accordingly 
John Ribald
 was fitted with two Ships from 
Diep,
 at the Charge of 
Charles
 the Ninth King of 
France,
 wherewith having sail'd thirty Degrees Northern Latitude, he came before the Promontory of 
Francisco,
 where he ran up into the Mouth of a wide River, to which he gave the denomination of 
Dolphin,
 upon whose Banks were whole Mulberry-Woods, which nourish'd Silk-Worms in strange abundance. From hence he sail'd by the 
Wolves Head
 (a Point so call'd, because great numbers of Wolves breed there) and leaving the 
Cedar-Island,
 landed on 
Florida,
 where he built a Triangular Fort, and having furnish'd it with Men, Guns, and Provisions, sail'd back for more Supplies to 
France;
 but coming thi∣ther, found all things in disorder, occasion'd by a War amongst themselves; so that the 
French
 which guarded and dwelt in the Fort,
 waited in vain for Re∣lief, and their Provisions growing scant, thought it fittest and their best way to build a Vessel, and sail from thence; which having effected, and being gone about the third part of their Voyage there hapned such a Calm for twen∣ty Days, that they made not the least way, which drove them to so great extre∣mity, their Provisions being spent, that they drank their own Urine, and fed upon their old Shoes, which also in a short time failing, they agreed amongst themselves to kill and eat one of their Sea-men, call'd 
Henry Lacher,
 on whose Flesh they liv'd some days; but being again driven to the greatest want ima∣ginable, in this extremity of Desparation, their Condition being altogether hopeless, an 
English
 Frigat discovering them, and observing by their manner of Sailing that they were in some great want, drawing near, sent their Long-boat aboard, and found them so weak, that they were not able to handle their Tack; whereupon generously taking pity of them, they reliev'd them, and conducted them to the Coast of 
England,
 and then brought them to Queen 
Eli∣zabeth,
 who had formerly design'd to rig a Fleet for 
Florida.


Mean while, no News having been heard of the foremention'd 
French
 Plan∣tation

in 
Brasile,
 and 
Coligni
's Difference with the King being decided, he pre∣vail'd so much,
 that 
Renatus Laudonier
 should with three Ships sail to relieve the Garrison in the late deserted Fort. 
Laudonier
 landing in 
Nova Francia,
 found a Stone with a 
French
 Inscription, plac'd on the Shore by 
Ribald,
 and hung full of Laurel Garlands: Then he visited the King 
Saturiona,
 whose Son 
Atorcus
 had se∣veral Children by his own Mother, according to a Salvage Custom observ'd in that Countrey. Whilst they stay'd here, a Fiery Meteor appear'd in the Sky, with such fervor, that some Rivers boyl'd with the heat of it, and the Fish parboyl'd, died; nay more, it scorch'd all the Plants far and near: The Natives ascrib'd this Plague to the 
French
 Cannons, by which means they stood in great fear of the 
French,
 who might have done great things had not they differ'd amongst themselves;
 For a Sea-man nam'd 
Rubel Patracon,
 pretending to have skill in 
Necromancy,
 would undertake to shew the Places where the Gold and Silver Mines were, which the rest of the Sea-men believing, rebell'd against 
Laudonier,
 and though sick, imprison'd him, forcing him to sign a Wri∣ting to this effect, That the two Ships, of which the Rebels made 
Vassar
 and 
Trincant
 Commanders, should with his leave and permittance sail to 
New Spain
 for Provisions. Whilst they were preparing for their Voyage, 
Rupiferrir
 ha∣ving been sent to the King 
Utina,
 came back with many rich Presents, and with∣al brought Information of the Gold and Silver Mynes 
Apalatica;
 but 
Vassar
 and 
Trincant
 taking no notice thereof, set forth, and took a 
Spanish
 Carvel, richly laden before 
Havana,
 whose Commander they agreed to release on the pay∣ment of a great Ranson; but the Masters Son being sent ashore to fetch the Money which they had agreed for, in stead thereof, made his Fathers Mischance known; whereupon two great Frigats and a Galley were the next Morning very early sent to attaque the 
French,
 between whom was a sharp Encounter; but in a short time the two Pyrats were sunk, and the Prisoners sold for Slaves, excepting a few that escap'd in their Long-boat.


In this interim 
Laudonier
 receiving no Supply from 
France,
 was brought to great extremity; for the Rebels had carried great part of his Store with them. In these straights he was forc'd by those that staid with him, contrary to the Articles of Peace lately made with King 
Utina,
 to take him Prisoner, in hopes that for his Liberty he would procure them some Provisions; but the Inhabi∣tants incens'd at the baseness of so unexpected an Action, could not be wrought upon by any means to give them Relief; but grown more perverse than before, appointed a general Meeting to elect another King; so that out of all hopes, they utterly gave themselves over for lost. In this desperate conditi∣on, 
John Haukins,
 a great Sea-Captain, came thither with four 
English
 Ships, who pitying their misery, furnish'd them with Necessaries, and having onely four Vessels, lent them one, because 
Laudonier
 was at that time too weak to endure the Sea; but not long after recovering strength, and all things ready to set Sail, 
Ribald
 came to an Anchor before 
Charles-Fort,
 with seven Ships from 
Diep:
 Within few days after, the 
Spanish
 Admiral 
Peter Melandez
 arriv'd with eight Frigats, whereof the 
French
 having Intelligence, cut their Cables, and stood out to Sea, whom the 
Spaniards
 chac'd, but could not reach; whereupon lea∣ving them, they landed in the Mouth of the River 
Dolphin,
 where by help of the 
Moorish
 Slaves they began to intrench themselves; of which 
Ribald
 having notice, immediately sail'd thither, at least to disturb, if not absolutely drive them from their Work; but surpriz'd in the way by a great Storm, lost most of his Fleet, ingag'd among the Rocks; yet the Men were most of

them sav'd. In this Storm the 
Spaniards
 also suffer'd great damage, yet made an Advantage of the 
Frenchmens
 Misfortune, marching with all speed to 
Charles-Fort,
 in which were onely two hundred weak Men, 
Ribald
 having taken the primest Soldiers along with him. In the Morning before Sun-rise the 
Spaniards
 made a fierce Assault, and in a short time became Masters of the Place, which 
Laudonier
 seeing, fled in a Boat; others leaping from the Walls into the Moat, sav'd themselves by swimming: Whoever fell into the Victors Hands,
 was without mercy slain; nay, such was the 
Spaniards
 inveterate malice to the 
French,
 that wanting living Bodies, they exercis'd their Cruelty upon the dead, pulling out their Eyes, and cutting off their Members, carrying them in Tri∣umph on the Points of their Swords. In the interim, the Storm ceasing, 
Ri∣bald
 approach'd 
Charles-Fort,
 with his shatter'd Fleet, but was so amaz'd when he saw the 
Spanish
 Flag set upon the Walls, and 
Vallemond
 marching towards him with a Squadron of 
Spaniards,
 that although a River lay between them, yet he presently came to a Treaty, and deliver'd up all his Men, being above sour hundred, upon promise of good Quarter; but the 
Spaniards
 in stead of keeping their Agreement, bound them, leading them all to the Castle, where, both against their Articles, and the Law of Arms, they massacred them, and burnt their Bodies; but 
Ribald
 being quarter'd, they fix'd his Limbs upon Poles about the Walls, sending his Head to 
Sevil.
 When 
Charles
 the Ninth, King of 
France,
 receiv'd notice hereof, he was not in the least concern'd at the 
Spanish
 Cruelty us'd to his Subjects, out of a particular hatred to 
Coligni,
 the first Promoter of the Voyage.
 But though the 
French
 Crown so little regard∣ed the inhumane Usage committed by the 
Spaniards
 in 
Charles-Fort,
 yet 
Domi∣nicus Gurgie
 shew'd himself so highly concern'd thereat, that turning all his Goods into Money, he levied two hundred Soldiers, and fourscore Sea-men, which he put aboard three small Ships, pretending that he would onely touch at 
Brasile;
 but sailing beyond 
Cuba,
 he stood directly for 
Florida,
 where after his Landing he was kindly receiv'd by 
Saturiona
 the King, who complaining much against the 
Spaniards
 Oppressions, sent to joyn with him his Kinsman 
Olotocara,
 having the Command of a great Army.


The 
Spaniards
 by this time had not onely strengthned 
Charles-Fort,
 but also rais'd two others on each side of the River 
Mayo,
 in which three Holds lay Garrison'd above four hundred choice Soldiers. Those in the new Forts made little resistance; but quitting the same, and flying into a neighboring Wood, fell into an Ambuscade of 
Indians,
 who slew thirty of them, and preserv'd ninety for a Publick Execution. Thus they march'd on victoriously to 
Charles-Fort,
 where by the way sixty 
Spaniards
 sallying out, were every one cut off, which much facilitated the 
Frenchmens
 Work. The Governor 
Melandez,
 seeing a certain mine attend him, fled into the Woods; but met there by the 
Flori∣dans,
 return'd to the 
French,
 of whom he begg'd Life for himself, and some of his People: Yet 
Gurgie
 deaf to all intreacies, would hear nothing, but pres∣sing on, took them all Prisoners, and as a just Reward of their Cruelty to his Countrey-men; hang'd them on the next Trees: After which Execution, it can scarce be express'd how kindly the Natives entertain'd the 
French,
 because they had freed the Countrey from the 
Spanish
 Oppressions. Thus having ac∣complish'd his Design, and returning home, he was nobly receiv'd at 
Rochel,
 but had not the least Countenance for all his trouble from the King; the Car∣dinal of 
Lorein
 telling him, 
That for his good Service he ought to suffer death,
 
because he had fitted out three Ships upon his own Account, without Authority.








SECT. XIV. 
Four
 English 
Expeditions, under the Conduct of our Famo
 
 Martin Forbisher, 
Sir
 Francis Drake, Thomas Candish, 
 Smith.


CAptain 
Forbisher
 sailing to the Northern Parts of 
America,
 
Anno
 1576. chusing a bad time, the Year being too much spent, and the Ocean so full of Ice, that it forc'd him to return to 
England:
 Not many Months after, he renew'd his Voyage, Queen 
Elizabeth
 having rigg'd out, and sent under his Command one Frigat and two Ketches; Mann'd with a hundred and forty Men: The twenty sixth of 
May
 h
 weigh'd Anchor, and sail'd to the 
Orkenies,
 lying to the North of 
Scotland,
 where landing, he found the poor Islanders fled out of their Huts, into Caves and Dens among the Rocks. From thence he steer'd North-North-West, through abundance of floating Pieces of Timber, which often∣times gave him great stops. The fourth of 
July
 he made 
Friezland,
 where he met with a great Storm of Hail, mix'd with Snow: Before the Shore lay a great Ridge of Ice, which hindred for a while their Landing: Here he saw several Wild People, but could not come to speak with them; for upon the least approach they fled; yet when they saw any advantage, made resistance: At last, three of them came unarm'd to the Shore, beckoning 
Forbisher
 to come to them; which he had done, had not great numbers of the Natives appear'd too soon from an Ambuscade in a Wood, and behind a Hill, who seeing them∣selves discover'd, march'd up into the Countrey, three onely staying on the Shore, of whom the middlemost feigning to be lame, at last fell down, whom his Companions took up, and carried a little way, but then forsook, by which the 
English
 observing their Design, shot that the Sand flew all about him; whereupon forgetting his Lameness, he ran as swift as a Deer up a Hill.


Forbisher
's Men had by this time fill'd two Barrels with a Mineral not unlike Gold, but was afterwards found to be of little value. Nothing else of Re∣mark did he find here, except great long-hair'd Men, who being exceeding salvage, subtilly plot nothing else but to murder, lurking for Men, like Wild Beasts for their Prey, whom, when caught, they tear in pieces. Close fitted to their Bodies, they wore the Skins of several Wild Beasts, priding in the Tails which hung down betwixt their Legs. Their Tents are of conjoyn'd Whalebones, cover'd over with the like Skins, the Entrance always facing the South. They use Bowes, Arrows, Slings, and two sorts of Boats: In the big∣gest they can carry seventeen Men, which are made of several Wooden Planks clinch'd together, and cased on both sides with Leather: The smallest ones are cover'd just in the same manner, much resembling a Weavers Shuttle, ha∣ving in the middle a Hole, wherein a Man sits, who drawing the Cover of the Boat about his Waste by Strings, with one Oar makes swift Passage.


The Countrey it self is barren, yet feeds abundance of Deer, Hares, Wolves, Bears, and Dogs like Wolves, whose Flesh serves the Inhabitants for Food.


This Countrey seems to be exceedingly troubled with great Earthquakes, because several pieces of Rocks, and whole Mountains rent asunder, may be seen in divers places.


The fourth of 
August, Forbisher
 having elevated the Pole to sixty eight De∣grees, beyond what 
Sebastian Gabot,
 the first Discoverer of those Parts, and set out by 
Henry
 the Seventh, had done (for 
America
 Northward never before had





 been so far penetrated) and laden with a sort of shining Sand, which he be∣liev'd might contain much of a Golden Oar, having with him three of the Na∣tives, 
viz.
 a Man, a Woman, and a Child, set Sail for 
England,
 and the seventh of 
September
 came to 
Milford
-Haven, and not long after arriv'd in 
London,
 where in short time the Salvages died.


At the same time when 
Forbisher
 sail'd Northerly, Sir 
Francis Drake
 also, fitted out by Queen 
Elizabeth,
 steer'd another Course, sailing by 
Cape Blanko
 and 
Cape Verde,
 along the 
African
 Coast, to 
Brasile,
 where he caught several Sea-Wolves, and Anchoring in the River 
La Plata,
 furnish'd himself with Fresh Water: Then proceeding on his Voyage through the crooked 
Straights of Magellan,
 he came to an Anchor before 
Moucha,
 wash'd by the 
South Sea.
 The Islanders receiv'd him very courteously, because they were inform'd that the 
English
 were at great Wars with the 
Spaniards,
 to avoid whose Cruelties, they had deserted the main Continent, and setled on 
Moucha.
 One of these 
Mouchaners
 going aboard, serv'd them for a Pilot to the Haven 
Valparizo,
 where 
Drake
 burnt the St. 
Jago,
 a small Village, and plundring all the Countrey about it, got together a great Trea∣sure of Gold and Silver. Before 
Arica
 he took three 
Spanish
 Ships, richly la∣den; and before 
Lima,
 four more, having an unvaluable Treasure of Pearls and Gold aboard them. Thus inrich'd, he steer'd his Course Northerly to forty two Degrees; but the Cold forcing him to fall four Degrees to the South∣ward, he discover'd a very pleasant and inhabited Coast, the People whereof shew'd him great kindness: The King himself coming aboard with a great Train, set a Crown of Gold upon 
Drakes
 Head, and gave him a Golden Scep∣ter, and an Ivory Chain. After this he inspected the Islands 
Tidor, Ternata, Java, Zeilon,
 and 
Cape de Bona Esperanza,
 from whence, after a three Years Voy∣age, having encompass'd the World, he came safe to 
London,
 where he rested not long; for sailing 
Anno
 1585. to 
America,
 he took great Prizes from the Ci∣ties 
St. Jago, St. Domingo, St. Augustin,
 and 
Carthagena,
 setting them all on Fire. Thus again returning home victoriously, and after the famous defeat of the

Spanish Armado,
 he rigg'd out a new Fleet, having for his Vice-Admiral Cap∣tain 
Hawkins:
 Their Design was to have sail'd to 
Panama;
 but both dying, and so the Commission ceasing, the expected great and golden Project also died with them.


A Year after the death of these famous Navigators, Captain 
Thomas Candish
 Mann'd with a hundred and twenty Men, and Provisions for two Year, set∣ting sail in a lucky Hour, a second time encompass'd the World, passing the 
Straights of Magellan;
 in which Voyage having got above ten times the value of his Charge, by taking the 
Spanish
 Carrack 
St. Anna,
 valued at twenty Tun of Gold; and at last freighted with a Mass of Treasure, he came safe into the River of 
Thames.


But much worse success had Captain 
John Smith,
 who weigh'd Anchor 
Anno
 1614. with two Ships, fitted out by several Merchants in 
London,
 for 
New Eng∣land,
 and on the Island 
Monachigga
 to load Copper, Gold, and other Minerals that were to be had there, and also to fish for Whales: But there were no such Minerals to be found there, nor any Whales to be taken on the Coast, because the time of the Year was past; so that he return'd home without Success. However, not long after, they undertook the same Expedition a second time, but with worse Fortune; for being gotten in sight of 
Virginia,
 he was treache∣rously set upon, and taken by the 
French,
 who accus'd him, that he had de∣stroy'd the Plantations in 
Nova Francia,
 and unless he would make satisfaction for the Damage, they threatned him with death. He was carried Prisoner to 
Rochel,
 in a 
French
 Ship; but not far from thence surpris'd by a mighty Storm, 
Smith
 finding an opportunity, leap'd into the Boat, and driving betwixt the Waves, at last, half dead, was thrown upon the Island of 
Oleron,
 whom after∣wards, having lost all, an 
English
 Ship took in, and brought to his Native Countrey.






SECT. XV. Netherland 
Expedition by
 Jaques Mahu, 
and
 Simon de Cordes.


FIve Ships being fitted out at 
Rotterdam,
 the Command of them was given to 
Jaques Mahu
 and 
Simon de Cordes,
 who on the twenty seventh of 
June, Anno
 1598. weigh'd Anchor from the 
Goree,
 and sail'd on an immense Voyage; at last landing at the Island St. 
Jago,
 they won a strong Castle there, and took two Barques; but at last Articled with the 
Portuguese,
 that they might undi∣sturb'd supply themselves with Fresh Water, yet they, as if they minded no Agreements, whilst the 
Dutch
 were filling their Casks, came down upon them with two hundred Horse, each having a Foot-Soldier behind him; but the 
Hollanders
 made so stout resistance, that they put them all to flight.


The City of 
St. Jago,
 which gives Denomination to the whole Island, is built long-wise, having a convenient Haven, like a Crescent: Through the City glides a River, on both sides of which, beyond the Town, arise several high Mountains: That part which faces the Sea, hath Fortifications, defended with strong Bulwarks. The 
Portuguese
 had brought all their Guns to bear towards the Sea, to sink the 
Holland Ships,
 which they invited thither under pretence of kindness; but a great Storm hindred the Fleet, that they could not Anchor at the appointed place; onely two of the Ships sail'd pretty near, but not within Shot.








From hence fleering to the Desolate Island 
Brava,
 they saw nothing but five ruin'd Houses, the Door of one stopp'd up with great Stones, which being taken away, was found full of 
Turkish
 Wheat, which prov'd a great kindness to the Sea-men.


Mean while the Admiral 
Mahu
 died,
 and his Body put into a Chest fill'd up with Stones, was thrown over-board;
 so that 
Simon des Cordes
 carrying the Flag, steer'd his Course to 
Guinee,
 there to refresh himself; for most of his Men were so weakned by the Scurvey, that they were scarce able to hand the Sails.


Arriving at their intended Port, the Sick were carried ashore; and the Vice-Admiral 
Beuningen,
 being conducted by a 
French
 Guide, went to the Vice-Roy of that Countrey, who sat on a low Bench,
 with a Sheeps-skin under his Feet, in a Violet-colour'd Cloth Suit, without any Linnen, Shirt, Shoes, or Stockins; on his Head a Cap made of yellow, red, and blue Eastern Cloth; his Face whitened with Ashes, shew'd in several places its natural blackness, ap∣pearing through the Colours; about his Neck a Collar or Chain of Glass Beads: Behind him sat his Nobles, with Cocks Feathers on their Heads, and their Skins painted Red.


Beuningen
 plac'd by the King on a Mat, complain'd to him, That the 
Guine∣ans
 fled from him where-ever he came, though in Friendship, to barter 
Europe∣an
 Commodities with them, against Fruits, Poultrey, Sheep, and other Provi∣sions: Whereupon the King promis'd to furnish him therewith, and invited 
Beuningen
 to Dinner. After some stay, the Kings Wives entred the Palace, a very mean and ill-favour'd Building, more like a great Barn than a Kings House, and plac'd a kind of nasty Trough on the Ground, in which lay no∣thing but some wild Herbs, and a piece of a smoak'd Sea-Calf; and though he was a Person of the largest size, and corpulent, yet he eat sparingly. 
Beu∣ningen,
 though exceeding hungry, found little rellish in such kind of Meats; wherefore spreading a Napkin, his Attendants brought him some Bisket and

Spanish
 Wine, whereof after the King had tasted, he lik'd so well the rellish, that it rock'd him asleep, whilst 
Beuningen
 walk'd to the Sea-side to refresh him∣self; but the 
Guineans
 coming about him, he was forc'd to return to the King, who waking at the noise, appear'd highly incens'd at his People, and took 
Beuningen
 into his House: However the Subjects, notwithstanding the Kings Commands, when 
Beuningen
 was sent into a neighboring Hut, kept Watch about it all Night: The next Morning early an old Woman entred, muttering to her self, and went out and in to 
Beuningen
 three times one after another, knocking on a Box not unlike a Pair of Bellows, out of which flew abundance of Dust about 
Beuningen,
 which caus'd a great Laughter amongst the 
Guineans.
 The King also coming to him, presented him with two Goats, and four Hens, and so conducted him back to the Ships.


Beuningen
 seeing that there was no good to be done, set sail from thence, and coming before the River 
La Plata
 in 
America,
 it appear'd Blood-red. Out of the Water which was taken up in Buckets, started a sort of Insects like Fleas, which caus'd a strange and sad Distemper amongst the Sea-men, that when any Meat was offer'd to them, so soon as ever they put it to their Mouths, they would fall down backwards in a swoon, foaming and frothing at the Mouth, and turning up the White of their Eyes, die distracted. Suffering under this Disaster, they hasted from thence with all speed, and sailing into the 
Straights of Magellan
 they kill'd above fourteen hundred 
Penguyins,
 which is a Bird that preys on Fish, and lives in Holes under Ground; they somewhat re∣semble a Goose, onely they stand more upright, and are double-crested, with two plumy Combs. Coming to an Anchor in the 
Green-Bay,
 there arose a great Storm, which continued several days, so that they were forc'd to moor their Vessels with four Anchors, extremely afflicted both with Hunger and Cold, preserving themselves alive by eating young Grout, at that time not above a span high from the Ground; but this course Food bred an incurable Dropsie, that posted them on to a sudden death. Afterwards, when the Weather grew more pleasant,
 the Inhabitants being Gyants, most of them eleven Foot high, grew more troublesom, oftentimes assailing them, and throwing Darts point∣ed like Harping-Irons, at which they were very expert. Their Salvage Natures may appear by their Dealings with the dead 
Hollanders,
 cutting off their Heads, and bruising them to pieces, sticking Darts through their Hearts, and cutting off their Privities.


At last the Fleet getting into the 
South Sea,
 were by stress of Weather sepa∣rated one from another: Two Ships, being the 
Faith,
 and the 
Good Tydings,
 were driven back into the 
Straights of Magellan,
 where they suffer'd the utter∣most extremity of Hunger:
 Here they took a wild Woman, and two Chil∣dren, who being of a sallow Complexion, had a great hanging Belly, a wide Mouth, crooked Legs, long Heels, and Breasts like Cows Udders; about her Neck a String of Snail-shells, and upon her Back a Beasts Skin, fastned about her Neck with the Sinews of it; her Food nought else but live Fowls: The same Diet the Children fed upon: The youngest being but six Months old, had his Mouth full of Teeth, and ran without any help: The eldest they car∣ried to 
Amsterdam;
 but having kept the Woman aboard two Nights, they gave her several Trifles, and set her ashore. Here they found old Ice in the middle of Summer, four Foot thick.


Beuningen
 lingred in the 
Straights of Magellan,
 and being tired out with Hunger, Cold, and Storms, return'd home; and had they not by accident

taken abundance of Coneys, they had all perish'd. Above two Years had this unhappy Voyage lasted, when they arriv'd at their Native Countrey, with six and thirty Men, being all that remain'd alive of a hundred and five.






SECT. XVI. 
The Expedition of
 Oliver van Noord.


TWo Months after 
Mahu, Oliver van Noord
 set sail with four Ships, and two hundred forty eight Men, from the 
Maes.
 Having reach'd the 
Princes Island,
 he lost seven of his Men by the Treachery of the 
Portuguese;
 and An∣choring before the City 
Javeiro,
 he was no better entertain'd by the same Nati∣on: Here having a Rencounter, and both Sides receiving considerable Loss, he steer'd for St. 
Sebastian,
 a fruitful Island, producing an Herb very wholesom against the 
Scurvey:
 Here the Sea-men found great store of Sea-Mews, and Parrots, besides several sorts of delicious Fish. The approaching Winter advis'd them from entring the 
Straights of Magellan
 so late; wherefore they judg'd it best to seek a convenient Harbor, to put their Sick ashore to re∣fresh themselves. The Island 
St. Hellen,
 for its fruitfulness, seem'd to be the most convenient for this purpose; but a great Storm preventing them, they came to 
St. Clara,
 where taking in Fresh Water, they cast Anchor in 
Porto De∣sire.
 In this Haven they saw a kind of Sea-Dogs,
 whose fore-parts being over∣grown with long Hair, seem'd like a Lyon, and the Feet like Mens Hands; over their Eyes and Upper-lips grew black and white Hair, which in Stormy Weather stands staring upright, but in Calm, lies flat and smooth; they Urine backwards, sleep very soundly, and cast their Young every Month: Their Flesh well-boyl'd prov'd a savory Dish.


Van Noord
 going ashore here, saw not a Man;
 but only Burying-places on high Rocks, built of red Stones, and adorn'd both within and without with Bowes, Arrows, and other strange things: Under the Heads of the Dead lay four-square Shells, and other things artificially carv'd. Curiosity made them desirous to make a further search into the Countrey; wherefore he rowed du∣ring a whole Tide up a River; and when their Boat ran aground at the time of Ebb, he walk'd several Leagues up into the Countrey, where he saw nothing but Deer, Buffles, and Ostriches: and because he saw no People, he judg'd the Coast to be uninhabited; but returning again, he found it other∣wise; for the Sea-men, though commanded to stay in the Boat, which lay in the middle of the River, went ashore, where they were so fiercely set upon by thirty of the Natives, that three of them were kill'd, and another wounded in the Leg. These People are very strong and Salvage, with painted Faces, and long Hair; but after this Encounter, they saw no more of them.


But 
van Noord
 having spent fourteen Months in search, and lost a hundred Men, set sail again with three Ships; for one of them, being the 
Unity,
 he burnt at the Island 
Clara,
 where he Winter'd, because of a great Leak which could not be stopp'd. Here they brought five thousand Fowls aboard, which much increased their Stock of Provisions.


From hence passing the Wide Ocean, into the 
Straights of Magellan,
 four times the Fleet attempted to go into the 
South-Sea,
 and was as often driven back by cross Weather into the 
Straights;
 but the fifth time prov'd more successful; for having got through, and left the 
Straights
 a handsom way astern, they

discover'd two Islands, from one of which the Sea-men going aland, brought four Boys and two Girls; who afterward instructed in their Tongue, in∣form'd them concerning the scituation of the Countreys thereabout.


After that, the Fleet Sail'd into 
Hungers Haven,
 where they found the ruines of the deserted 
Philip-Stadt,
 which Captain 
Thomas Candish
 had seen fourteen years before, fortifi'd with four Bulwarks; but now onely some Houses, a Church, and a Gibbet were standing: Four hundred 
Spaniards
 built that City, as a Key to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan.
 But all their Provisions being spent in three years time, and no relief coming from 
Spain,
 and what they Sow'd ex∣pecting the hopes of a Harvest, the Salvages coming down by night de∣stroy'd; which caus'd so great a Famine to rage amongst them, that many dy'd, not so much as putting off their Clothes, who lying in the Houses un∣bury'd, occasion'd such a stench in the City, that the remainder fled into the Field; where they liv'd a whole year by the Fruits of the Trees, Herbs, and Roots: At last, three and twenty of them, amongst which were two Women remaining yet alive, resolv'd to travel to the River 
La Plata,
 and accordingly set forward, bur what became of them could never yet be heard, only one 
Ferdinando
 that was of that company, accidentally wandring from the rest, happen'd to light upon 
Candish
's Fleet.


Here 
Van Noord
 set on Shore the Vice-Admiral 
Jacob Claeszoon Ilpendam,
 for some crimes which he had committed; and leaving him behind, Sail'd from thence thorow the South-Sea along the Coast of 
Chili
 and 
Mocha;
 which Island, of a considerable bigness, rises in the middle with a forked Mountain, from which a convenient River comes flowing down into the Countrey.


The Inhabitants conducted the 
Hollanders
 to their Village, consisting of about fifty Houses built of Straw, but were forbid to go into their Huts: Up∣on the Mens call the Women appear'd, which being divided into three par∣ties, humbly kneel'd down before them; and soon after an old Woman brought an Earthen Can full of 
Cica,
 a Liquor made of 
Mays,
 whose extra∣cted Juyce, boyl'd and put into Tubs, ferments like our Beer or Ale, with a cap of Barm, with which they treated the 
Hollanders,
 who drinking moderate∣ly, were well refresh'd; but the Natives will ply this Liquor, till they make themselves Distracted, and are mad Drunk.


From hence 
Van Noord
 steer'd his course to 
Sancta Maria,
 where in his way he took a 
Spanish
 Ship, call'd 
Buon Jesus,
 that is, 
Good Jesus,
 and receiv'd intelli∣gence from the Prisoners, that the Admiral 
Simon de Cordes,
 with twenty three Men was kill'd by the 
Americans
 on the Promontory 
Lavapia,
 being the head Land or Point opposite to 
St. Maries;
 that a year since, tydings were brought to 
Lima
 of his Fleet; so that they had made all things ready to withstand him. But 
Van Noord
 hinder'd by strong contrary Winds, not able to reach 
Sancta Ma∣ria,
 stood directly for 
St. Jago,
 in whose Haven lay a great 
Spanish
 Ship full of 
Indians,
 and two other going in, which two he set on Fire, and the third he Tow'd towards his Fleet; repenting extremely that he had given liberty, and set 
Francisco de Ivarro
 Commander of the 
Buon Jesus
 ashore; because he after∣wards understood from the 
Spanish
 Pilot, that 
Ivarra
 threw ten thousand two hundred pound weight of Gold, pack'd in fifty two Cases, over-board, when he observ'd that he was like to loose his Ship.


The Fleet Sailing forward came to an Anchor before the 
Thieves-Island,
 whose Inhabitants are very light Finger'd, go stark naked, and are of great strength; they found the Women much Disfigur'd, their Noses, Lips, and Cheek-bones eaten by the 
French
 Pox.








In the Bay 
La Baya,
 the 
Dutch
 Admiral, with a 
Spanish
 Flag on his top-Mast,
 sent one of his Sea-men in a Fryers garb ashore, if possible under that disguise, to get Provisions; which falling out according to their Design, they were sup∣ply'd with all manner of Victuals: After that, the 
Hollanders
 burnt five Vil∣lages on the Island 
Capull;
 took a 
Chinesy
 Vessel, one 
Spanish
 Barque, and a 
Carvel
 Laden with Brandy from 
Cocos;
 and after a great and bloody Fight sunk the Admiral of the 
Manilla
's, and so at last with various fortunes arriv'd at 
Rotter∣dam,
 having in three years encompass'd the World.






SECT. XVI. 
The Expedition of
 George Van Spilbergen.


ANno
 1614. the eighth of 
August,
 the 
East-India
 Company of the 
United Nether∣lands
 set out seven Ships under the Command of 
George Spilbergen,
 who coming to 
Cape St. Vincent,
 and engaging with the 
Portuguese,
 took one of their Ships, and so proceeded on his Voyage to the 
Straights of Magellan,
 but by a huge Storm, the Fleet was separated. Amongst those that were scatter'd was the good Ship call'd 
Meruw,
 in which some of the crew had conspir'd to have kill'd the Master, and seiz'd the Vessel; but he having some inkling thereof, set so stoutly upon two of the chief Contrivers with his drawn Hanger, that he forc'd them to leap over-board, and as stoutly ordering the rest, set all to rights.


But 
Spilbergen
 Landing on one of the 
Penguyn
 Islands,
 found two Dead Bo∣dies just cover'd with Earth, about their Necks was a Chain of glistering Snail Shells neatly strung; the Grave stuck full of Bowes and Arrows, was pleasant to look upon, between several high Mountains, whose tops lay bury'd in Snow: The Fleet came out of the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 but not without great danger, for the South-Sea much disturb'd by tempestuous Weather, seem'd to raise its

Waves up to the Sky, so that they had enough to do, from being ingag'd among the Rocks: But at last with great difficulty, wonderfully escaping all danger, they Anchor'd before 
La Mocha,
 an Island which on the North side lies low, and on the South defended by Rocks.


Spilbergen
 seeing abundance of Men standing on the Shore, Row'd thither to Barter for Merchandize,
 amongst them was a Sheep with a long Neck, bunch-Back'd like a Camel, a little Mouth, and long Legs; which Beast serves them in stead of Horses, to carry their burthens, and perform their Tillage. The 
Americans
 breed up these Sheep every where, by reason of the extraordinary be∣nefit they receive from them, some of them keeping no less than eighteen hun∣dred. Their Shepherds ride upon a Beast almost like an Ox, and carry in their hands Copper-Plates, hung round about with Bells, which they shake, ma∣king a different noise when their Sheep shall go in or out; and on their Heads wear Feathers like Coronets, standing upright.


From thence,
 
Spilbergeon
 departing, Landed at last on the Island of 
St. Mary,
 where he burnt all the 
Spanish
 Villages;
 as he did also in 
Val Parysa.


After going ashore, in the Haven 
Quintero,
 he saw abundance of Wild Horses drinking out of a Rivulet, supply'd with fresh Water from an adjoyning steep Mountain; so soon as they espy'd Men, they instantly running away, were seen no more.


Having left 
Quintero,
 and spent a Moneth in Sailing farther, they dis∣cry'd eight great Ships; whereupon the Prisoners inform'd them, that it was the 
Spanish
 Fleet, of which 
Roderigo de Mendoza
 was Admiral, fitted out on pur∣pose to fight 
Spilbergen,
 whose coming (as we said) was known a year before. At midnight 
Mendoza
 Boarded 
Spilbergen,
 but was so roughly receiv'd, that he was forc'd to Retreat with the loss of the Ship 
St. Francisco.
 At Day-break, the 
Holland
 Admiral fir'd at 
Mendoza,
 who answering with equal courage, occa∣sion'd a smart Engagement, wherein the 
Spaniards
 were so hard beset, that they put forth a White Flag; but it was immediately taken in again by the Commanders aboard, choosing rather to die, than surrender, because they had mock'd at 
Mendoza,
 when he hinted the difficulty of the Enterprize in the Grand 
Peruvian
 Councel, saying, 
They went out, onely to take a few disabled
 Hol∣landers, 
and tying them hand and feet, carry them to Execution.
 Yet their high and proud Stomachs prov'd very fatal to them, for afterwards totally routed and put to flight, most of them sunk by the way.


This done,
 the 
Hollanders
 victoriously Sail'd to 
Calyow de Lima,
 having a con∣venient Haven: The City adorn'd with curious Houses and Temples, is strengthen'd by a Platform, Planted with great Guns towards the Sea, and the Shore was guarded by eight Troops of Horse, and four thousand Foot; where∣upon 
Spilbergen,
 who was yet to go so great a Voyage, judg'd it no way con∣venient to adventure the loss of all on the good or bad event of a Battel, espe∣cially being so much over-power'd by the number of the Enemy: Wherefore seeing no hopes of Victory, setting forward to 
Guarma,
 he got some fresh Pro∣visions.


Against the City 
Peyta,
 he play'd his Cannon with such fury, that the Towns∣men deserted the place, which he observing, set it on fire, and Sail'd to 
Aquapul∣que,
 where from the Fort at first the 
Spaniards
 fired some Guns at them; but soon after changing humor, they came to an Accommodation, furnishing the 
Hollanders
 with convenient Provisions. Passing on, and coming to 
Selaques;
 both Natives and 
Spaniards
 having suffer'd some of the 
Hollanders
 to Land; after

set upon them treacherously in a Thicket, but to their little advantage, for they made so good a Defence, that the Assailants not able to bear the brunt, fled with great loss.


Spilbergen
 Sailing from hence to the 
Manilla
's, waited there for the 
Spanish
 Ad∣miral 
Juan de Silva,
 who had made (is was reported) great preparations for him long since; but seeing it was in vain, at last he return'd to 
Zealand,
 where he came to an Anchor, loaden with Riches, in the middle of Summer, 
Anno
 1617.






SECT. XVII. 
The Expedition of
 William Corneliszon Schouten, 
and
 Jacob Le Maire.


SOme Merchants that were call'd the 
Austrian
 Company, fitted out one Ship with sixty five, and a Ketch with two and twenty Sea-men, giving the Command thereof to the Captains 
Schouten
 and 
Le Maire: Anno
 1615 they Weigh'd Anchor from the 
Texel;
 the first took a view of one of the three Islands, call'd 
Mabrabomma,
 lying before 
Cape Sierra Leona.
 This Island appear∣ing a great height out of the Sea, was not inhabited, they seeing onely three Wild Buffles, many Wild Cats, Birds which bark'd like Dogs, Wild Palm-Trees, Lemon-Trees, Turtles, Crocodiles, Partridges, and Storks: From hence, passing by the dangerous Shelf 
Abrolbos,
 they ran into 
Porto Desire,
 where on the Rocks they found abundance of Eggs, and Spierings, or Smelts, and Spire∣grass sixten Inches long, wherefore they call'd that Inlet 
Spierings-Bay.
 Their Sloop also brought two Sea-Lions, and one hundred and fifty 
Penguins
 from the 
Penguin
 Isles, having Sail'd two Leagues up the River; in the interim, the ground being meer Stone, and their Anchors coming home,
 the great Ship drove against a Rock, and at Ebbing Water, broke off the outermost Planks and Iron-Work, and the Ketch also striking on a high Shelf, was at low Ebb two Fathom with her Keel above the Water, and had without peradventure been overset, and bilg'd, but a fresh North-West Wind kept her upright, yet at last, the Weather growing calm, she lean'd, but the Tide coming in very fast, set her afloat, so that she was miraculously sav'd; then setting Sail again to 
King's-Island,
 they found so many Eggs of black 
Mews,
 that one without stir∣ing from his place, might reach above fifty Nests, and in each of them at least three Eggs, which they carry'd aboard by thousands. Their Boat Rowing Southerly down the River, found some Ostriches, and Beasts not unlike Stags, but with exceeding long Necks. On the Hills lay Stones heap'd one upon ano∣ther, which removing, they found Dead Bodies of eleven Foot long; here
 here they spent their time in cleansing their Ships, and new Sheathing the Ketch, but as they were Tallowing,
 the Flame accidentally got between the Crevisses which immediately taking Fire, in a short time consum'd it to Ashes: The great Ship had gotten a Horn in her Bow, seven Foot under Water;
 this Horn being firm without any hollowness, and not unlike a great Elephants Tooth, struck thorow two Ashen and one Oaken Plank, sticking in a Rib of the like Wood, and yet above half a Foot remain'd out to be seen.


At length 
Schouten
 Weighing Anchor from 
Porto Desire,
 and Sailing to four and fifty Degrees Southern Latitude, met whole Shoals of Whales, insomuch, that he was fain to Tacque to and again to shun them. Sea-Pies, bigger than Swans, came flying in great numbers aboard, suffering themselves to be taken

with the hand. On the North-side they spy'd a high and scraggy Coast spread∣ing it self to the East South-East, which they call'd, 
The States Countrey,
 that which lay to the Westward of it, 
Mourice
 of 
Nassau,
 the Islands in fifty seven Degrees 
Barnevield
's-Isles, and the sharp Point in which lay the Snowy Moun∣tains, Southward of the 
Magellan Straights
 end the 
Cape
 of 
Hoorn.


Schouten
 had now gotten the height of fifty nine Degrees, when he enter'd the South-Sea, through the new passage between 
Mauritius
 and the 
States-Coun∣trey,
 which was call'd from his Partner,
 
The Straights of Le Maire.


Near the two Isles 
Juan Fernando,
 they found great store of Fish, after that they view'd these Islands, that lay scatter'd up and down the South-Sea, each of them they nam'd according to their several occasions, calling the first, 
The Isle of Dogs;
 because they have abundance of Dogs there that could not bark: Another, 
The Bottomless Island,
 because the Sea was so deep about it, that they could not come to an Anchor. The Inhabitants who go naked, with their Skins pounced full of strange shapes, of blue Snakes, Dragons, and such like Creatures, Salli'd out of the Woods upon the 
Hollanders
 with great Clubs, to which was fasten'd the Sword or Snout of a Sword-Fish, and also with Slings.


Somewhat further they came to 
Water-Land,
 and 
Flyes-Island,
 the first so nam'd, because the Shore round about was planted with Trees, but in the middle all lay cover'd with Salt-Water; the other from the 
Flyes,
 which with incredible numbers troubled the Sea-men four days together.


Moreover, the Reception or Entertainment which 
Schouten
 was welcom'd withal, at the 
Hoorn-Islands,
 being very remarkable, we will in brief relate:


Anchoring in nine Fathom Water, Shelly ground, before a fresh Rivulet, three 
Hollanders
 sent to the King were by him courteously entertain'd, who with strange humility, not bow'd, but kissing their Feet fell flat on the ground, and put the 
Hollanders
 Feet upon his Neck; and after this manner of Salutati∣on, waited upon them aboard: Yet although this King fawn'd so much, and seem'd so humble, yet he was very severe over his Subjects, for finding one that had filch'd a Sword, he not onely brought and restor'd it, but immediate∣ly Executed the Thief before their Faces.


Le Maire
 and 
Arias Claeszoon
 were much honor'd here, for the old and young King put their Crowns on their Heads, curiously Wrought of fine White Fea∣thers, and the end adorn'd with small Red and Green Feathers; they gave also to each of them a Pigeon, White to their Wings, the hinder part Black, and under their Bellies Red.


In the interim, the King of 
Water-Island
 visited the other, by whom 
Le Maire
 was treated: When they met, they made strange shews of Honor to each other, but at last shew'd their Salvageness by eating raw Fish, and rudely Dancing before the 
Hollanders. Le Maire
 going into the Countrey, and climbing up a high Mountain, saw nothing but Morass Wilds, and Vallies, lying under Water: The King and his Retinue here kept him company, during his stay there, when weary with walking, they sate down together under Coco-Nut-Trees; the young King tying a String about his Leg, climb'd with exceeding dexterity up a high Tree, bringing several Coco-Nuts down with him, which he open'd very expeditiously.


Arias Claeszoon,
 Rowing ashore one night, found the King sitting under a Roof, resting on four Pillars, where several Naked Women Danc'd before him according to their Musick, which was Taboring upon a hollow Piece of





 Wood, which yielded a murmuring sound without any distinct Tune.


But the two Kings meeting again, the next day Complemented one ano∣ther with more antick and ridiculous Postures, sitting side by side under the Roof, imploring their God, with their Hands folded, and their Heads bow'd to the ground: At this interview, four 
Holland
 Trumpeters and Drummers stood playing before the King, to the great admiration and amazement of the Islanders, which were near ten thousand gather'd together upon the News of the strangers to attend the two Kings. Soon after a great company of Rusticks came running thither, which had a green Herb call'd 
Cava,
 ty'd about their middle; on a sudden they began all to chaw this 
Cava,
 throwing that which they had chaw'd into a large Woodden Trough, then putting Water to it, they Kneaded it together; which done, brought the Liquor on their Heads to the two Kings, before whom they kneel'd when they gave them any: Yet not∣withstanding they receiv'd such honor from their Subjects, they shew'd servile respects to the 
Hollanders,
 for every King presented them with a Pig, which they first laid on their Heads, then kneeling, put it down at 
Le Maires
 Feet, and bowing their Heads to the ground, rose again. They wear their Hair long, which Brayded, hung on the left side of their Heads down to their Hips, ty'd at the end with two Knots; but the Nobility had two such Locks: All of them went naked, their Privities onely cover'd. The smallest of the Men exceeded the biggest of the 
Hollanders
 in tallness.
 The Women had long Breasts hanging like Satchels down to their Bellies, and so unshamefac'd, that they pro∣stituted themselves to any, in sight of all Men; and still at low Water, their business was to catch Fish, which they greedily eat raw.


After all this Entertainment, Weighing from hence,
 
Schouten
 Sail'd along the Coast of 
New-Guiny,
 where three Boats full of 
Negro
's came Rowing to∣wards them, Slinging very fiercely Stones at them, and hovering about, attended their motion all night. Next morning, seven Boats more coming to their assistance, they set upon the 
Hollanders,
 but soon fled from their Bullets;

yet two of the 
Negro
's were taken, that in each Nostril wore a Ring. Sailing further, several Boats came aboard of them, whereof those that Row'd, break∣ing their 
Assagays
 or Launces over their Heads, enter'd the Ship; the Hair of their Heads and Beards bedawb'd with Lime,
 flew about, whilst they Danc'd on the Decks, after they had eaten a good Meal: But they endeavor'd to re∣ward this their kind Entertainment with Treachery, for going ashore, they soon after return'd in greater numbers, and sat upon the Anchors which lay over the Bows of the Ship, and there being a great calm, endeavor'd to Towe the Ship towards the Shore, whilst others threw Stones and Arrows. But so soon as the 
Hollanders
 firing their Guns Wounded several of them, they all fled, except some which they took Prisoners, whereof one whom they after∣wards call'd 
Moses,
 did them great service.


But 
Le Maire
 was amaz'd at nothing more, than when on the next Coast he saw several little Houses built about nine Foot high, out of which many Peo∣ple Issu'd, which were all deform'd, either having Wry Noses, Bow Legs, Squint Eyes, or crooked Backs, and all in one part or another mis-shapen.


At last, Anchoring before 
Jacatra,
 the Ship was stopt there by order of the 
East-India
 Company, and the Men divided and put aboard those Ships that Sail'd from 
India
 to 
Holland,
 and arriv'd in safety at 
Flushing,
 after they had Sail'd about the World, in two years and eighteen days.






SECT. XVIII. 
Voyage of the
 Nassavian 
Fleet, under the Command of
 Jaques L' Heremite, 
and
 Geen Huigo Schapenham.


THe 
United Netherlands,
 to abate the 
Spanish
 Greatness, set out a considera∣ble Fleet, which they sent to try their fortune, in making Prize of what ever they could light upon in any of their Havens wash'd by the South-Sea.


Jaques L' Hermite
 had ten Ships under his Command, Mann'd with sixteen hundred thirty seven Men, and two hundred ninety four Brass and Iron Guns, with which he set Sail from 
Goree, Anno
 1623. and coming before 
Cape Vincent,
 he discover'd eleven 
Turkish
 Pirates, whom fighting, he beat, and re-took the 
Holland
 Ships they had made Prize of.


At 
Roxents Head, L' Hermite
 gave chase to fifteen 
Spanish
 Ships, and coming up with them, sunk eleven, and took four laden with Sugar. Afterwards An∣choring at 
Safia,
 he sent the Ship 
Over-yssel,
 and a Frigat call'd the 
Gray-Hound,
 to Convoy home the Prizes; afterward being inform'd, that thirty 
Spanish
 Ships were making to them, Sailing into the Haven 
St. Vincent,
 the Spring Wa∣ter that he supply'd his empty Cask with being brakkish, caus'd an excoriation of the Guts, which brought the Bloody-Flux, whereby he lost many of his Sea-men; being well entertain'd by the Salvages of 
Antonio,
 they went on to 
Sierra Leona,
 a Mountainous Point full of Lime-Trees, here they found the Names of 
Sr. Francis Drake,
 and other 
English
 cut in a Rock.


After that he put in at the fruitful Island 
Annabon,
 where he caus'd his Chi∣rurgeon to be Beheaded.


This wicked Man being brought to the Torture, would confess nothing concerning the Crimes objected against him, but being strip'd for Execution, they found a small Bag hanging on his Breast, in which lay a Serpents Skin

and Tongue, with which he had Poyson'd several Men, but he confess'd no∣thing.


The first of 
February,
 the Fleet came to 
Cape de Pemias,
 which they know at a great distance, by its high Mountains cover'd with Snow.


In short time after, Sailing by the Mouth of the 
Straights
 of 
La Maire,
 they met with very tempestuous Weather, and seventeen of their Men going ashore, were devour'd by the 
Cannibals
 of 
Terra del Fuogo.
 These People being all 
Whites,
 and of a large Stature, Paint themselves Red, and go stark naked, except some of highest quality who tie a Deer Skin about their Necks; and the Women co∣ver their Nakedness with a piece of Leather: They live in Bowers made of the Branches of Trees, Stak'd three Foot deep, in a round, at bottom, and above like our Tents, Canopy'd, the top of which open, to carry out the Smoke like a Chimney; and have no other Houshold-stuff than some Baskets, in which they lay their few Fishing Implements. They go continually Arm'd with Clubs, Arrows, Slings, and Stone-Knives: Their Boats being only the Trunk of a Tree made hollow, rise up before and behind like a Half-Moon, and are four∣teen, and some sixteen Foot long, and two broad, and Row swifter than a Pinnace with many Oars. Lastly, they are so Salvage, that they seem rather to be Beasts than Men, knowing no Religion, ill Natur'd, cruel and Trea∣cherous.


From hence, passing on, 
L' Hermite
 refresh'd at the desolate Isle 
Fernando,
 and so Steer'd his Course to 
Calla de Lima,
 on whose Coast, taking a 
Spanish
 Vessel, the Prisoners told him, that their Plate-Fleet had Weigh'd Anchor, and were gone to 
Panama;
 only the Admiral which carry'd forty Brass Guns, with fifty Merchant-Men, lay close under the Shore, Guarded by three Stone Bulwarks, Fortifi'd with fifty Guns.


L' Hermite
 having a design upon these, took three 
Spanish
 Vessels that were going thither, and at midnight, sent Captain 
Adrian Tol, Peter Slobbe,
 and 
Mein∣dert Egbertszon,
 with twelve well Mann'd Boats, furnish'd with Brass Drakes, and Hand-Granado's, to Attaque the 
Spanish
 Fleet that lay hard by; and whilst some gave a false Alarm on the North of 
Callao,
 the Boats Rowing from Ship to Ship, in short time fir'd forty of them; although the 
Spaniards
 from the Shore endeavor'd by their Shot to drive back the Enemy, neither the Fort or Admiral sparing Powder nor Ball.


In this valiant Exploit the 
Hollanders
 had onely seven Men kill'd, and fifteen Wounded: About break of day, seven of the 
Spanish
 Ships floated, burning to∣wards the 
Dutch
 Fleet, which were as terrible as now Fire-ships, which forc'd them to Weigh Anchor to shun them.


After that, 
L' Hermite
 took two Ships laden with Wine, a third full of Wood, and a fourth with Wheat: One of these Prizes he fitted and prepar'd for a Fire-ship, and sending her to Board the 
Spanish
 Admiral, it ran aground with∣in shot of him; whereupon being batter'd by the Admirals Guns, and those from the Bulwarks, and at last taking Fire gave but a small blow, because most part of the Powder had taken Wet.


In this interim, while thus their design went prosperously on, their Admiral 
L' Heremite
 dy'd, whom they Bury'd on the Island 
Lima,
 and 
Schapenham,
 in de∣fiance of the Vice-Roy in 
Callao,
 caus'd one and twenty 
Spaniards
 to be hang'd at the Yard-Arm, because he had sent him a scornful Answer on the Proposals concerning the delivery of the Prisoners.


Cornelius Jacobszoon
 Sailing to 
Pisco
 with four Sail from the Fleet, could do

no good there, for he not onely found the City to be surrounded with a Wall of fifteen Foot high, but having also many Earthen Redoubts, behind which lay above two thousand arm'd Men, wherefore he deserted the same after some Rancounters:
 But the Rear-Admiral, 
John Williamszoon Vershoor,
 who was sent to 
Gainquil,
 had much better luck; for he not onely took that Metropolis, but also burnt a new Royal 
Gallion,
 and two lesser Vessels; carry'd a conquer'd Vessel to 
Lima;
 slew above a hundred 
Spaniards,
 and threw seventeen over∣board, because they had shot Poyson'd Bullets against the Law of Arms; of which Conquest Captain 
Engelbert Shutte
 had the greatest honor: But the Sea-men grew weaker and weaker by the Scurvy, and all of them would have pe∣rish'd, had they not found a soveraign Herb on the highest Mountains of 
Lima, Schapenham
 being chose Admiral in 
L' Heremites
 place,
 Weigh'd Anchor from 
Cal∣lao,
 and ran into the Inlet 
Piscadores,
 where on the shore he rais'd a Sconce; yet not long after departed from thence without any effect, but lost twenty eight Men, through the bad Conduct of their Commanders; the like number he lost also at 
Aquapulque,
 on the side of which City stands a Castle with four strong Bulwarks; the 
Holland
 Fire-ship lay just without the reach of the shot, the rest lay along the shore in a row, there to seize upon the Vessels expected thither from the 
Manillaes:
 But because the Scurvy raged amongst the Sea-men, and disabled them, they waited in vain, 
Schapenham
 Sail'd through the South-Sea to the 
Ladrones,
 where he found store of Provisions. 
Anno
 1625. in 
March,
 he drop'd Anchor before 
Maleye,
 and from thence went with 
Herman Spiult,
 the Governor for the 
East-India
 Company in 
Amboina,
 to 
Ceram,
 where they Con∣quer'd the Fort 
Lochoe,
 and soon after 
Cambella;
 then the Fleet being divided, 
Schapenham
 carry'd home two Ships from 
Batavia,
 and the remainder return'd at several times, they being hir'd to serve the 
East-India
 Company to 
Surratta, Malacca,
 
Coromandel,
 and the 
Molucco
 Isles: 
Schapenham
 Deceasing near 
Bantum,
 and being Bury'd on 
Pulo Boftok,
 the Ships arriv'd at the 
Texel
 in 
July, Anno
 1616.




Henry Brewer 
his Voyage.


ANno
 1643. 
Brewer
 set Sail with four Ships from 
Reciffo,
 and ran close along the 
States-Isle,
 so dangerous and Rocky, that he durst not put in to the Land; from which flew great abundance of Party-colour'd Ducks, with sharp Bills, about the Ships, and under the Keels swam also Whales.


On the West side of the 
Straights Le Maire, Brown
 ran into 
Valentine
's Inlet, where he was much troubled by the Winds which came whistling through the hollow Mountains with great and sudden gusts: The shore afforded red and black Strawberries, 
Carville
 and Muscles, to the great refreshment of the Sea-men, who daily saw Sea-Lions,
 but could not come to shoot one of them, for no sooner they perceiv'd any body, but they Diving under Water, swam away; and though they saw Mens Foot-steps of eighteen Inches long, yet they never found any Men. Thence Sailing into the South-Sea, along the Coast of 
Chili,
 they enter'd a Bay which they nam'd 
Brewer's-Haven;
 where Landing, they walk'd towards a great Smoke which they saw afar off, but coming near it, found only two Houses within a large Plain, full of Sheep, Oxen, and Hor∣ses; before the Houses stood Woodden Crosses.


The 
Dolphin
 Pink and a great Boat being sent to the Inlet, lay the following Night at an Anchor near a high Mountain; from whence, in the Night, two great Guns were fir'd, whereupon, Lieutenant 
William Ter Bergen
 Landed with

sixteen Musqueteers, and climbing up the Mountain, found a Village behind the same, where all things were in Alarm, Drums beating, Trumpets sound∣ing,
 Bells ringing; the Villagers suddenly firing their Guns on 
Ter Bergen,
 who being supply'd with thirty four Men, Encounter'd the Enemy so Valiantly, that he fled into the Woods, not without the loss of Men and Horses: The Guns with which they had shot in the Night lay onely on a Redoubt: 
Ter Ber∣gen
 persuing this Victory, March'd into the Woods, and shot the 
Spanish
 Com∣mander 
Andreas Munes Iserrera
 from his Horse, got great store of Treasure which lay hid under the Tree, being brought out of 
Carelmappa,
 which Village he set afire, and kill'd all the Horses, and Weigh'd Anchor with the Admiral 
Brewer
 to 
Michael de Cabuco,
 where not being able to Land, because of the many ob∣scure Rocks and Shoals, they set Sail to 
Castro,
 which they conquer'd and burnt without the least resistance: This City situate on a Mountain is stately built among Flowry Meadows, delightful Orchards, and brave Fountains;
 the Sea before it flows daily fourteen Foot. 
Brewer
 also burnt a 
Spanish
 Ship, and set some Houses afire, took three 
Spaniards
 Prisoners on 
Las Bahias,
 who inform'd him, that the Winter Season was almost over, but that it was never known by any to pass over so mildly, ill Weather generally using to blow down Houses, Trees, and rend Rocks asunder; that there was much Gold in 
Osorno
 and 
Baldivia;
 which last they had some years since deserted for hunger, but it was since Garrison'd by three hundred 
Castilians,
 that none could get at the Fort 
Conception
 (which lay a League Westerly from thence) but in a small Boat, that there were on the place near two thousand Inhabitants. Moreover, an ancient Matron call'd 
Lovysa Pizarra,
 from 
Quintian,
 one of the Isles in the 
Chilean
 In-Land-Sea, being fetch'd from thence, gave information, that forty years since, before the 
Indians
 took up Arms, the 
Spaniards
 were quietly setled in 
Osorno,
 and in so good a condition, that an ordinary Planter had at least three hundred Slaves, of which, every one was to procure a certain quantity of Gold; that the Isles 
Chiloves
 were divided into above a hundred Colonies or Plantations, the 
Chileses
 serving the 
Castilians
 as their true Governors; those that do good Service, the King of the Colony makes them Commanders; and that the 
Chineses
 had Rebell'd in several places. 
Brewer
 on the 
Chileses
 request took some of them, with their Wives and Children into his Ship, furnish'd with Arms, he digg'd a Chest of Silver and a Brass Gun out of the Earth, and soon after being sick,
 dy'd. His Successor 
Elias Herkmans
 prosecuting those Publick Affairs, sent the Pilot of the 
Unity
 out of 
Brewer's Haven,
 and some Sea-men, with two 
Chi∣lean Casiques
 with a Boat to 
Carelmappa;
 but being surpriz'd by a violent Storm,
 stood in for 
Horse-Island,
 where he and the 
Casiques
 Landing, he order'd seven Sea-men to carry the Boat to a safer Harbor; but being driven from the shore by strong Winds, it took in so much Water as fill'd and sunk it, so that all of them were drown'd. 
Horse-Island
 being destitute of Provisions and Lodgings, those that were Landed expected nothing but Death, till they found out a small Hut, and in the same six brave Sheep, and a good quantity of Potatoe Roots, which serv'd for Bread: But when this their new-found Store was almost spent, they happily were fetch'd off by the Boat belonging to the Ship 
Amsterdam,
 and with the whole Fleet came to an Anchor before 
Baldivia.
 This City built by the 
Castilians,
 consisted formerly of five hundred and fifty fair Houses, and was divided into Streets and cross Ways, with two large Markets, and as many costly Churches.


The 
Chileses
 unsufferably oppress'd, slew all the 
Spanish
 Garrison, and into

the Governor's Mouth and Ears pour'd melted Gold; of his Skull they made a Drinking-cup, and of his Shin-bones, Trumpets; after this, the City fell al∣most to decay, onely a great part of the Wall remain'd yet standing: The 
Chi∣leans
 hereupon flock'd hither by thousands, some on Horses, others on Foot, all Arm'd with Lances of a Foot long: 
Herkman
 hereupon informing them by an Interpreter, that they being mortal Enemies of the 
Spaniards,
 would joyn with the 
Chileans
 against that common Foe; and desir'd, that they might build a Fort on the Market-place in 
Baldivia,
 for a defence against all Invasions, and that they might be supply'd with Provisions which the Fleet wanted; all which the 
Chileans
 granted, and accordingly brought in store of Sheep, Hogs, and Cattel: But so soon as 
Herkman
 began to make the least mention of Gold, they were all abash'd, and said, that they knew of no Gold Mines, nay, their Hair stood an end, when they heard the name of Gold; so horribly the 
Spaniards
 had dealt with their Parents:
 After this, the 
Chileans
 growing more and more strange, did not in the least countenance the building of the Fort, and the longer the Fleet staid, the less Provisions they brought aboard; upon which, the Ships were necessitated, without any remarkable Exploits, to set Sail and return to 
Reciffo.














The Second Book, CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF Northern America.




CHAP. I.
 Of the Bounds of 
America,
 and of the Division of the 
Mexican
 or Northern part thereof.


H
Aving in the first Part of this Volume discours'd at large concerning the Original of the 
Americans,
 and whether that part of the World call'd 
India Occidentalis,
 or 
America,
 were known to the Ancients, or own its Discovery wholly to the Moderns, as also of all the Discoveries that have been made of the several parts thereof, and by whom, we shall now pass on to the Topographical part, describing every particular Province or Region, by giving an Account of their Situation, Temperature, Productions, Nature of the Soil, and Quality of the Inhabitants.


America,
 lying Westward of the 
Azores,
 and the Worlds Meridian, is by some suppos'd to consist of one vast Island, and several lesser ones scatter'd about it: Nor can this Supposition be thought improbable, if, as many think, it be environ'd with Sea on the North side, as towards the East, South, and West it is known to be; East, by the 
Atlantick
 Ocean; South, by the 
Magellanick
 Straight; and West, by 
Mare del Zur.
 But because the North-West Passage, though attempted by many, as 
Nelson, Davis, Forbisher, Button, Smith, Hudson,
 and others, hath not yet been fully discover'd by any, so that it is not certainly known whether 
America
 be joyn'd to 
Groenland
 and the 
Arctick
 Region, by a continu'd Tract of Land, or sever'd by the Ocean, we shall follow the method of those Geographers, who reputed sufficiently authentick, have divided this 
New World
 into Islands, and two grand 
Peninsula's,
 joyn'd together by an 
Isthmus,
 or Neck of Land, call'd 
The Straight of Darien,
 by some 
The Straight of Panama,
 lying almost under the 
Equinoctial Line,
 and extending in length from 
Nombre de Dios
 Southward, above a hundred 
English
 Miles, and from East to West seventeen Miles over in the narrowest place. Of these two grand 
Peninsula's
 the Northern is generally call'd 
America Mexicana,
 from 
Mexico,
 the chief City of the Province, properly call'd 
Mexicana;
 which without doubt was hereto∣fore

the most potent, rich, and flourishing of all the Kingdoms of the 
Indians,
 at least on the North side of the 
Isthmus.
 In the Division of the several Provinces of 
America,
 as well those of the Northern as of the Southern Continent, we find so various an Account among the several Geographers that have written of them, (not any two of them agreeing in one and the same order) that to reconcile the dif∣fering methods of so many disagreeing Authors, would be an endless Work; wherefore we shall pitch upon the surest course, and not omitting the mention of any of the Provinces taken notice of by the said Authors, hereby endeavor to take in whatsoever material hath been observ'd by all of them, and by the way take oc∣casion to shew how one differs from another in the distribution of them. Those therefore of the 
Northern America
 (that as near as can be we may bring many into one) seem most fitly describ'd in this following order: 1. 
Estotiland.
 2. 
Terra Laboratoris,
 or 
Nova Britannia.
 3. 
Canada,
 or 
Nova Francia.
 4. 
Nova Scotia.
 5. 
Norumbegua.
 6. 
New England.
 7. 
New Netherland,
 now call'd 
New York,
 as being in the possession of the 
English.
 8. 
Mary-Land.
 9. 
Apalchen,
 now call'd 
Virginia.
 10. 
Carolina.
 11. 
Florida.
 12. 
Jucatan.
 13. 
Guatimala,
 containing 
Chiapa, Vera Paz, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa∣rica, Veragua, Guatimala,
 properly so call'd. 14. The Kingdom of 
Mexico,
 or 
New Spain,
 containing the Arch-bishoprick of 
Mexico, Mechoacan, Tlascalla, Guaxata, Panu∣co, Tabasco.
 15. 
New Gallicia,
 containing 
Guadalajara, Xalisco, Chiametla, Couliacan, Cinoloa, Zacatecas.
 16. 
New Biscay.
 17. 
New Mexico.
 18. 
Cibola,
 wherein are menti∣on'd 
Tontonteac
 and 
Nova Granada.
 19. 
Quivira;
 to which by most Authors is added 
California,
 which being an Island, we thought fit to reserve to be spoken of among the Islands, as also 
Terra Nova,
 or 
New-found Land;
 which last lies utmost East, as the other West of 
Northern America.
 Some there are also (and particularly Monsieur 
De Martini
) who among the above-mention'd Provinces have inserted 
Groenland,
 though doubtless with little reason, since should it be granted that it is not divi∣ded by any Sea, yet it is evident, if any credit may be given to all modern Maps and Globes, that the greatest part of 
Groenland
 lies in the Hemisphere of the known World, and therefore we have judg'd it most convenient to refer the particular mention thereof to the Description of the 
Arctick Region.


The Islands of 
Northern America
 are 1. 
Terra Nova,
 or 
New-found Land.
 2. The Island of 
Assumption.
 3. The 
Bermudas,
 or 
Summer-Islands.
 4. 
Hispaniola.
 5. 
St. John Porto Rico.
 6. 
Cuba.
 7. 
Jamaica.
 8. The 
Lucayes.
 9. The 
Caribbees,
 being twenty eight in number. 10. The Isles of 
Sotavento.
 11. 
Trinidado;
 and 12. 
California,
 the biggest of all the 
American
 Islands.


The length of the 
West-Indies
 is generally computed to be from the utmost South of 
Terra Magellanica,
 to the farthest North of 
Estotiland,
 about six thousand 
English
 Miles, reaching from about sixty Degrees of Northern, to fifty three of Southern Latitude; the breadth from 
St. Michael
 or 
Piura
 Westward, to 
Parabaya,
 a Town on the Coast of 
Brasile
 Eastward, three thousand nine hundred Miles, and the whole compass thirty thousand.




SECT. II. Estotiland.


THat the 
English
 have been very great Undertakers of Voyages and Discove∣ries towards the North-West, appears by the Denomination of divers Pla∣ces, both from the Persons which have Sail'd thitherward, and also from such of our own Countrey Names as were thought fit to be there fix'd, as beyond the 
Arctick Circle,
 are Sir 
James Lancaster
's 
Sound,
 Sir 
Dudley Diggs
's 
Cape,
 Queen 
Annes

Foreland, Cumberland Isles, Davis
's 
Straight, &c.
 on this side toward the 
Arctick Circle, Button
's and 
Brigg
's 
Bay, Hudson
's 
Sea,
 otherwise term'd 
Mare Christianum,
 out of which more Westerly runs a narrow Sea call'd 
Hudson
's 
Straight:
 beyond 
Hudson
's 
Sea
 towards the 
Arctick Circle
 is a place call'd 
New North-Wales;
 and on this side an∣swerable to it, between 
Button
's 
Bay
 and the 
Christian Sea,
 lies 
New South-Wales;
 all which places we find generally set down in the 
American
 Hemisphere, but in the Geographical Discourses thereof little is said of them, if so much as nam'd. The farthest part of Land Northward, between 
Hudson
's 
Gulph
 and 
Hudson
's 
Straight,
 betwixt fifty seven and sixty Degrees of Northern Latitude, goes generally by the Name of 
Estotiland,
 I mean that properly so call'd (for 
Estotiland
 is by some as largely taken as 
Canada,
 by 
Cluverius, Golnitzius, Peter du Val,
 and others, namely for all that Tract of Land extending from that supposed 
Straight
 of 
Ansan,
 which di∣vides 
America
 from 
Asiatick Tartary,
 as far as the utmost point of Land that shoots toward the 
Atlantick Ocean
) which Southerly towards 
Terra Laboratoris
 is bounded with a River vulgarly call'd 
Rio Nevado,
 or 
The Snowy River. Estotiland
 seems to have deriv'd its Name from its lying more Easterly than the rest of the Provinces, and, according as 
Nova Britannia
 is plac'd in some Charts, might very well be taken for the same, though it hath not been so term'd by any Author, but rather 
Terra Laboratoris, Cortereatis,
 and 
Nova Britannia
 are generally receiv'd to be all one.


This Province is affirm'd by 
Matthias Quadus,
 and 
J. Antonius Maginus,
 to have been the first discover'd Countrey of the new World, and that by 
Antonius Zeno,
 a Patrician of 
Venice,
 in the Year of our Lord 1390. which was long before the Ex∣pedition of 
Columbus,
 through the encouragement of 
Zichmus,
 King of the Isle of 
Friezland;
 but by whomsoever found out, or at whatsoever time, it is commonly affirm'd to be not ill furnish'd with Provisions of all sorts, as Beasts, Birds, Fish, Fowl, and Fruits, having a Soil indifferent fertile, in respect of the coldness of the Climate.
 The People in general (for some there are that live wild and salvage up and down the Woods, and go naked, whereas the Clothing of the Countrey is the Skins of Beasts and of Sea-Calves, call'd 
Morses
) are reported not onely tolerably civil, but also ingenious and expert both in mechanick Arts, and other necessary Faculties, insomuch that the first Voyagers to this place are said to have observ'd of them upon this first Discovery, That they sow'd Corn, brew'd Beer and Ale, and Traded by Sea to 
Greenland, Friezland,
 and other places, to the distance of fifteen hundred Miles; and that they were not altogether void of the use of Letters, but that their Character was onely proper to themselves and not intelligible by any other Nation: Moreover, there is a certain Tradition, that there was here and there some little knowledge of the 
Latine
 Tongue amongst them, and that there were found divers 
Latine
 Books in a Library of one of their Kings; the reason of which, if true, is conjectur'd to be from certain 
Europeans
 who understood that Language, having in Ages past suffer'd shipwrack upon those Coasts, where chancing to abide either through constraint or choice, they might haply at their Decease leave behind them some Books and other Monuments of the 
Latine
 Tongue. They were ob∣serv'd to use such a kind of Javelin or short Dart, as was known to be us'd by the People of 
Java,
 and some other Islands of the 
East-Indies;
 whereupon it seems not wholly improbable, that they might for a long time have entertain'd Traffick and Correspondence with them.


The 
Morses,
 or Sea-Calves before mention'd, are about the bigness of a young Heifer, the Hunting of which by the Natives, who take them in great numbers, is to them in the stead of Whale-fishing, which is not there so good, for they draw a great quantity of Train-Oyl out of them. On each side of the Jaw of this amphi∣bious

Creature (for it is said to live very much on the Land, as well as in the Water) there sticks out a crooked Tusk, winding downward like an Elephants 
Proboscis,
 above a Cubit in length, and as white and hard as Ivory: It is esteem'd of great venue, at least it passes for such among those who take it for other than what it is, for it is frequently vended for Unicorns-horn; of which imposture Dr. 
Brown
 takes notice, and gives a Caution against in his 
Vulgar Errors.


This Countrey is suppos'd, and that probably enough, to have store of Brass and Iron Mines; but for the Mines of Gold and Silver, which some have imagin'd there, the Northerly Situation of the Countrey, and by consequence the coldness of the Climate, give sufficient cause to question the truth of any such assertion. What chief Towns, Cities, Rivers and Mountains there are in this Province, is not yet deliver'd by any, onely 
Maginus
 and 
Quadus
 make mention of four principal Rivers, which disperse themselves through the Countrey, and take their source out of a great Mountain in the midst thereof.






SECT. III. Terra Laboratoris.


TErra Laboratoris,
 by some call'd 
Nova Britannia,
 by others 
Corterealis,
 (though there are some who make 
Laboratoris
 and 
Corterealis
 two distinct Countreys, comprehended, according to 
Peter du Val,
 under 
Nova Britannia,
 as the more general Province; or, according to 
Cluverius,
 under 
Canada
) lies from about fifty four to fifty seven Degrees of Northern Latitude, between 
Estotiland
 and the River 
Canada,
 which 
Maginus
 and some others, though for what reason is not express'd, name 
Fretum trium Fratrum, The Bay of the three Brethren;
 others, 
The River of St. Laurence,
 and is, according to the said Author, of so vast a bigness, that the Mouth of it extends it self thirty five 
Italian
 Miles wide; likewise of such a length, as to have been navigated a continu'd Voyage of eight hundred Miles. The deno∣mination of 
Terra de Laborador,
 or 
Laboratoris,
 seems probably enough conjectur'd to be from the cultivability (if one may so term it) of the Soil, or its aptness for Cultivation or Tillage; that is, because by the painful Hand of the Labourer or Husband-man it may be rendred so fertile, as to yield all sorts of Grain and Fruits; haply in allusion to that fruitful Countrey of 
Campania
 in 
Italy,
 vulgarly known by the Name of 
Terradi Lavoro.
 As for the Appellation of 
Terra Corterealis,
 it need not be question'd, but that it derives it self from 
Gaspar Corterealis,
 a 
Portuguese
 Gentle∣man, who about the Year of our Lord 1500. is thought by some to have made the first discovery of these Parts; though Sir 
Sebastian Cabot
 a 
Venetian,
 is more generally believ'd to have been the Man that (under the favour and countenance of 
Henry
 the Seventh, King of 
England
) first discover'd them, at least the adjoyning Island 
Terra Nova,
 or 
New-found Land;
 but just onely discover'd, being hinder'd the far∣ther prosecution of that Design, by the important Affairs in which the said King was about that time involv'd; neither did 
Corterealis,
 whether he was the first, or came after, do any more, for returning within a year after his first setting out, he was never heard of; nor, as 
Osorius
 a 
Portuguese
 Historian writes, any of his Com∣pany, being all suppos'd to have been drown'd by Shipwrack; and in like man∣ner 
Michael Corterealis,
 who the year following set forth with two Ships in quest of his Brother 
Gaspar.
 Upon which series of Misfortunes the 
Portuguese
 being wholly discourag'd, and giving over this Design, the 
French
 of 
Armorica
 or 
Bretany
 succeed them in it with somewhat better success about the Year 1504. whereupon it came to

be term'd 
Nova Britannia,
 or 
New Britain.
 The ancient Inhabitants of this place were formerly of a Nature, like the generality of the 
American
 People, somewhat bruitish and salvage, but by long conversation with the 
French,
 are said to have cast off their original wildness, and become more civilly manner'd: they are very jealous of their Wives, by report much addicted to Soothsaying, though otherwise having little of Religion, or of any other kind of Learning; they dwell for the most part in Caves under Ground, feed chiefly upon Fish, and are accounted most ex∣pert Archers. Whatever places the 
French
 have built here besides, those of chiefest note are 
St. Maries, Cabo Marzo,
 and 
Brest.






SECT. IV. Canada, or New France.


CAnada,
 as it is taken for one and the same Province with 
New France,
 con∣tains 
New France,
 properly so call'd, 
Nova Scotia, Norumbega,
 and some ad∣joyning Islands, as the 
Canada
 of 
Cluverius,
 lying more North-Westerly, comprehends (as we have already intimated) 
Estotiland, Laboratoris,
 and 
Corterealis,
 and, according to the most modern Division (for that of 
Cluverius
 neither con∣sents with the latest Authors, nor agrees with exact Survey, it being nam'd 
Canada,
 in respect the River 
Canada
 runs through it) hath on the North 
Terra Corterealis,
 on the South 
New England,
 and on the East the Ocean, and hath between forty five and fifty two or fifty three Degrees of Northern Latitude.
 The River 
Canada
 is judg'd to be the largest of all the Rivers of 
America,
 as those Rivers generally the largest of all in the World besides; it rises in the Western parts of this Province which remain yet undiscover'd, and in some places spreads it self into huge Lakes, some of them a hundred Miles in compass, with many little Islands dispersed up and down in them, and so running from the West about a hundred Leagues, falls at last into the North part of 
St. Lawrence Bay,
 being that wide 
Emboucheure
 of thirty five Miles breadth already mention'd. This River is extraordinary full of Fish, among which there is one sort more remarkable than the rest, call'd by the Inha∣bitants 
Cadhothuis,
 having Heads resembling the Heads of Hares, and Bodies as white as Snow; they are taken for the most part before the Isle 
de Lievres.
 The Countrey on both sides of the River is pleasant and indifferently fertile, especially towards the South-West, where upwards from the River the Ground rises into many little Hills, invested most of them with Vines, with which and several other sorts of Trees this Countrey abounds, being well water'd with a great many lesser Streams, all of them falling into the River 
Canada.


That this Countrey is term'd 
New France,
 from having been discover'd by the 
French,
 at least more fully than before, there needs no question to be made; but whether 
Joannes Verrazanus,
 under 
Francis
 the First of 
France,
 or 
Sebastian Cabot
 before spoken of, were the first in this Discovery, may admit of some dispute: the 
Cabots
 indeed, (for 
John
 the Father is by some mention'd to have accompanied his Son) who by all are own'd the first Discoverers of 
New-found-Land
 and 
Terra de Baccalaos,
 are also commonly reputed to have first found out the Province of 
New France,
 together with some parts adjacent, though perhaps it might be upon this Ground that 
Terra de Nova,
 or 
New-found-Land,
 not being known at first to be an Island 
New France
 and that might be taken for one continu'd Province; and it ap∣pears so much the more probable, because 
Canada,
 or 
Nova Francia,
 is by some call'd 
Terra Nova;
 however it be, or whoever were the first Adventurers, 
Quarteri
 and

Champlain
 are the two 
French
-men that have gain'd so much fame by making a more ample and particular search into these parts, that this Province may seem from thence to have sufficient claim to the Title of 
New France,
 whereof that part more especially so call'd, lies on the North-side of the River 
Canada,
 and Southward to 
Terra Corterealis.
 The Winter is here very long, and so much the more severe by reason of a cold North-West Wind which blows most part of the Winter Season, and brings with it so thick a Snow, that it continues upon the Ground most com∣monly till after 
May.
 The Countrey is for the most part wooddy, but in the Champain parts thereof very fruitful of Corn, and all sorts of Grain, especially Pulse: It hath also Fish, Fowl, wild Deer, Bears, Marterns, and Foxes in abun∣dance, and of Hares such plenty, that one of the little Islands belonging to this Pro∣vince, is by the 
French
 nam'd 
L' Isle des Lievres,
 or 
The Island of Hares:
 But the most peculiar Commodity belonging to this Countrey is the 
Esurgnuy,
 a kind of Shell-Fish, extraordinary white, and approv'd of singular vertue for the stanching of Blood; to which purpose they make Bracelets of them, not onely for their own use, but also to vend them to others; but 
John de Laet
 and others have observ'd no other than a superstitious use of them amongst the Salvages, in their Funeral Rites for the Dead: the manner of their taking it is very remarkable; for when any one is condemn'd to die, or taken Prisoner, they cut off all his fleshy parts in long slices, and then throw him into the River, where they let him lie twelve hours, and at last pulling him out again find his Wounds full of 
Esurgnui. Quadus
 and 
Maginus
 make mention of three ancient Towns, namely 
Canada
 (denominated as the Pro∣vince, from the River) 
Hochelai
 and 
Hochchelaga,
 giving Name to a Territory about it, which Geographers either take no notice of, or make some question of the be∣ing of such Towns; however, a late Describer of the 
West-Indies,
 not mentioning the other two, gives this description of the last, 
viz. Hocbchelaga:


This City (saith he) said to be the Seat and Residence of a King of this Country whom the Natives, at least some of them, acknowledge and reverence, carrying him sometimes in great pomp upon their Shoulders sitting upon a Carpet of Beasts Skins, is situate far within Land, at a distance of six or seven Leagues from the River 
Canada,
 and is a kind of fortifi'd place, encompass'd about with a three∣fold Range of Timber Ramparts one within another, of about two Rods high from the Ground, with cross Planks, or pieces of Timber jutting out, on purpose to hinder an Enemy's Scaling or getting up; towards the top there is as it were a Scaffold or Gallery fram'd, from whence they may throw down Stones (of which there is always good store ready, or what else to annoy the Assailants: It hath one onely Gate for Entrance, and that likewise well fortifi'd after their manner: There are guess'd to be in it fifty or sixty great Houses, built (as the maner of the 
Americans
 that live in Houses usually is) in a square Figure, each side being about fifty Foot long, or more, and sixteen or twenty broad, but not many Stories high; and in the midst of the Court or void space; a place to make their Fire, and do other necessary work about it. Moreover the Territory round about this Town is both rich in Soil, and pleasant in Prospect.


Besides these three above-mention'd Towns there are several others, which are not untaken notice of in the most modern Descriptions and Maps, 
viz.
 1. 
Stadac,
 or 
Stadacone,
 somewhat Westward of a small Isle call'd 
The Isle d' Orleance;
 2. 
Que∣beque,
 which being made a Colony of the 
French,
 and the Natives expell'd, came to be Entituled 
St. Croix;
 3. 
Tadoussac,
 which lies in that part of the Countrey denomi∣nated from the River 
Saguenay,
 and by some call'd at this day 
Nouvelle Biscaye,
 a de∣lightful place, and full of stately Trees, and hath likewise a good and safe Haven,

capable of receiving twenty Ships; 4. 
Trois Rivieris,
 or three Rivers; 5. 
Mon∣real;
 6. 
Sillery;
 7. 
Richelieu;
 besides two strong Castles or Forts, 
Franceroy
 and St. 
Lewis;
 the First built by 
Monsieur Robeval
 at his Landing here, about the Year 1540. the other design'd for a Colony, in the Year 1611. by 
Monsieur Champlany,
 but hinder'd by the Invasion of the 
Iroquois.
 The smaller Rivers that run out of the Gulph of St. 
Lawrence,
 and the grand River 
Canada
 towards the North, on which side chiefly lies this Province, are, 1. 
Chichesedec,
 2. St. 
Margarite,
 3. 
Lesquemin,
 4. 
Saquenay,
 before-mention'd, 5. 
Montonne;
 and on the South side, the River 
Mary.
 The principal Tribes of the ancient Natives of this Countrey were; on the North side of 
Canada
 the 
Canadans,
 the 
Betisiamites,
 the 
Hurons,
 the 
Algoniquins,
 the 
Quenongebins,
 the 
Algoingequins,
 the 
Attagopantans,
 the 
Atticameques,
 the 
Nipisiriniens;
 and on the South side, the 
Etechemins,
 and the chief Heads or Princes of these Tribes were call'd 
Sagamores.


Jaques Quartier
 Complementing their King 
Agouthanna,
 took up his Quarters a whole Winter at St. 
Croix,
 a Sandy Promontory, overflow'd by the River 
Canada,
 into which falls the Lake 
de Champlain,
 grown round about with Chestnut Trees; in it breeds the strange Fish call'd 
Chaousarou,
 generally ten Foot long,
 with Heads like Sharks, and two rows of Teeth-in their Mouths, their Skins full of strong Scales, which are sufficient Shields against Swords and Lances, are great devourers of other Fish and Fowls, which they take after this manner, 
viz.
 they swim a∣mongst Reeds or Canes, and lie still with their Mouths open; whereat the Birds sitting down upon them, are immediately swallow'd.


The Natives of 
Nova Francia
 anoint their bodies with Oil; in the Summer they go naked, and in the Winter mantle themselves in Furs. Their Warlike Accoutre∣ments are Darts and Clubs, but chiefly great Shields. They are revengeful, cruel, and fraudulent; their Women common to all Men, from fifteen to twenty, after which, Marrying, they become very Chaste. Their Diet is 
Indian
 Corn, fresh and salt Fish, Venison, 
Buffalo's
 and Beavers flesh; wiping their Fingers (when greasie) on their Heads, or their Dogs backs, which wait for the Scraps.


At that season when the Corn covers the ground, to any heighth, they eat Cockles, Dogs, dead Caryon, and the Skins wherewith they Clothe themselves. When they have eaten their fill, they tabering on their Bellies, cry, 
Tapoue Mikispoun,
 that is, 
Ve∣rily I am satisfi'd.
 They give their Sick a speedy Cure, either immediately killing them, or inhumanely exposing them to the Woods, to be devour'd by ravenous Beasts, but if they die suddenly, they in howling tone pronounce 
Ove, Ove,
 thereby to chase the Souls of the Deceas'd out of their Huts; they stick the bodies on Wood∣den Prongs, cover them with Bark, and lay their Clothes and Arms by them; all what remains of the Funeral Feasts is burnt, whereas at other times, what e're is brought on their Table they eat, though ready to burst. They make the first Proofs of their Valour by undergoing a most prodigious Torment, in this man∣ner;
 Two by consent tie their naked Arms together, on which they suffer burning Sulphur to be pour'd, till the flesh starts from the bone; if either of them shrink, or pull back his Arm, he is accounted by them ever after as an ignominious and base Coward. They call God 
Atahocan,
 and believe that one 
Messou
 first drowning the world by a general Deluge, restor'd it again after a wonderful manner,
 
viz. Messou
 hunting with Wolves, they scented a Deer which being closely pursu'd, leap'd into a neighboring Pool, the Wolves following it, were drown'd;
 
Messou
 coming thither, stood amaz'd at a Bird, which inform'd him, that the Wolves were pluck'd down, and held fast in the bottom by horrible Monsters, where∣upon he diving, the Pool immediately began to swell, and at last the whole sur∣face

of the Earth to be overflow'd. 
Messou
 afterwards let a Raven flie to fetch a Clod of Earth, but in vain, for all the Land lay drown'd in Water; at last a Rat diving to the bottom, brought a lump of Earth, out of which 
Messou
 restor'd the World; shot Arrows into Trees, which became fruitful Branches. Here also re∣side an innumerable many 
Sorcerers,
 call'd 
Pillotoa
's, which sometimes being pos∣sess'd with a Frenzy, scourge themselves in a terrible manner, insomuch that the Blood runs down by their sides: These People are held in great esteem, for they boast themselves to have their Original from Heaven upon this occasion,
 
viz. Ataensic,
 a certain great Queen or Goddess, residing above the Stars, had a sick Hus∣band, who Dreamt that he should be restor'd to his former health so soon as he could but taste of the Fruits which grew on a Tree, whereby the Family of Hea∣ven were kept alive, but that the Tree must needs be cut down, which 
Ataensic
 obeying, gave onely two blows, when the Tree, to her great amazement, fell out of Heaven down to the Earth; there being by this means nothing more left to eat in Heaven: 
Ataensic
 follow'd the fallen Tree, and being big with Child, bare a Daughter, which growing up to years, was Deliver'd of two Daughters, 
viz. Taoviscaron
 and 
Jouskeha,
 the eldest of which slew the youngest: By these Fables we may discern their obscure knowledge of 
Noah
's Flood, 
Eve
's Fall, and 
Cain
's Mur∣der. No less ridiculous is that which they believe concerning the Creation, 
viz.
 That the Waters were inclos'd within a Frog, which 
Jouskeha
 causing to be cut open, all Streams and Rivers issuing out, had their Original from thence: This done, 
Jouskeh
 open'd a Pit, out of which came all sorts of Beasts; they ascribe a Bodily shape to the Soul,
 as also Immortality, but that they live together in a great Village towards the West; from which removing sometimes, they knock at the Doors of their former Friends in the Night, and sow deserted Grounds: That the Journey towards the Village in which the Souls reside is very strange; the High∣way thither beginning at a Rock nam'd 
Ecaregniendi,
 where they first Paint their Faces, which done, they go to a Hut inhabited by an old Man, nam'd 
Osotrach,
 who takes the Brains out of the Souls Head; after which they walk to a broad Ri∣ver, which they cross on a narrow Plank or Bridge, on which a Dog encountring, forces them to leap into the Water, which carries them down to the foremention'd Village. They acknowledge one 
Oki
 for the Governor of the Sea, and seasons of the Year:
 They also Religiously Worship the Rock 
Tsankchi Arasta,
 which they believe some ages ago was once a Man, but afterward Transform'd into a Rock, in which a 
Daemon
 resides, who can make their Journies either successful or dan∣gerous, wherefore they offer him Tobacco.
 Their opinion of Thunder is like∣wise very ridiculous, for they say that the Devil endeavoring to vomit a horrible Serpent, by straining to evacuate the same, rents the Clouds, and occasions Thun∣der. Lastly,
 They relate of a Dwarf call'd 
Thakabech,
 who climb'd on the top of a Tree, which by his blowing thereon grew so high, that it touch'd the Clouds, and 
Thakabech
 easily stept into them, where he found all sorts of delight and plea∣sure; but having a Sister on Earth, descended again along the Tree, and fetching his Sister, conducted her above the Stars; mean while, 
Thakabech
 going in the Night to see if he had taken any thing in his Net which he had pitch'd, found it full of Fire, and observing the same very narrowly, saw that he had taken the Sun, but durst not approach the same, by reason of its great heat; but making a Mouse, sent her to gnaw the Net in pieces, and set the Sun at liberty. Every twelfth year they keep an extraordinary great Funeral-Feast;
 for on the Set-time they flock from all parts to the appointed place, every one carrying thither the Bo∣dies or Bones of their Deceas'd Friends, wrapt up in Clothes, and hang them over

their Meat, which they eat singing; such fond and Superstitious Conceits make up the Religion of these poor deluded People.






SECT. V. Accadia, or Nova Scotia.


NOva Scotia,
 or 
New Scotland,
 formerly call'd 
Accadia,
 is commonly accounted a part of 
New France,
 (
viz.
 that part which lying on the South side of the River 
Canada,
 and shooting South-Easterly into a bosom of the Sea, forms it self into a 
Peninsula,
 between the Gulph of St. 
Lawrence;
 and the Bay 
Francoise
) nevertheless, because of the different concernments of this part of the Countrey, in regard the right of claim to several places in this district; most especially of all 
No∣va Francia
 besides, hath been long in dispute between 
Us
 and the 
French,
 it will be most convenient to Treat of it apart; and because the Series of Affairs, from its first discovery, till of late years, appears faithfully represented on the 
English
 part, in a Remonstrance Address'd to the King and Council by Sir 
Lewis Kirk,
 and his Brother 
John Kirk
 Esquire; it will not be amiss (onely adding some few things up∣on occasion) to follow exactly the Narration of Affairs, deliver'd in the said Re∣monstrance to this effect.


1. THe whole Tract or Space of Land in 
America,
 lying on either side of the River 
Canada,
 which a long time since were known by the Names of 
Nova Francia,
 and 
Nova Scotia,
 were at first discover'd and found out by the 
Eng∣lish,
 in the time of 
Henry
 the Seventh, King of 
England;
 which Expedition was first undertaken at the Command and Charges of that King; afterwards further'd and carry'd on by the favorable Aspect of Queen 
Elizabeth;
 so that in process of time, for many years together, the said Tract of Ground, with abso∣lute Priviledge of free Commerce, fell under the Jurisdiction and Power of the Crown of 
England:
 Neither was it unto any other 
Christian
 Princes, or their Sub∣jects more clearly known or discover'd, untill about the year 1600. some of the 
French
 understanding the benefit arising by Traffique in the River of St. 
Lawrence,
 having formerly seiz'd upon that Tract of Land, situate on the North side of the said Floud or River 
Canada,
 did afterwards, in 
Anno
 1604. (
under the Con∣duct of
 Peter de Gua, 
Lord of
 Monts, 
who in the year
 1606. 
was follow'd by
 Monsieur de Pourtrincourt) Possess themselves of 
L' Accadie,
 lying on the South side of the said River, naming the whole 
Nova Francia,
 challenging to themselves for many years, at least 
de facto,
 the Possession thereof, with sole liberty of Com∣merce there.


2. In 
Anno
 1621. King 
James
 of 
England
 looking upon the Possession gotten there by the 
French,
 as upon an Invasion, did by his Letters Patents Grant un∣to Sir 
William Alexander
 a 
Scotchman
 (
Created afterwards Earl of
 Sterling, 
by King
 Charles 
the First
) 
L' Accadie,
 by the Name of 
Nova Scotia;
 who in the year 1622, and 1623. 
after Sir
 Samuel Argal 
had driven out
 Biard 
and
 Masse, 
and demolishing their Fort, carry'd them Prisoners to
 Virginia; having obtain'd the Possession thereof, they Planted a Colony therein, and kept Possession for about two years after, until such time, as upon the Marriage of his Majesty King 
Charles
 the First, with the Lady 
Henrietta Maria,
 the said 
L' Accadie,
 or 
Nova Scotia,
 was by Order of the King of 
England
 return'd into the Possession of the 
French.


3. Afterwards a War arising between his Majesty King 
Charles
 the First, and

Lewis
 the XIII. 
Anno
 1627, and 1628. Sir 
David Kirk
 and his Brethren and Rela∣tions of 
England,
 did by vertue of his Majestie's Commission, send to Sea (at their great charge) first three, afterwards nine Ships, with Warlike Preparations for recovering of the Possession of the said Lands, lying on either side of the said River 
Canada,
 and to expel and eject all the 
French
 Trading in those Parts, wherein they had good Success; and in 
Anno
 1627. did there seize upon about eighteen of the 
French
 Ships, wherein were found a hundred thirty five Pieces of Ord∣nance, design'd for relief of the 
Royal Fort
 in 
L' Accadie,
 and 
Quebeck
 in 
Nova Francia,
 under the Command of 
Monsieur de Rocmand,
 and 
Monsieur de la Tour,
 Fa∣ther of 
de la Tour,
 Governor of the said 
Royal Fort,
 whom, together with the said Ships and Guns, they brought into 
England;
 and in the year 1628. they Possess'd themselves of the whole Region of 
Canada
 or 
Nova Francia,
 situate on the North side of the River, together with the Fort or Castle of 
Quebeck,
 Sir 
Lewis Kirk
 be∣ing then constituted Governor of the place, the 
French
 being then either expell'd or convey'd into 
England,
 and the Arms of the King of 
England
 being publickly there erected, and every where plac'd; and before the year 1628. it was brought to pass by the said Sir 
William Alexander,
 (assisted both by the advice and charge of the said 
Kirk
) that in the parts of 
L' Accadie,
 or 
Nova Scotia,
 on the South side of the River 
Canada,
 the whole place, with the Forts thereon built, being by him subdu'd, presently came under the Power of the King of 
England;
 that Region on the South side falling into the Possession of the said Sir 
William Alexander,
 and that on the North side, into the Possession of the 
Kirks.


4. On 
March
 29. 1632. a Peace being concluded between King 
Charles
 the First, and 
Lewis
 the XIII. it was amongst other things on the part of the King of 
England
 agreed, That all the Forts, as well in 
L' Accadie
 as in 
Nova Francia,
 should be restor'd into the Possession of the Subjects of the 
French
 King, which was ex∣actly perform'd on the part of the 
English,
 though to the great damage of the 
Kirks;
 but on the part of the 
French,
 although it was agreed, as in the fourth and fifth Articles of Peace is set down, (to which reference is had) yet nothing was ever perform'd of their parts; so that the 
Kirks
 did thereupon suffer loss, to the value of five thousand Pounds 
Sterl.
 which were to be paid them by 
Monsieur de Cane
 a 
French-man,
 but remain unpaid to this day.


5. 
Anno
 1633. the King of 
England
 taking notice, that although the Forts and Castles, according to the League, were deliver'd up into the Possession of the 
French,
 (especially such as had been erected during their Possession thereof) yet that his 
English
 Subjects were not to be excluded from Trade or free Commerce, in those Regions that were first Discover'd and Possess'd by his Subjects, did, with the advice of his Council, by his Letters Patents, Dated 
May
 11. 1633. upon consideration had of the Expences, which the said 
Kirks
 had laid out upon the re∣ducing of that Countrey with the Fort of 
Quebeck,
 to the value of 50000
lb
.; and also of their ready obeisance in resigning up the same on his Royal Command, Grant unto Sir 
Lewis Kirk,
 and his Brother 
John Kirk
 and his Associates, for the term of thirty one years (not yet expir'd) full Priviledge, not only of Trade and Commerce in the River 
Canada,
 and places on either side adjacent, but also to Plant Colonies, and build Forts and Bulwarks where they should think fit.


6. By vertue of which Commission, Sir 
Lewis Kirk
 and his Brother 
John Kirk,
 and his Associates, in the Moneth of 
February
 next following, 
viz.
 in 1633. set forth a Ship call'd 
The Merry Fortune,
 Laden with Goods of a considerable va∣lue, consign'd to those parts, where during her Trading there, without any just offence given; and in time of Peace, she was by the 
French
 forceably seiz'd on,

and carry'd into 
France,
 and her Lading, as if she had been lawful Prize, Confi∣scated; whereupon the 
Kirks
 suffer'd loss, to the value of twelve thousand Pounds. And although the Lord 
Scudamore,
 Ambassador in 
France,
 by the King of 
Englands
 special Command, and the said 
John Kirk
 being there in Person, by the King's Command, did often earnestly urge, that the Moneys due to the said 
Kirks,
 and the said Ship, with her Lading, might be restor'd, which for no other cause had been seiz'd upon and sold, but only for that by the King's Commission she was found Trading at 
Canada;
 yet he could obtain nothing, but after some years fruitless endeavors return'd into 
England
 without accomplishing his desires.


7. In the year 1654. 
Cromwel,
 although an unjust Usurper of the Government, yet upon consideration of the Premises, taking a just occasion for requiring the Possession of 
L' Accadie,
 sends forth several Ships under the Command of one 
Sedgwick,
 who by vertue of the Authority granted him by 
Cromwel,
 assaulted and subdu'd the aforesaid Forts in 
Nova Scotia,
 and restor'd them into the Possession of the 
English:
 And although in the year 1655. a League of firm Peace and Amity being concluded between 
Cromwel
 and the 
French
 King, the 
French
 Ambassador did often urge the Restitution to the Possession of the 
French;
 yet for the same cau∣ses aforesaid, which had mov'd 
Cromwel
 to seize upon them, it was thought fit still to retain the Possession of them; and although according to the purport of the twenty fifth Article of the Peace, Commissioners on both sides were to be ap∣pointed for the deciding and determining that Controversie; yet nothing was done therein, neither did the Commissioners ever meet within three Moneths, as in the twenty fourth Article of the Treaty was provided and agreed: So that now the case is very clear, that the Possession to the 
English
 remains firm and just, and that the Forts and Bulwarks before specifi'd, are without all peradventure under the Power and Jurisdiction of the King of 
England.


Since the Restauration of his present Majesty, the 
French
 Ambassador represent∣ing unto the King the Pretensions of the 
French
 unto the several Forts and other places in 
Accadie,
 and urging the non-performance of the Articles of Agreement between 
Oliver Cromwel
 and the 
French
 King, mov'd the King of 
England, As a pro∣fess'd Enemy to all Violence,
 for a Restitution of all the Forts and other places which were then in the possession of the 
English:
 Not long after which, whether upon the Ambassadors request, or upon other important Affairs intervening, or upon what other ground soever it were, the 
French
 were suffer'd to re-enter on the foresaid places, and do yet keep Possession of them, till such time as the 
English
 claim under the just Title of the 
Kirks,
 shall meet with some fit occasion of being reviv'd.


That which we suppose gives the 
French
 so much the more confidence in their claim of this Country, is their presumption upon the Expedition of 
James Quartier,
 whom they will have to be the first Discoverer, if not Possessor, not onely of the Isle of 
Assumption,
 but also of this Coast of 
Nova Francia,
 not taking notice it seems of 
Sebastian Cabot,
 under 
Henry
 the Seventh.


The chief places of Note in this Countrey, are, 1. 
Port Royal,
 a Colony of 
French,
 said to have been Planted there by 
Monsieur de Montz
 in 1604. by report, capable of receiving a thousand Ships; and in 1613. (the 
French
 being driven out by Sir 
Sa∣muel Argal,
 Governor of 
Virginia,
 who took Prisoners 
Biard
 and 
Masse,
 and demo∣lish'd the Fort at 
Port Royal
) given by Patent, as aforemention'd, to Sir 
William Alex∣ander;
 afterwards by him sold again to the 
French;
 then in the time of 
Oliver Crom∣wel
 re-taken by Major 
Sedgwick;
 lastly, re-possess'd by the 
French.
 2. St. 
Luke's Bay,
 or 
Portua Mouton.
 3. 
Gaspe,
 or 
Gachepe.
 4. 
The Haven of Passepay.
 5. 
The Bay de Toutes

Isles.
 6. 
The Fort de la Heve.
 7. 
The Cape of Sable.
 Within the Southern Point 
Forchu,
 lies the Isle 
Longu,
 which boasts of a Silver Mine.


The most noted People of the ancient Inhabitants of 
Accadie
 were the 
Iroquois,
 ly∣ing most South-Westerly upon the Sea Coast, who us'd to drive a great Trade in Beavers and other Commodities.


Westerly before the River 
Chovacoet
 lies 
Bacchus Isle,
 full of Vineyards.


The Inhabitants thereof differ very much from other Salvages, for they shave all the Hair from the Crown of their Head, wear long Locks behind, pleited to∣gether, and stuck full of Feathers, Paint their Faces black and red, go arm'd with Clubs, Bows, Pikes, and Arrows pointed with Fish-bones: They Till their Ground very handsomly, and divide their Fields with Hedges; they Plant To∣b
cco, Vines, Cabbages, 
Maiz,
 and divers Colour'd Beans; the stalks of the 
Maiz
 serve in stead of Poles for their Beans to run up upon.


Beyond 
Cape de Rocher
 lies the brave Harbor 
Beauport,
 which is secur'd from all Winds by an Isle which lies in the midst of it. The Countrey Manur'd in most pla∣ces, and Fruitful, feeds store of Men and Cattel.


The Haven of 
Malabar
 is surrounded in a manner with little Huts, cover'd with Mats, which in the Middle of the Room have a hole for the Smoke to go out at. The Southern shore is Sandy, and very dangerous.


For the more full exemplification of what concerns this part of 
Nova Francia,
 we shall conclude with an account of all Material Passages relating to the 
French,
 from their own Narrations as followeth.


THe first discoverer of this Coast was 
Jaques Quartier,
 sent out 
Anno
 1534. by the 
French
 King, 
Francis
 the First, in which Expedition he spent five Months; and going from thence to St. 
Male,
 discover'd the Inlet 
Lawrence, Terreneuf,
 and 
Natiscotec.
 The following year prosecuting his Voyage, he Sail'd into the great River 
Canada,
 and Winter'd near St. 
Croix,
 where he lost divers of his Men by the Scurvy, a Distem∣per till that time altogether unknown; and such was his condition, that none of his Men had escap'd with life, had not the Inhabitants taught him to cure the same with the Bark and Leaves of the Tree 
Annedda;
 with which many recovering, 
Quartier
 Weigh'd Anchor, and treacherously carry'd the King 
Donnacona
 with many of his Nobles, Prisoners to 
France;
 but most of them dying, 
Quartier
 brought only a few of them back with him in his third Voyage, six years after the first, when ar∣riving in the Haven St. 
Croix,
 he cast up a strong Fort, which he nam'd 
Charles∣bourg Royal,
 where he staid a whole Winter. 
Joan de la Roque,
 whom the 
French
 King had made Governor of 
Quartier
's new-discover'd Countries, Sailing thither with three Ships, met with 
Quartier
's Fleet near 
Terreneuf;
 from whence he was then going home, because he saw no hopes of subduing the Salvages with so small a Force as he had brought with him from 
France.
 But 
de la Roque
 endeavoring to make a further discovery of 
Canada,
 Sail'd up the River 
Saguenay,
 where spending both time and Money, he was Commanded home by the 
French
 King, and the fruit∣less Expeditions lay dead till about 1604.


When 
Peter de Monts
 obtaining Letters Patents to Trade for Furs in the fore∣mention'd Countries, Sail'd with two Ships beyond 
Accadie,
 up St. 
Lawrence Bay,
 where he Landed on the Isle St. 
Croix,
 where of ninety seven Men, with which he staid there a whole Winter, he lost thirty five; but having fresh Supplies sent him from 
France,
 he remov'd to 
Port Royal,
 where leaving forty Men, he return'd home; these forty being reduc'd to twenty three, and in great want, walking a∣long the Sea-shore in a despairing condition, espy'd a Ship coming up with full

Sail, which upon nearer approach, prov'd a 
French
 Vessel,
 of which 
Poutrincourt
 was Commander, who receiving his wretched Countrey-men with great joy, took them with him to 
Port Royal,
 being sent thither on purpose to settle a Plantation in 
Accadie:
 Mean while the Letters Patent granted to 
Monts,
 being call'd in, the first Planters in 
Port Royal
 were forc'd to desert the same, and return home; and also 
Poutrincourt
 returning, came back again three years after to 
Port Royal,
 where find∣ing the Houses standing as he had left them, he Manur'd the Countrey all about, and endeavoring to Plant 
Christianity
 among the Natives, Christen'd among others an 
Accadian
 Lord, who was above a hundred years old; all which 
Poutrincourt
 Sail∣ing back to 
France,
 related at the Court.


The 
Jesuits
 being also inform'd thereof, obtain'd leave of the Queen to send 
Peter Biard
 and 
Euemond Masse
 thither, on pretence, that 
Henry
 the Fourth had him∣self promis'd them the same Priviledge in his Life time. But the Merchants at 
Diep,
 which were concern'd in the new Plantations with 
Poutrincourt,
 opposing the go∣ing over of the foremention'd 
Jesuits,
 express'd themselves very violent against them, and laid to their charge the Blood of the late King, which they said was yet reaking in 
Paris: What assurance
 (alleadg'd they) 
had their Goods which were in the Custody of Men inclin'd to the
 Spaniards? 
Must the
 Christian Religion 
be promulgated? There are so many Orders of
 Monks 
which may easily produce two Men; but if the Queen was resolv'd to send
 Jesuits 
thither, they desir'd restauration of the Monies which they had dis∣burs'd:
 To which 
Biard
 and 
Masse
 harkening, gather'd up the demanded Mo∣nies, under pretence of being requir'd towards the Preaching of the 
Christian Reli∣gion
 amongst these remote 
Heathens;
 by this means getting great Sums, they bought out the foremention'd Merchants, so that the new Plantations fell half to the 
Je∣suits,
 who setting Sail, and arriving at 
Port Royal,
 turn'd all things topsiturvy, and so thwarted 
Poutrincourt
 in his designs, that he was forc'd to complain to the 
French
 Court of the 
Jesuits
 oppression, whose aim it was to get all things into their own Possession; whereupon they Excommunicated 
Poutrincourt
's Son (who serv'd in his Father's place at Court, and gain'd the Duke 
Guereheville
 in 
France
 to be of their Party, by promising him, that he should share in the new Plantations for a contracted Sum of Money: After this they receiv'd all sorts of Arms and Ammu∣nition, with several Brass Guns, of the then King 
Lewis
 the XIII. and other gifts Collected and gather'd out of their several Societies, for two new 
Accadian
 Apo∣stles. 
Gilbert du Thet,
 a subtile man of the same Order, transported their Neces∣saries.


At this time all things going favorably with the 
Jesuits,
 they made themselves Masters of 
Port Royal,
 and began to raise a Fort on the River 
Pemtagovet;
 but there their happy Proceedings were stop'd, for Captain 
Argal
 before-mention'd, Sailing thither in vindication of the 
English,
 was encounter'd by 
du Thet,
 (who firing the first Gun on 
Argal,
 was by him taken off with Chain-shot) and taking 
Biard
 and 
Masse,
 carry'd them Prisoners to 
Virginia,
 and dismantled the Fort built at 
Port Roy∣al,
 after which it was by King 
James
 given by Patent to Sir 
William Alexander,
 as hath been already related, together with what of most remarkable hath happen'd since.








SECT. VI. Norumbegua.


NOrumbegua,
 lying between 
Nova Scotia
 Northward, and 
New England
 South∣ward, is so utterly not taken notice of by many as a distinct Province, that it might seem to be swallow'd up and lost in the two Countreys be∣tween which it lies, or at least to be thought a part of 
Virginia
 or 
New England
 (for 
Virginia
 largely taken is said to contain 
New England, Novum Belgium,
 and 
Virginia,
 especially so call'd) and that so much the rather, because the 
Bessabees,
 accounted by 
Sanson d' Abbeville
 an ancient People of 
New England,
 are written to have liv'd near the River 
Penobscot,
 which is reckon'd to be the same with 
Pemtegovet,
 or (as some will have it) 
Norumbegua,
 from which, or from a certain great City of that Name, the Country for fancy's sake must needs be denominated; but since most com∣monly we find it nam'd and treated of apart, it will not be improper to follow that method, carrying the Bounds of 
New England
 no farther Northward than the River 
Quinnebequi
 or 
Sagadahoc,
 and so determining the main part of this Countrey to that space between the aforesaid River and 
Pemtegovet,
 excepting a small Sou∣therly portion upon the Banks of the River 
Chovacovet;
 so that it appears chiefly situate under the forty third Degree of Northern Latitude.


As for the Towns or Cities of this Province, there is but a very uncertain ac∣count to be given, forasmuch as the pretended great City 
Norumbegua,
 from whence the Province should take its Appellation, is not acknowledg'd by any of the most authentick modern Writers, nor in any late Voyage or Discovery any mention made either of that or any other considerable Town or City. Dr. 
Heylin
 suppo∣seth it to be no other than 
Agguncia,
 a poor little Village, that seems compos'd of a company of Hutts or Sheaves, cover'd with the Skins of Beasts, or the Barks of Trees. But the most favourable conjecture is, that it might haply be the Ruines of an ancient Town, which the Natives call'd 
Arambeck,
 and had probably deserted it long before the arrival of the 
Europeans
 in those parts; however, it is not very probable that the Name of the Countrey should be deriv'd from this City, if ever there were any such, or from the River, which appears to have been term'd 
No∣rumbegua
 on purpose to make way for this derivation, whereas 
Pomtegovet
 is the an∣cient Appellation that properly belongs to it; nor hath any modern one been ap∣ply'd to it but that of 
Rio Grande,
 by 
Buno
 in his 
Comment
 upon 
Philip Cluverius,
 upon what ground is hard to tell, since it is observ'd by 
Heylin
 and others, to be neither large, nor otherwise much to be commended, being Navigable not above twenty or thirty Miles, in respect of its many great Cataracts and Falls of Water, an In∣convenience with which many other Rivers of 
America
 are prejudic'd, and rendred impassable.


Before and about the Mouth of this River, which is judg'd to be about eight or nine Miles broad, lie many small Islands, or rather Hills, inviron'd with Water, the chiefest of which is by the 
French
 call'd 
La Haute Isle,
 from the high and Moun∣tainous appearance of it to those that see it from afar off at Sea.


The aforemention'd 
Buno,
 though he names, as belonging to 
Norumbega,
 these several places, 
viz. Porto del Refugio, Porto Reale, Paradiso, Flora,
 and 
Angolema,
 from some obscure 
French
 testimonies, without particularising any Author, yet he after∣wards confesses, that the Names given by the 
French,
 and those apply'd by the 
Spa∣niards,
 are so various and disagreeing, and breed such a confusion, that no Charts or Descriptions had concluded upon either.




As for those who will have 
Norumbega
 deriv'd from 
Norwegia
 in respect of a Co∣lony brought thither from 
Norwey,
 if the Etymologie be not a little too much forc'd, the Invention may pass well enough till a better be found out.


In this Countrey the temperature of the Air is not bad, nor the Soil unfruitful, if it were well cultivated, chiefly towards the Rivers, and where it is not either overgrown with Woods, or craggy with Hills and mountainous Rocks: neither are the Woods unprofitable, for they afford good Timber, and all kind of necessary and useful Wood, especially Beeches, Fir-trees, Wallnut-trees, and other Nuts: The Plains are very pleasant, and yield good Pasturage, onely the Maritime Coasts are so shallow and full of Sands, that the Sailing near them is accounted some∣what dangerous; and this may be imagin'd to be the reason that no Authors have yet met with any Ports or Havens belonging to this Countrey, which they have thought worthy their notice.








CHAP. II. New England.


AS 
Canada
 is by some accounted a general Province, containing 
New France, L' Accadie, Norumbega,
 and other places, so under 
Virginia
 largely taken, are comprehended 
New England, New Netherlands,
 and 
Virginia
 properly so call'd; however, since that part which vulgarly goes under the Name of 
Virginia
 and 
New England
 were possess'd, if not discover'd, at several times, and their Plan∣tations promoted and propagated upon several occasions, and by distinct Interests, and since 
New England
 hath been look'd upon as a place considerable enough for Persons of very eminent quality to concern themselves in it, we rather are induc'd to consider this Countrey as a principal part, than as any way depending on, or being any Branch or Portion of 
Virginia.


It lies between 
Norumbega,
 which it hath Northward, and 
New Netherlands
 South∣ward, from forty one to forty five Degrees of Northern Latitude, in the midst of the temperate Zone, and paralell to 
France
 and some part of 
Italy
 in the Western Hemisphere, so that one would think it should enjoy the same temperature of Air; but the contrary is found, for that part which borders upon the Sea is colder, partly by reason that the Sea-waves break the reflexion of the Sun-beams, partly by reason of the abundance of Vapors, which mounting upward, abate the ardor of them; but the more Inland parts of the Countrey are indifferently warm: Moreover it hath been found by certain experience, that those Countreys which look to wards the East, or Sun-rising, are colder than those which lie towards the West, or Sun-setting, and those that have the Evening Winds on them, warmer than those which have the Morning Winds; which being so, it should follow, that the temperature of the Air in those Regions is peculiar to the Bodies of those of our Nation, who being accustom'd to a Climate somewhat temperate, are nei∣ther able to endure extremity of Cold, nor immoderate Heat: Yet there are who affirm, that 
New England,
 though situate in the midst of the temperate Zone, never∣theless feels both extremities of the two opposite Zones, in the Summer the heat of the Torrid, and in the Winter the cold of the Frigid.


As for the first discovery of this Countrey,
 it is not to be expected otherwise

than that of the discovery of those other Countreys hitherto discours'd of, that is to say very uncertain; but because the 
French
 boast of 
Joannes Verrazanus
 (who though an 
Italian,
 was employ'd by the 
French
 King 
Francis
 the First) as the first Discoverer, not onely of 
Nova Francia,
 as hath been already intimated, but also of this Coun∣trey and the adjoyning Coast and Regions, we shall not think it impertinent to give from their own Relations, a brief view of his Voyage, and afterwards a parti∣cular Description of the 
English
 Plantations there, and of their Transactions, both one with another, and between them and the Nations. The Narration of 
Verra∣zanus
's Voyage is as followeth:


ON command of the 
French
 King 
Francis
 the First, 
John Verrazanus, Anno
 1524. setting Sail Westward from the 
Canary
 Isles, discover'd a low 
American
 Coast, in thirty four Degrees North Latitude, inhabited by naked People, which be∣hind the sandy Hills facing the Sea, Manur'd many fruitful Plains. Then Sail∣ing a hundred Leagues along the Shore Northerly, he view'd a Countrey full of Vines, which grew up amongst the Boughs of high Trees; and Sailing up a pleasant River, Landed on the Island 
Clandia,
 full of woody Mountains: thence he stood for the main Continent; where after having visited a King, Clad in wrought Deer-skin, he Sail'd by a Bay, at whose Mouth appear'd a Rock in an Inlet, twenty Leagues; where appear'd five small Isles, all of them exceeding fruitful. After this (being got a hundred and fifty Leagues to the Northward) he found very salvage People, whose Heads appear'd through Bear-skins and Sea-Calves. By this time having 
Terreneuf
 on his Starboard, he return'd back to 
Diepe.


Thus far 
Verrazanus
 made some discovery of the Coast, which hath since not onely been▪ farther inspected by the 
English,
 but also by them Planted and call'd 
New England.


This Countrey, whether first discover'd by the said 
Verrazanus,
 or together with the rest of largely-taken 
Virginia,
 by Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 or, as some say, by Captain 
Gosnald,
 in the Year 1602. was so well known to the 
English
 in the be∣ginning of King 
James
's Reign here, that the setling and carrying on of Plantations id this part of 
America,
 was vigorously promoted by many of the most eminent Per∣sons in 
England:
 whereupon it was about the Year 1606. being the fourth Year of the said King, granted by Patent to several Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Mer∣chants, under the denomination of 
The Plymouth Company,
 both in favour of those generous Spirits, who studied and endeavor'd the good of the Publick by foreign Plantations, and indulgence to those, who not well satisfi'd with the Government of Church and State, and willingly transporting themselves and Families thither, as to their 
Asylum,
 could more conveniently be spar'd than the better affected part of the People: And although the Colonies at first sent over succeeded not accord∣ing to expectation, yet in a short time there Plantations were brought to very great perfection. Captain 
Weimouth,
 who had been employ'd there by the Lord 
Arundel
 of 
Warder,
 for the discovery of the North-West Passage, falling short of his Course, hapned into a River on the Coast of 
America,
 call'd 
Pemmaquid;
 from whence he brought five of the Natives for 
England,
 three of whose Names were 
Mannida▪ Skettwarroes,
 and 
Tasquantum,
 and Landing at 
Plymouth,
 presented them to Sir 
Ferdi∣nando Gorges,
 whom he made use of as Instruments for the farther advancement of these Plantations: they were all of one Nation, but of several parts, and several Families; he kept them with him three years, and observing in them an inclination to vertuous Designs, and Spirits above the Vulgar, he gain'd information from

them what great Rivers ran up into the Land, what Men of note were seated on them, what Power they were of, how Ally'd, what Enemies they had, and the like; and taking some light from thence, sent away a Ship, furnish'd with Men, and all kind of Necessaries convenient for the Service intended, under the Com∣mand of Captain 
Henry Chaloung,
 a Gentleman of a good Family, and very capable for Undertakings of this nature; and giving him sufficient Instructions what to do, sent along with him two of the said Natives for his better Conduct and Di∣rection, ordering him by all means to keep the Northerly Gage as high as 
Cape Briton,
 till they had discover'd the Main, and then to beat it up to the Southward as the Coast tended, till they found by the Natives they were near the place to which they were assign'd. By that time they were about a hundred Leagues off the Island of 
Canara,
 the Captain fell sick of a Feaver, and the Winds being Westerly, his Company shap'd their Course for the 
Indies,
 and coming to 
St. John de Porto Rico,
 the Captain went ashore for the recovery of his Health, whilst the Company took in Water, and such other Provisions as they had present need of, and spent some time in Hunting, and other Recreations; after which steering their intended Course, they were met with by the 
Spanish
 Fleet that came from the 
Havana,
 taken Prisoners and carried into 
Spain,
 the Ship and Goods being confiscated, the Voyage overthrown, and the Natives lost.


Not long after the setting out of 
Chaloung, Thomas Haman
 was sent by Sir 
John Popham,
 Lord Chief Justice of 
England,
 towards the River of 
Sagadehoc,
 to the suc∣cour of 
Chaloung,
 if need were; but not finding him, after he had scowr'd the Coast all about, he return'd back into 
England.


Captain 
Prinne
 was likewise sent from 
Bristol,
 who arriving happily in those Parts, brought back with him at his return the most exact Discovery of that Coast that ever had been gain'd till then.


A while after, at the Charge of the said Sir 
John Popham,
 a hundred Men were sent to settle a Colony at 
Sagadehoc,
 under the Command of 
George Popham, Raleigh Gilbert,
 Master of the Ship, who seated themselves in a 
Peninsula,
 at the Mouth of this River; which attempting to discover, they met with a Wood near to an Island, distant from the Line about forty five Degrees, and some odd Seconds, where they easily went on Shore. In the Year 1608. the Commander of the Colony deceasing, and not long after him the Lord Chief Justice, who had been the chief that had furnish'd them with fresh Supplies, they return'd for 
England
 in those Ships that had been sent them with Succours: At which unexpected return, the Patrons of the Design were so offended, that for a certain time they desisted from their Enterprizes. In the mean while the 
French
 making use of this occasion, Planted Colo∣nies in divers places, when Sir 
Samuel Argal
 from 
Virginia
 disturb'd their Designs, and brought away Prisoners all he could lay hold on.


Suddenly after Captain 
Hobson
 and divers others were set out with very great Preparations, and with them two of the Natives which had been detain'd for some time in 
England,
 whom they thought to have made use of, the better to draw the rest of the Natives to their Commerce; but because a little before twenty four of them had been treacherously dealt with by one 
Hunt,
 they contracted from thence so great an animosity towards the 
English,
 that Captain 
Hobson
 was con∣strain'd to return without effecting any thing.


In the Year 1614. Captain 
John Smith
 being sent to Fish for Whales, and seek af∣ter Mines of Gold and Silver, Landed upon the Island of 
Monahiggan,
 where he found some store of Whales, but not such as those by whose Oyl they use to make so much profit.




About the same time (two of the Natives being recover'd, 
Erpenow
 of 
Capawick,
 that had escap'd from Captain 
Hobson,
 and 
Assacumet
 of 
Pemmaquid,
 one of those that had been taken Prisoners with 
Chaloung
) Captain 
Harly,
 with Necessaries con∣venient for such a Voyage, was dispatch'd away by Sir 
Ferdinando Gorges,
 the Earl of 
Southampton
 favouring the Design, and furnishing him with some Land-Soldiers under the Command of Captain 
Hobson;
 who not discourag'd with his former ill Success, resolv'd upon a second Adventure.


In the Year 1615. Sir 
Richard Hakings
 undertook a Voyage into those Parts by authority of the Council of the second Colony, but by reason of the great Wars among the Natives, his Observations could not be such as might give any farther light than what had been already receiv'd.


Soon after which Captain 
Dormer
 coming for 
England
 from 
New-found-Land,
 and Landing at 
Plymouth,
 apply'd himself to the Governor, by whom he was dispatch'd away, with Direction to meet Captain 
Rocroft,
 sent away a little before; but 
Ro∣croft
 being dead by that time 
Dormer
 could come after him to 
Virginia,
 where he heard he was, he returning to 
Capawick,
 was there set upon by 
Erpenow,
 the fore∣mention'd Salvage, and other 
Indians
 that were Conspirators with him; and within a short while after at 
Virginia,
 whither he went to be cur'd of the Wounds he re∣ceiv'd in that Assassination, he fell sick and died.


About the Year 1623. Captain 
Robert Gorges,
 newly come out of the 
Venetian
 War, was employ'd by the Council of 
New Englands
 Affairs as the Lieutenant-General, to regulate the Abuses of divers Fisher-men and other Interlopers, who without License frequented those Coasts: for which Service he had assign'd to him all that part of the main Land situate upon the North-East side of the Bay of the 
Messachasets.


By these several Colonies sent so thick one after another, both a full Discovery of the Countrey came to be made, and a large gap open'd to the free possession thereof; yet in regard of the many disappointments and misfortunes the several Companies sent over met with, and counting the vast Charges their setting forth cost the Undertakers, which would have been still increas'd by the need of conti∣nu'd Supplies, in all probability 
New England
 would have been but thinly peopled to this day, had not a great Tide of People, possess'd with an aversion to the Church-Government of 
England,
 and fled into 
Holland
 for 
Liberty of Conscience,
 ea∣gerly taken hold of this opportunity to make themselves Masters of their own Opinions, and of a Place where they might erect a Government suitable there∣unto: and though at first there were some Exceptions taken, as if this Countrey was to be made a Receptacle of Sectaries, and such as condemn'd the Ecclesiastical Government of the Nation, insomuch that Sir 
Ferdinando Gorges,
 to whom they ap∣ply'd themselves, desiring him to mediate for them to the Council of 
New Englands
 Affairs, when they perceiv'd the Authority they had from the 
Virginia
 Company, could not warrant their abode there, had enough to do (notwithstanding his Apology, 
That these things hapned contrary to his expectation
) to wipe away the jea∣lousie which was entertain'd of him, it being Order'd, that no more should be suf∣fer'd to pass into 
New England,
 but such as should take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: yet at last there was little notice taken who went, perhaps upon con∣sideration, that the vast resort of People thither would be of greater advantage to the Plantations, than their different Opinions, at so remote a distance, could be pre∣judicial, so long as they acknowledg'd Obedience to the King and Civil Power: However, Sir 
Ferdinando,
 to clear himself the better, mov'd those Lords that were the chief Actors in the Business, to resign their Grand Patent to the King, and pass

particular Patents to themselves of such part of the Countrey along the Sea-Coast, as might be sufficient for them: To this Motion there being a general Assent given by the Lords, and a Day appointed for the conclusion thereof, an Act was made for the Resignation of the Patent, alloting to each Man their several Bounds. From the uttermost parts began the Limits of the Lord 
Mougrave,
 and ended at 
Hudson
's 
River.
 To the Eastward of which River, for the space of sixty Miles in length, was plac'd the Duke of 
Richmond
's Assignment: Next to him was setled the Earl of 
Carlile:
 Next him the Lord 
Edward Gorges:
 Next the Marquess of 
Hamilton:
 Then Captain 
John Mason:
 And lastly his own, which extended to the great River 
Sagadehoc,
 being sixty Miles, and so up into the Main Land a hundred and twenty Miles, which he was pleas'd to call by the Name of 
The Province of Main.


The Landing of the 
English
 in 
Plymouth
 Plantation was very much facilitated by the great Mortality that hapned amongst the 
Indians
 about that time, amongst the 
Pecods, Narragansets, Nianticks, Tarantines, Wippanaps,
 and those of 
Abargini, Agissawang,
 and 
Pockanekie,
 their 
Powwows,
 or Doctors, seeing with amazement their 
Wigwams,
 or Streets, lie full of dead Bodies, and in vain expecting help from 
Squantam
 their good, or 
Abbamoch
 their bad God. Not long before, that blazing Comet, so much talk'd of in 
Europe,
 apppear'd after Sun-setting in their Horizon South-West for the space of thirty Sleeps, (for so they reckon their Days). They Landed at first with little or no resistance, a handful of Men onely being sent before to keep possession for their Companions, who arriv'd eight days after; when the Natives appearing with their Bowes and Arrows, let flie their long Shafts amongst them; whereupon one Captain 
Miles Standish
 with his Fowling-piece shot the stoutest 
Sachem
 amongst the 
Indians,
 as he was reaching an Arrow from his Quiver; which the rest seeing, fled into the Woods and Thickets.


The same Year the 
Merchant-Advenurers
 in 
England
 sent forth store of Servants to provide against the Wants of that place; amongst whom came over a mix'd Mul∣titude, who setled themselves in the Bosom of the Cape now call'd 
Gloucester.


About the Year 1651. there fled to the 
English
 at 
Water-town
 the 
Indians
 that dwelt thereabouts, for protection against the 
Tarratines,
 a sort of cruel and salvage Canni∣bals, by whom near the Town of 
Saugust,
 in the very dead time of the Night, one Lieutenant 
Walker
 being on a sudden alarm'd, was shot through his Coat and Buff Jacket with two Indian Arrows. That Night the 
English
 stood upon their Guard, and the next Morning sent word to other parts; who gather'd together, and taking counsel how to quit themselves of these 
Indians,
 agreed to discharge their great Guns; whose redoubled noise, ratling in the Rocks, struck terror into the 
Indi∣ans,
 and caus'd them to betake themselves to flight. The Autumn following, others of the 
Indians,
 who till then had held a good correspondence with the Planters, be∣gan to quarrel about the Bounds of their Land; but a great Mortality, by the ra∣ging of the Small-Pox, breaking out amongst them, put an end to that Contro∣versie: There died amongst the rest one of the chief of the 
Sagamores
 of the 
Matta∣chusets,
 call'd 
Sagamore John,
 who before his Death had been instructed in the 
Chri∣stian
 Faith, and took care that his two Sons should be nurtur'd therein.


In the Year 1635. there arrived several Ships with great plenty of Provisions, and many Persons of good Quality, and amongst the rest Sir 
Henry Vane.


The same Year the People of 
Cambridge,
 otherwise call'd 
New-town,
 hearing of a fertile place upon the River 
Canectico,
 remov'd thither, and erected anew Corporati∣on by the Name of 
Banectico,
 being encourag'd thereunto by the Lord 
Say
 and the Lord 
Brooks,
 and planting a Forrest at the mouth of the River, call'd it 
Saybrook Forrest.


About the Year 1638. the 
Pequods,
 a stout and Warlike Nation, lying to the

South-West of the 
Mattachusets,
 were discover'd upon their March within some few Miles of 
Hartford:
 Their coming very much terrifi'd all that inhabited therea∣bouts; but they took onely three Women and return'd; one of whom making a violent resistance, had her Brains beaten out; the other two they carried away with them, without abusing their Persons, as it was suppos'd they would, for they esteem'd their own 
Shaws,
 being black, beyond our Women. Their chief Design was to learn to make Gunpowder; which seeing they could not effect, they look'd upon their Prize as nothing so precious as they imagin'd.


A little after another 
Indian
 War threatning the 
English,
 they resolv'd together to send an Ambassador to 
Cannonicus,
 chief 
Sachem
 of the 
Naragansits,
 endeavoring to prevent him from confederating with the 
Pequods,
 who (as they had Intelligence) were about sending to him to joyn with them: 
Cannonicus
 being grown old, had re∣sign'd the Government to his Nephew 
Mantinemo,
 a stern Man, and of a cruel Na∣ture. The Ambassadors arriving at his Court, which was about eighty Miles from 
Boston,
 the 
Indian
 Prince assembled his chief Councellors, and having Entertain'd the Ambassadors Magnificently, and Feasted them Royally, gave them Audience in his State-house; where the 
Sachem,
 to manifest his greater State, lay along upon the Ground, with all his Nobility sitting about him, with their Legs doubled up, and their Knees touching their Chin: The 
English
 Interpreter having made his Speech in the Name of the rest, both 
Cannonicus
 and the young King gave discreet Answers, signifying their Resolutions to keep a fair Correspondence with the 
Eng∣lish,
 and yet not to fall out with the 
Pequods:
 Who a little after making also their Addresses to the same King, he disswaded them by many Reasons from making War with the 
English,
 and to deliver into their hands those Persons that had murther'd any of them. The 
Pequods
 nevertheless, though they seem'd inclinable to his Coun∣sel, yet they acted as Enemies; for when the 
English
 sent a Company of Soldiers into their Countrey to treat with them about delivering up the Murtherers, they made shew of willingness, but spying their advantage, betook themselves to their Heels; and whomsoever they took stragling by surprise, they revil'd and in∣sulted over in a most cruel manner, vilifying the 
Christian
 Religion, and uttering all the Blasphemies they could invent. Whereupon they rais'd fresh Souldiers for the War, to the number of four score, out of the several Towns in the 
Mattachusets,
 and with some 
Indian
 Guides came to their Fort, within which they had pitch'd their 
Wigwams,
 the Entrance being on two sides, with intricate Meanders to enter; at which were plac'd 
Indian
 Bowe-men, who shot the foremost of the 
English;
 yet they had little to boast of in the end, for the 
English
 rushing in through the winding Ways, and placing themselves round the 
Wigwams,
 made a very prosperous Shot, by directing the Muzzles of their Musquets against the 
Indians
 which lay sleeping on the Ground: In the midst of which rouzing terror and confusion they were defeated with little ado, most of them being either wounded, kill'd, or taken. The 
English
 thus animated with the first Victory, send their Prisoners to the Pinna∣ces, and prosecute the War in Hand, marching against the next Body of the 
Indians,
 which lay Encamp'd on a Hill about two Miles distant, where they gave them a second Overthrow, slaying many more than in the first Engagement; the rest flying to a very thick inaccessible Swamp or Bog, were there besieg'd by the 
English;
 and skulking up and down, as they saw their opportunity they would Shoot at them with their Arrows, and then suddenly fall flat along in the Water; at last the 
Eng∣lish
 finding out a Passage into the Swamp, utterly defeated them, and put an end to the War with the loss of few Mens Lives, and not many wounded.


In the Year 1640. there came over a fresh Supply of People into 
New England,
 and

finding no place to settle in within any of the former erected Colonies, they re∣pair'd to a place call'd 
Long Island,
 sever'd from the Continent of 
New-Haven,
 about sixty Miles off the Sea.


The Year following the four Colonies, namely the 
Massachusets, Plymouth, Ca∣nectico,
 and 
New-Haven,
 taking into consideration the many Nations that were on all sides of them, as the 
French, Dutch, Jews,
 and native 
Indians;
 as also how the three first went to lay claim to Lands they never had any right to, and the last to be con∣tinually quarrelling and contending, where they saw any hopes of prevailing, by Commissioners chosen from the respective Colonies, concluded a firm Confede∣ration to assist each other in all just and lawful Wars; upon which there came in certain 
Indian Sachems,
 as 
Pomham, Miantonemo, Soccanocoh,
 and 
Uncas,
 who not onely submitted to the 
English
 Government, but also, if occasion were, in matters of Controversie submitted to their Arbitration: But the Contest between 
Mianto∣nemo
 and 
Uncas
 was too hot to be appeas'd, (though the 
English
 were not wanting to interpose) unless by the Blood of one of them, as will appear by the Consequence: 
Uncas
 was a Prince of 
For,
 whose Life 
Miantonemo,
 though a much more potent Prince, sought to take away by treachery, hiring a young Man of the 
Pequod
 Na∣tion to murther him, as the following Story renders suspected; for one dark Evening this 
Sachem
 passing from one 
Wigwam
 to another, was Shot through the Arm with an Arrow; but recovering the Palace, had the Arrow pull'd out, and his Arm cur'd: the young Man that was suspected being examin'd, how he came by that great store of 
Wampompeage
 which was found about him, and being able to give no good account, it increas'd the suspicion, and induc'd 
Uncas
 to complain to the 
English
 at a General Court held at 
Boston:
 Whereupon the young Man was Examin'd in the presence of 
Miantonemo,
 who came thither with his Attendants; but the young Man tutor'd, as suppos'd, by 
Miantonemo,
 pretended that 
Uncas
 had enjoyn'd him to feign that he was hir'd by 
Miantonemo
 to kill him: To which Tale of his little belief being given, it was concluded upon farther Examination of him in private that he had done the Fact: nevertheless they let him depart with 
Mianto∣nemo,
 advising him to send him home to 
Uncas;
 but he in stead of returning him cut off his Head, and forthwith gather'd an Army of a thousand Men to fight with 
Uncas;
 who met him with half the Men: the Battel being joyn'd, the 
Narragansets,
 though the far greater multitude, were beaten by the 
Wawhiggins,
 through the Va∣lour of 
Uncas
 their Prince; who perfected his Victory by possessing himself of the Person of 
Miantonemo,
 whom, having put his Life-guard to flight, he carried away with him in triumph to the Town of 
Hartford,
 desiring to have the advice of the United Colonies what to do with his Prisoner: Whereupon the Commissioners having had sufficient proof of 
Miantonemo
's treachery towards this Prince, advis'd 
Uncas
 to put him to death, but not to exercise that barbarous kind of cruelty which is usual amongst them in these Cases. The 
Sachem,
 upon this advice, not long after pretended to remove him to a safer place, but by the Way caus'd him to be Execu∣ted: His Subjects and Kindred were troubled at his Death, but the little Princes his Neighbors, over whom he had tyranniz'd, rather rejoyc'd.


In the Year 1645. the Sons of old 
Canonnicus,
 their Father being dead, began to fall into hot Contentions with their Neighbors, and being forbidden by the United Colonies, they did not stick to threaten Wars to the 
English
 also. Whereupon the Commissioners rais'd an Army of Horse and Foot, and made Major General 
Edward Gibbons
 Commander in Chief over them. But the 
Indians
 hearing of this Preparation, sent some of their chief Nobility to the Commissioners of the United Colonies, who were assembled at 
Boston,
 to Treat about Peace; to which the

Commissioners agreed, upon condition they should pay a part of the Charges of the War; and that they should send four of their Sons for Hostages till the Sum was paid; and the Hostages being sent back before the 
Wapom
 was all paid, the two Princes, 
Pesicus
 and 
Mexanimo,
 upon the sending a Company of Armed Men to de∣mand it, sent the remainder of the Money.


In the Year 1647. divers Persons of Quality ventur'd their Estates upon an Iron Mill, which they began at 
Braintree,
 but it profited the Owners little, rather wasting their Stock, the price of Labor in matters of that nature, being double or treble to what it is in 
England.


These are the most material Transactions we find deliver'd by any one which hapned from the first discovery till the Year before mention'd: what hath hapned from that time to this, chiefly relates to the several Revolutions that have been in 
England,
 and shall be therefore taken notice of when we come to speak of the Go∣vernment of these Plantations.


Though there are, who having remain'd some time, and been concern'd in those Parts, affirm the Soil of 
New England
 to be nothing so fruitful as it is believ'd and commonly deliver'd to be, yet we think it not improper to give a brief account of the Trees and other Plants; also the Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and other Commodities which most Writers will have to be the production of this Countrey, especially since we find them compactly summ'd up by an unknown Writer in the Language of the 
Muses.
 The recital of the Plants and Trees, which (excepting the Cedar, 
Sassafras,
 and Dyers 
Sumach
) are all of the same kind with those that grow in 
Eu∣rope,
 onely differing in nature, according as the Epithets of many of them declare, is as follows:


Trees both in Hills and Plains in plenty be;


The long-liv'd Oak, and mournful Cypress Tree;


Skie-towring Pines, and Chesnuts coated rough;


The lasting Cedar, with the Walnut tough;


The Rozen-dropping Fir, for Mast in use;


The Boat-men seek for Oars light, neat grown Sprewse;


The brittle Ash, the ever-trembling Asps;


The broad-spread Elm, whose Concave harbors Wasps;


The Water-spungy Alder good for nought;


Small Eldern by the 
Indian
 Fletchers sought;


The knotty Maple, pallid Birch, Hawthorns;


The Horn-bound Tree, that to be cloven scorns;


Which from the tender Vine oft takes his Spouse,


Who twines embracing Arms about his Boughs.


Within this 
Indian
 Orchard Fruits be some;


The ruddy Cherry, and the jetty Plumb;


Snake-murthering Hazle, with sweet Saxafrage,


Whose Leaves in Beer allay hot Feavers rage;


The Dyers Shumach, with more Trees there be,


That are both good to use, and rare to see.


The Beasts peculiar to this Countrey are the 
Moose,
 the 
Rackoon,
 and the 
Mus∣quash;
 the two first Land-Animals, the last Amphibious, which with others, com∣mon to them with us, are thus versifi'd by the abovesaid Author:


The Kingly Lyon, and the strong-arm'd Bear;


The large limb'd Mooses, with the tripping Deer;


Quill-darting Porcupines, that Rackoons be


Castled ith' hollow of an aged Tree;


The skipping Squirrel, Rabbet, purblind Hare,


Immured in the self-same Castle are,


Lest red-ey'd Ferrets, wily Foxes should;


Them undermine, if Ramper'd but with Mold;


The grim-fac'd Ounce, and rav'nous howling Wolf,


Whose meagre Paunch sucks like a swallowing Gulph;


Black glittering Otters, and rich Coated Beaver;


The Civet-scented Musquash smelling ever.


Of such of these as are altogether unknown to us, take these brief Descriptions.


The Beast call'd a 
Moose,
 is not much unlike red Deer, and is as big as an Ox, slow of Foot, Headed like a Buck, with a broad Beam, some being two Yards

wide in the Head, their flesh is as good as Beef, their Hides good for Clothing; if these were kept tame, and accustom'd to the Yoke, they would be a great Com∣modity: First, because they are so fruitful, bringing forth three at a time, being likewise very uberous: Secondly, because they will live in Winter without any Fodder. There are not many of these in the 
Massachusets
 Bay, but forty Miles to the North-East there are great store of them.


The 
Rackoone
 is a deep Furr'd Beast, not much unlike a Badger,
 having a Tail like a Fox, as good Meat as a Lamb: These Beasts in the day time sleep in hollow Trees, in a Moon-shine night they go to feed on Clams at a low Tide, by the Sea side, where the 
English
 hunt them with their Dogs.


The 
Musquash
 is much like a Beaver for shape, but nothing near so big;
 the Male hath two Stones, which smell as sweet as Musk, and being kill'd in Winter, never lose their sweet smell: These Skins are no bigger than a Coney-skin, yet are sold for five Shillings apiece, being sent for Tokens into 
England;
 one good Skin will perfume a whole house full of Clothes, if it be right and good.


The Birds both common and peculiar are thus recited.


The Princely Eagle, and the soaring Hawk,


Whom in their unknown ways there's none can chawk:


The Humbird for some Queens rich Cage more fit,


Than in the vacant Wilderness to sit.


The swift-wing'd Swallow sweeping to and fro,


As swift as Arrow from 
Tartarian
 Bowe.


When as 
Aurora's
 Infant day new springs,


There th'morning mounting Lark her sweet lays sings:


The harmonious Thrush, swift Pigeon, Turtle-dove,


Who to her Mate doth ever constant prove:


The 
Turky
-Pheasant, Heath-cock, Partridge rare,


The Carrion-tearing Crow, and hurtful Stare,


The long-liv'd Raven, th'ominous Screech-Owl,


Who tells, as old Wives say, disasters foul.


The drowsie Madge that leaves her day-lov'd Nest,


And loves to rove, when Day-birds be at rest:


Th'Eel-murthering Hearn, and greedy Cormorant,


That near the Creeks in morish Marshes haunt.


The bellowing Bittern, with the long-leg'd Crane,


Presaging Winters hard, and dearth of Grain.


The Silver Swan that tunes her mournful breath,


To sing the Dirge of her approaching death.


The tattering Oldwives, and the cackling Geese,


The fearful Gull that shuns the murthering Peece.


The strong-wing'd Mallard, with the nimble Teal,


And ill-shape't Loon, who his harsh Notes doth squeal.


There Widgins, Sheldrakes and Humilitees,


Snites, Doppers, Sea-Larks, in whole million flees.


Of these the 
Humbird, Loon,
 and 
Humility
 are not to be pass'd by without parti∣cular observation.


The 
Humbird
 is one of the wonders of the Countrey,
 being no bigger than a Hornet, yet hath all the Dimensions of a Bird, as Bill, and Wings with Quills, Spi∣der-like Legs, small Claws: for Colour, she is as glorious as the Rain-bow; as she flies, she makes a little humming noise like a Humble-bee, wherefore she is call'd the 
Humbird.


The 
Loon
 is an ill-shap'd thing like a Cormorant,
 but that he can neither go nor flie; he maketh a noise sometimes like Sowgelders Horn. The 
Humilities
 or 
Sim∣plicities
 (as we may rather call them) are of two sorts, the biggest being as large as a green Plover; the other as big as Birds we call 
Knots
 in 
England.
 Such is the sim∣plicity of the smaller sorts of these Birds, that one may drive them on a heap like so many Sheep, and seeing a fit time shoot them; the living seeing the dead, settle themselves on the same place again, amongst which the Fowler discharges again: These Birds are to be had upon Sandy Brakes, at the latter end of Summer before the Geese come in.


No less Poetical a Bill of Fare is brought of the Fish on the Sea-Coasts,
 and in the Rivers of 
New England
 in these subsequent Verses.






The King of Waters, the Sea shouldering Whale,


The snuffing Grampus, with the Oily Seale,


The-storm presaging Porpus, Herring-Hog,


Line-shearing Shark, the Catfish, and Sea Dog,


The Scale-fenc'd Sturgeon, wry-mouth'd Hollibut,


The flounsing Salmon, Codfish, Greedigut:


Cole, Haddock, Hage, the Thornback, and the Scate,


Whose slimy outside makes him'seld in date,


The stately Bass, old 
Neptune's
 fleeting Post,


That Tides it out and in from Sea to Coast.


Consorting Herrings, and the bonny Shad,


Big-belly'd Alewives, Mackrills richly-clad


With Rainbow colours, Frostfish and the Smelt,


As good as ever Lady 
Gustus
 felt.


The spotted Lamprons, Eels, the Lamperies,


That seek fresh Water-Brooks with 
Argus
 Eyes,


These watery Villagers, with thousands more,


Do pass and repass near the verdant Shore.






Kinds of Shell-fish.


The luscious Lobster, with the Crabfish raw,


The brinish Oyster, Muscle, Periwigge,


And Tortoise sought for by the 
Indian
 Sqaw,


Which to the Flats dance many a Winters Jigge,


To dive for Cocles, and to dig for Clams,


Whereby her lazie Husbands guts she crams.




To speak of the most unusual of these sorts of Fish;
 First the 
Seal,
 which is call'd the 
Sea-Calf,
 his Skin is good for divers uses, his Body being between Flesh and Fish, it is not very delectable to the Palate, or congruent with the Stomack; his Oil is very good to burn in Lamps, of which he affords a great deal.


The 
Shark
 is a kind of Fish as big as a Man,
 some as big as a Horse, with three rows of Teeth within his Mouth, with which he snaps asunder the Fishermans Lines, if he be not very circumspect: This Fish will leap at a Mans hand if it be over board, and with his Teeth snap off a Mans Leg or Hand if he be Swimming; these are often taken, being good for nothing but Manuring of Land.


The 
Hollibut
 is not much unlike a Pleace or Turbut,
 some being two yards long, and one wide, a Foot thick; the plenty of better Fish makes these of little esteem, except the Head and Finns, which Stew'd or Bak'd is very good; these 
Hollibuts
 be little set by while 
Basse
 is in season.


The 
Basse
 is one of the best Fishes in the Countrey,
 and though Men are soon weary'd with other Fish, yet are they never with 
Basse;
 it is a delicate, fine, fat, fast Fish, having a Bone in his Head which contains a Sawcerful of Marrow, sweet and good, pleasant to the Palate, and wholsom to the Stomack: When there be great store of them, we only eat the Heads, and Salt up the Bodies for Winter, which exceeds Ling or Haberdine: Of these Fishes some are three, and some four Foot long, some bigger, some lesser; at some Tides a Man may catch a dozen or twenty of these in three hours; the way to catch them is with Hook and Line: The Fisherman taking a great Cod-line, to which he fasteneth a piece of Lobster, throws it into the Sea, the Fish biting at it, he pulls her to him, and knocks her on the head with a Stick.


Alewives
 are a kind of Fish which is much like a Herring,
 which in the later end of 
April
 come up to the fresh Rivers to Spawn, in such multitudes as is almost in∣credible, pressing up in such shallow Waters as will scarce permit them to Swim, having likewise such longing desire after the fresh Water Ponds, that no beatings with Poles, or forcive agitations by other devices, will cause them to return to the Sea, till they have cast their Spawn.


Clamms
 or 
Clamps,
 are a Shell-fish not much unlike a Cockle, they lie under the Sand, and have every one of them a round hole to take Air, and receive Wa∣ter at. When the Tide ebbs and flows, a Man running over these 
Clamm
 banks will presently be made all wet, by their spouting of Water out of those small holes: These Fishes are in great plenty in most places of the Countrey, which is a great Commodity for the feeding of Swine, both in Winter and Summer; for being

once us'd to those places, they will repair to them as duly every Ebb, as if they were driven to them by Keepers: In some places of the Countrey there be 
Clamms
 as big as a Peny white Loaf, which are great Dainties amongst the Natives, and would be in great esteem amongst the 
English,
 were it not for better Fish.


Other Commodities which this Countrey is said to yield, are, in down-right Prose, Furrs, Flax, Linnen, Iron, Pitch, Masts, Cables, and some quantity of Am∣ber; so that if what many Authors have consented to assert concerning 
New Eng∣land
 be not a meer Fiction, what e're hath been affirm'd of the unfruitfulness of the Country will demonstrably be found invalid.


There are also to be found here some hurtful Creatures,
 of which, that which is most injurious to the Person and Life of a Man is the 
Rattle-Snake,
 which is generally a yard and a half long, as thick in the middle as the small of a Mans Leg; she hath a yellow Belly, her Back being spotted with black, russet, yellow, and green colours, plac'd like Scales; at her Tail is a Rattle, with which she makes a noise when she is molested, or when she seeth any approach near her; her Neck seems to be no thicker than a Mans Thumb, yet she can swallow a Squirril, having a great wide Mouth, with Teeth as sharp as Needles, wherewith she biteth such as tread upon her, her Poyson lyeth in her Teeth, for she hath no Sting. When any Man is bitten by any of these Creatures, the Poyson spreads so suddenly through the Veins, and so runs to the Heart, that in one hour it causeth Death, unless he hath the Antidote to expel the Poyson, which is a Root call'd 
Snake-weed,
 which must be champ'd, the Spittle swallow'd, and the Root apply'd to the Sore; this is present Cure against that which would be present death with∣out it: This Weed is rank Poyson, if it be taken by any man that is not bitten; whosoever is bitten by these Snakes, his flesh becomes as spotted as a Leopard, un∣til he be perfectly cur'd. It is reported, that if the Party live that is bitten, the Snake will die, and if the Party die, the Snake will live. This is a most Poysonous and dangerous Animal, yet nothing so bad as the report goes of it in 
England;
 for whereas it is said to kill a Man with its breath, and that it can flie, there is no such matter, for it is naturally the most sleepy and unnimble Creature that lives, never offering to leap or bite any Man, if it be not trodden on first; and it is their desire in hot weather to lie in Paths, where the Sun may shine on them, where they will sleep so soundly, that I have known four Men stride over one of them, and never awake it; five or six Men have been bitten by them, which by using of 
Snake-weed
 were all cur'd, never any yet losing his life by them. Cows have been bitten, but being cut in divers places, and this Weed thrust into their flesh, were cur'd; A small Switch will easily kill one of these Snakes. In many places of the Country there be none of them, as at 
Plymouth, New-town, Igowamme, Nahant, &c.
 In some places they will live on one side of the River, and swimming but over the Water, as soon as they are come into the Woods, they turn up their yellow Bellies and die. Up into the Countrey, Westward from the Plantations, is a high Hill, which is call'd 
Rattle-Snake-Hill,
 where there are great store of these Poysonous Creatures.


There are likewise troublesome Flies.


First there is a wild Bee or Wasp, which commonly guards the Grape, building by Cobweb habitation amongst the Leaves: Secondly a great green Flie, not much unlike our Horse-Flies in 
England;
 they will nipp so sore, that they will fetch Blood either of Man or Beast, and are most troublesome where most Cattel are, which brings them from out of the Woods to the Houses; this Flie continues but for the Moneth of 
June.
 The third is 
Gurnipper,
 which is a small black Flie, no bigger than a Flea; her biting causeth an itching upon the Hands or Face, which

provoketh scratching, which is troublesome to some; this Flie is busie but in close Mornings or Evenings, and continues not above three Weeks; the least Wind or heat expels them. The fourth is a 
Musketor,
 which is not unlike to our Gnats in 
England;
 in places where there is no thick Woods or 
Swamps,
 there are none or ve∣ry few. In the new Plantations they are troublesome for the first year, but the Wood decaying they vanish: These Flies cannot endure Wind; heat or cold, so that these are only troublesome in close thick Weather, and against Rain, many that are bitten will fall a scratching, whereupon their Faces and Hands swell.


As touching the Nature of the ancient Inhabitants, they are to be consider'd ac∣cording to their several Shires or Divisions; those that inhabit to the East and North-East bore the name of 
Churchers
 and 
Tarrenteens;
 these in the Southern parts were call'd 
Pequods,
 and 
Narragansets;
 those Westward, 
Connectacuts
 and 
Mowhacks;
 to the North-West, of whom were the 
Aberginians.


The 
Mowhacks
 were ever accounted a cruel bloudy People, which were wont to come down upon their poor Neighbors, with more than bruitish Savageness, spoil∣ing their Corn, burning their Houses, slaying Men, ravishing Women, yea very 
Canibals
 they were, sometimes eating on a Man one part after another before his Face, and while yet living; insomuch, that the very Name of a 
Mowhack
 would strike the Heart of a poor 
Aberginian
 dead, till they had the 
English
 on their sides to succor them; for these inhumane Homicides confess that they dare not meddle with a white Fac'd Man, accompany'd with his hot-mouth'd Weapon.


These 
Indians
 are a People of tall Stature, long grim Visages, slender Wasted, and having exceeding great Arms and Thighs, wherein they say their strength lieth; which is such, that one of them hath been known to kill a Dog with a fil∣lip of his Finger, and afterwards to have flead and sod him, and eat him to his Din∣ner. They are so hardy, that they can eat such things as would make other 
Indians
 sick to look upon; being destitute of Fish and Flesh, they suffice Hunger and main∣tain Nature with the use of Vegetatives; but that which they most hunt after, is the flesh of Man: Their custom is, if they get a stranger near their Habitations, not to Butcher him immediately, but keep him in as good plight as they can, feeding him with the best Victuals they have.


These 
Indians
 are more desperate in Wars than the other 
Indians,
 which proceeds not only from the fierceness of their Natures, but also in that they know themselves to be better Arm'd and Weapon'd; all of them wearing Sea Horse Skins and Barks of Trees, made by their Art as impenetrable, it is thought, as Steel, wearing Head-Pieces of the same, under which they March securely and undantedly, running, and fiercely crying out, 
Hadree Hadree succomee succomee, We come we come to suck your Blood,
 not fearing the feather'd shafts of the strong-arm'd Bow-men, but like unruly headstrong Stallions, beat them down with their right-hand 
Tamahawks,
 and left-hand Javelins, being all the Weapons which they use, counting Bowes a cowardly fight. 
Tamahawks
 are Staves of two Foot and a half long, with knobs at one end as round and big as a Foot-ball; a Javelin is a short Spear, headed with sharp Sea-Horse Teeth; one blow or thrust with these sharp Weapons, will not need a second to hasten death from a 
Mowhacks
 arm.


The 
Tarrenteens
 saving that they eat not Mans flesh, are little less Salvage and cruel than these 
Cannibals;
 our 
Indians
 do fear them as their deadly Enemies, for so many of them as they meet, they kill. Take these 
Indians
 in their own proper and na∣tural disposition, and they are reported to be wise, lofty-spirited, constant in friendship to one another, true in their promise, and more industrious than many others.




The 
Pequants
 are a stately Warlike People, just and equal in their dealings; not treacherous either to their Country-men, or 
English,
 to whom (except in time of War) they were not any ways uncivil. Their next Neighbors the 
Narragansets,
 are the most numerous People in those Parts, the most rich also, and the most industri∣ous; being the Store-house of all such kind of wild Merchandize as is amongst them. These Men are the most curious Minters of their 
Wampompeage
 and 
Mow∣hakes,
 which they form out of the inmost Wreaths of Periwinkle-shells. The Nor∣thern, Eastern, and Western 
Indians
 fetch all their Coyn from these Southern Mint-Masters. From hence they have most of their curious Pendants and Bracelets, from hence they have their great Stone Pipes, which will hold a quarter of an Ounce of Tobacco, which they make with Steel Drills and other Instruments; such is their Ingenuity and dexterity, that they can imitate the 
English
 Mold so accurately, that were it not for matter and colour, it were hard to distinguish them; they make them of green, and sometimes of black Stone; they are much desir'd of our 
English
 Tobacconists, for their rarity, strength, handsomness, and coolness. Hence likewise our 
Indians
 had their Pots, wherein they us'd to seeth their Victuals before they knew the use of Brass. Since the 
English
 came, they have employ'd most of their time in catching of Beavers, Otters, and 
Musquashes,
 which they bring down into the Bay, returning back loaden with 
English
 Commodities, of which they make double profit, by selling them to more remote 
Indians,
 who are ignorant at what cheap rates they obtain them, in comparison of what they make them pay, so making their Neighbors ignorance their enrichment: They were never known to be desirous to take in hand any Martial Enterprize, or expose themselves to the uncertain events of War; wherefore the 
Pequants
 call them 
Women-like Men,
 resting secure under the conceit of their popularity, and seeking rather to grow rich by in∣dustry, than famous by deeds of Chivalry.


Most of these Northward 
Indians
 are between five and six Foot high, straight Bo∣dy'd, strongly compos'd, smooth Skin'd, merry Countenanc'd, of Complexion more swarthy than the 
Spaniards,
 black Hair'd, high Foreheaded, black Ey'd, out-Nos'd, broad Shoulder'd, brawny Arm'd, long and slender Handed, out Breasted, small Wasted, lank Belly'd, well Thigh'd, flat Kneed, with handsome grown Legs, and small Feet: In a word, take them when the Blood skips in their Veins, when the Flesh is on their Backs, and Marrow in their Bones, when they frolick in their an∣tique Deportments and 
Indian
 Postures, they are more amiable to behold (though onely in 
Adam
's Livery) than many a trim Gallant in the newest Mode; and though their Houses are but mean, their Lodging as homely, Commons scant, their Drink Water, and Nature their best Clothing, yet they still are healthful and lusty. Their smooth Skins proceed from the often anointing of their Bodies with the Oyl of Fishes, and the fat of Eagles, with the grease of 
Rackoons,
 which they hold in Summer the best Antidote to keep their Skin from blistering with the scorching Sun; it is their best Armor against the 
Musketoes,
 and the surest abrasour of the hairy Excrement, and stops the Pores of their Bodies against the nipping Winters cold. Their black Hair is natural, yet is brought to a more Jetty colour by Oyl∣ing, Dying, and daily dressing; sometimes they wear it very long, hanging down in a loose dishevel'd Womanish manner, otherwise ty'd up hard and short like a Horse Tail, bound close with a Fillet, which they say makes it grow the faster; they are not a little Phantastical in this particular; their Boys being not permit∣ted to wear their Hair long till sixteen years of Age, and then they must come to it by degrees; some being cut with a long foretop, a long lock on the Crown, one of each side of his Head, the rest of his Hair being cut even with the Scalp; the

young Men and Soldiers wear their Hair long on the one side, the other being cut short like a Screw; other cuts they have as their Fancy leads them, which would torture the Wits of the most exact Barber to imitate. But though they are thus proud of the Hair of their Head, you cannot wooe them to wear it on their Chins, where it no sooner grows, but it is stubb'd up by the roots, for they count it as an unuseful, cumbersome, and opprobrious excrement, insomuch as they call him an 
English
 Mans Bastard that hath but the appearance of a Beard.


The Cloathing of the 
Indians
 is only a pair of 
Indian
 Breeches to cover their se∣cret Parts, which is but a piece of Cloth a yard and a half long, but between their Groins, ty'd with a Snakes Skin about their middles, one end hanging down with a flap before, the other like a tail behind. In the Winter time, the more Aged of them wear Leather Drawers, in form like 
Irish
 Trouses, fasten'd under their Girdle with Buttons: They wear Shooes likewise of their own making, cut out of a 
Mooses
 Hide; many of them wear Skins about them, in form of an 
Irish
 Mantle, and of these some are Bears Skins, 
Mooses
 Skins, and Beaver Skins sew'd together, others Ot∣ter Skins, and 
Rackoon
 Skins; most of them in the Winter having his deep Furr'd Cat Skin, like a large Muff, which he shifts to that Arm which lieth most expos'd to the Wind. Although they are poor, yet is there in them the sparks of natural Pride, which appears in their longing desire after many kind of Ornaments, wear∣ing Pendants in their Ears, in form of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, Carv'd out of Bone, Shells, and Stone, with long Bracelets of their curious wrought 
Wampompeage
 and 
Mowhackees,
 which they put about their Necks and Loins; these they count a rare kind of Decking; many of the better sort bearing upon their Cheeks certain Pourtraitures of Beasts, as Bears, Deers, 
Mooses,
 Wolves, 
&c.
 some of Fowls, as of Eagles, Hawks, 
&c.
 which is not a superficial Painting, but a certain Incision, or else a raising of their Skin by a small sharp Instrument, under which they convey a certain kind of black unchangeable Ink, which makes the desir'd form apparent and permanent. Others have certain round Impressions down the outside of their Arms and Breasts, in form of Mullets or Spur-rowels, which they imprint by sear∣ing Irons: W
ether these be Foils to illustrate their unparallel'd Beauty (as they deem it) or Arms to blazon their antique Gentility, cannot easily be determin'd: But a 
Segamore
 with a 
Humbird
 in his Ear for a Pendant, a black Hawk on his Head for his Plume, 
Mowhackees
 for his Gold Chain, good store of 
Wampompeage
 begirt∣ing his Loins, his Bowe in his Hand, his Quiver at his Back, with six naked 
Indian
 Lacquies at his Heels for his Guard, thinks himself little Inferior to the great 
Cham.


In Winter time they have all manner of Fowls and Beasts of the Land and Wa∣ter, Pond-fish, with 
Cathaires
 and other Roots, 
Indian
 Beans and 
Clamms;
 in the Sum∣mer they have all manner of Sea-fish, with all sorts of Berries. For the ordering of their Victuals, they Boil or Roast them, having large Kettles which they Traded for with the 
French
 long since, and do still buy of the 
English
 as their need requires, before they had substantial Earthen Pots of their own making. Their Spits are no other than cloven Sticks, sharpen'd at one end to thrust into the ground; into these cloven Sticks they thrust the Flesh or Fish they would have Roasted, behem∣ming a round fire with a dozen of Spits at a time, turning them as they see occasi∣on. They seldom or never make Bread of their 
Indian
 Corn, but seethe it whole like Beans, eating three or four Corns with a mouthful of Fish or Flesh, some∣times eating Meat first, and Corns after, filling the Chinks with their Broth. In Sum∣mer, when their Corn is spent, 
Sqoutersquashes
 is their best Bread, a Fruit like a young Pumpion: But as all are fellows at Foot-ball, so they all meet Friends at the Ket∣tle,

saving their Wives, that Dance a Spaniel-like attendance at their Backs for their Fragments. If their occasions cause them to Travel, the best of their Victuals for their Journey is 
Nocake,
 (as they call it) which is nothing but 
Indian
 Corn parch'd in the hot Ashes; the Ashes being sifted from it, it is afterwards beaten to Powder, and put into a long Leathern Bag, truss'd at their Back like a Knapsack, out of which they take thrice three Spoonfuls a day, dividing it into three Meals. If it be Winter, and Snow be on the ground, they can eat when they please, making use of Snow for their Drink; in Summer, they must stay till they meet with a Spring or Brook; with this strange 
viaticum
 they will travel four or five days to∣gether. They keep no Set-Meals, their Store being spent, they champ on the Bit, till they meet with fresh Supplies, either from their own endeavors, or their Wives industry, who trudge to the 
Clam-banks
 when all other means fail. Though they are sometimes scanted, yet are they as free as Emperors, both to their Countrey∣men and 
English,
 be he stranger, or near acquaintance; counting it a great discour∣tesie, not to eat of their high-conceited Delicates.


Their hardiness is much to be admir'd, no ordinary pains making them so much as alter their countenance; beat them, whip them, punch them, if they put on a resolution, they will not winch for it; whether it be their benumm'd insensible∣ness of smart, or their hardy resolutions, is hard to resolve; It might be a 
Perillus
 his Bull, or the Rack might force an out-cry from them, but a 
Turkish
 drubbing would not move them, the unexpected approach of a mortal Wound by a Bul∣let, Arrow, or Sword, striking no more terror, nor causing no more exclamation in them, than if it had been a shot into the body of a Tree; such Wounds as would be sudden death to an 
English
 Man, would be nothing to them; whether it be, that by their rare skill in the use of Vegetatives, or by Diabolical Charms, they cure them; nevertheless, the very name and thoughts of death is so hideous to them, or any thing that presents it so terrible, that a hundred of them will run from two or three arm'd with Guns. In the Night they need not to be feared, for they will not budge from their own Dwellings, for fear of their 
Abamacho
 (the Devil) whom they much fear, specially in evil enterprizes, they will rather lie by an 
English
 fire than go a quarter of a Mile in the dark to their own Dwellings; but they are well freed from this Scare-crow since the coming of the 
English,
 and less care for his de∣lusions.


Now for the matter of Government amongst them; it is the custom of their Kings to inherit, the Son always taking the Kingdom after his Fathers death. If there be no Son, then the Queen rules; if no Queen, the next to the Blood-Royal; who comes in otherwise, is but counted an usurping Intruder, if his fair carriage bear him not out the better, they will soon Unscepter him. Some say the chief 
Powahe
 is next in Dignity and Authority to the King, and when he dies, Marries the 
Squasachem,
 or Queen.


The Kings have no Laws to Command by, nor have they any annual Revenues; yet commonly are they so either fear'd or belov'd, that half their Subjects estate is at their Service, and their Persons at his Command, by which Command he is better known than by any thing else; for though he hath no Kingly Robes to make him glorious in the view of his Subjects, nor daily Guards to succor his Person, nor Court-like attendance, nor sumptuous Palaces; yet do they yield all submissive subjection to him, accounting him their Soveraign; going at his Command, and coming at his Beck, not so much as expostulating the cause, though it be in mat∣ters thwarting their wills; he being accounted a disloyal Subject that will not ef∣fect what his Prince Commands. Whosoever is known to Plot Treason, or to lay

violent hands on his lawful King, is presently Executed. Once a Year he takes his Progress, accompanied with a dozen of his best Subjects, to view his Countrey, to recreate himself, and establish good Orders. When he enters into any of their Houses, without any more Complement, he is desir'd to sit down on the Ground, (for they use neither Stools nor Cushions) and after a little respite all that are pre∣sent come in, and sit down by him, one of his Seniors pronouncing an Oration gratulatory to his Majesty for love, and the many good things they enjoy under his peaceful Government. A King of large Dominions hath his Vice-Roys, or in∣ferior Kings under him, to agitate his State Affairs, and keep his Subjects in good Decorum. Other Officers there are, but how to distinguish them by Name is some∣thing difficult. For their Laws, as their Vices come short of many other Nations, so they have not so many Laws, though they are not without some, which they in∣flict upon notorious Malefactors, as Traitors to their Prince, inhumane Murthe∣rers, and, some say, Adulterers: for Theft, as they have nothing to steal worth the Life of a Man, therefore they have no Law to Execute for Trivials, a Subject being more precious in the Eye of his Prince, than, where Men are so scarce, to be cast away upon so sleight a matter. A Malefactor having deserv'd Death, and being apprehended, is brought before the King, and some other of the wisest Men, where they enquire out the original of the thing, after proceeding by aggravation of Cir∣cumstances he is found Guilty, and Cast by the Jury of their strict Inquisition, he is Condemn'd and Executed in the following manner: The Executioner comes in, who blind-folds the Party, sets him in the publick view, and Brains him with a 
Tamahauke,
 or Club; which done, his Friends bury him.


Now to speak something of their Marriages, the Kings and the 
Powwows,
 or great Doctors, may have two or three Wives, but seldom use it, Men of ordinary Rank having but one; which dilproves the report, that they had eight or ten Wives apiece. When a Man hath a desire to Marry, he first gets the good will of the Maid or Widow, after, the consent of her Friends for her part; and for himself, if he be at his own disposing, and if the King will, the Match is made, her Dowry of 
Wampompeage
 paid, the 
Sagamore
 or King (who for every Marriage hath a Fathom of 
Wampompeage,
 which is about the value of seven or eight shillings) joyns their Hands, never to part till Death, unless she prove a Whore, for which they may put away their Wives.


As it is natural to all Mortals to worship something, so do these People, but ex∣actly to describe to whom their Worship is chiefly bent, is very difficult: They acknowledge especially two, 
Ketan,
 some say 
Tantum,
 their good God, and 
Hoba∣mocco,
 some say 
Squantum,
 their evil God; to 
Ketan
 they Sacrifice (as the ancient 
Heathens
 did to 
Ceres
) after their Garners be full with a good Crop. They like∣wise Invocate this God for fair Weather, for Rain in time of Drought, and for the recovery of their Sick; but if they do not hear them, then they verrifie the old Verse, 
Flectere si nequeo Superos Acheronta movebo,
 their 
Powwows
 betaking themselves to their Exorcismes and Necromantick Charms, by which they bring to pass strange things, if we may believe the 
Indians,
 who report of one 
Pissacannaw,
 that he could make the Water burn, the Rocks move, the Trees dance, and metamorphose himself into a flaming Man. In Winter, when there is no green Leaves to be got, he would out of the Ashes of an old Leaf, calcin'd and put into the Water, pro∣duce a new green Leaf: And of a dead Snakes Skin, a living Snake, both to be seen, felt and heard. The manner of their action in their Conjuration is thus: The Parties that are sick or lame being brought before them, the 
Powwow
 sitting down, the rest of the 
Indians
 giving attentive audience to his Imprecations and In∣vocations,

and after the violent expression of many a hideous bellowing and groan∣ing he makes a stop, and then all the Auditors with one voice utter a short 
Canto;
 which done, the 
Powwow
 still proceeds in his Invocations, sometimes roaring like a Bear, other times groaning like a dying Horse, foaming at the Mouth like a cha∣sed Boar, smiting on his naked Brest and Thighs with such violence, as if he were mad: Thus will he continue sometimes half a day, spending his Lungs, sweating out his Fat, and tormenting his Body in this diabolical Worship. Sometimes the Devil, for requital of their Worship, recovers the Party, to nuzzle them up in their devillish Religion. But since the 
English
 (upon whom, and in whose presence it is said the 
Powwows
 could never work their Witchcrafts) frequented those Parts, they daily fall from his Colours, relinquishing their former Fopperies, and ac∣knowledge the Power of the 
English
-man's God, as they call him. And it is reported of them, that at the very first they were so tractable to the 
Christian
 Religion, that they would say King 
James
 was good, and his God good, but their 
Tanto
 nought, though of their two Gods he was accounted the good one.


They use no other Weapons in War than Bowes and Arrows, saving that their Captains have long Spears, on which, if they return Conquerors, they carry the Heads of their chief Enemies that they slay in the Wars, it being the Custom to cut off their Heads, Hands and Feet, to bear home to their Wives and Children, as true tokens of their renowned Victory. When they go to their Wars, it is their Custom to paint their Faces with diversity of Colours, some being all black as Jet, some red, some half red and half black, some black and white, others spotted with divers kinds of Colours, being all disguis'd to their Enemies, to make them more terrible to their Foes, putting on likewise their rich Jewels, Pendents, and 
Wampom∣peage,
 to put them in mind that they Fight not onely for their Children, Wives and Lives, but likewise for their Goods, Lands and Liberties. Being thus Arm'd with this Warlike Paint, the antique Warriors make towards their Enemies in a disor∣der'd manner, without any Soldier-like Marching, or Warlike Postures, being deaf to any word of Command, ignorant of falling off or on, of doubling Ranks or Files, but let flie their winged Shaftsmen without either fear or wit: Their Artil∣lery being spent, he that hath no Arms to Fight, finds Legs to run away.


They have two sorts of Games, one call'd 
Puim,
 the other 
Hubbub,
 not much un∣like Cards and Dice, being no other than Lottery. 
Puim
 is fifty or sixty small Bents of a Foot long, which they divide to the number of their Gamesters, shuffling them first between the Palms of their Hands; be that hath more than his Fellow, is so much the forwarder in his Game: Many other Whimsies be in this Game, which would be too long to commit to Paper. He that is a noted Gamester hath a Hole in his Ear, wherein he carries his 
Puims
 in defiance of his Antagonists. 
Hubbub
 is five small Bones in a small smooth Tray; the Bones be like a Die, but something flatter, black on the one side and white on the other, which they place on the Ground, against which violently thumping the Platter, the Bones mount, changing colours with the windy whisking of their Hands to and fro; which action in that sport they much use, smiting themselves on the Beast and Thighs, crying out 
Hub, Hub, Hub;
 they may be heard play at this Game a quarter of a Mile off: The Bones being all black or white make a double Game; if three of one colour, and two of another, then they afford but a single Game; four, of a colour, and one differing, is nothing; so long as the Man wins he keeps the Tray, but if he loose the next Man takes it. They are so bewitch'd with these two Games, that they will lose sometimes all they have; Beaver, 
Moose
-skins, Kettles, 
Wampompeage, Mo∣whacks,
 Hatchets, Knives, all is confiscate by these two Games. For their Sports of

action they have commonly but three or four, as Football, Shooting, Running, and Swimming; when they play Countrey against Countrey, there are rich Goals, all behung with 
Wampompeage, Mowhacks,
 Beaver Skins, and black Otter Skins: Their Goals are a Mile long plac'd on the Sands, which are as even as a Board; their Ball is no bigger than a Hand-ball, which sometimes they mount in the Air with their naked Feet, sometimes it is sway'd by the multitude, sometime also it is two days before they get a Goal, then they mark the Ground they win, and begin there the next day. Before they come to this Sport they paint themselves, even as when they go to War, in policy to prevent future mischief, because no man should know him that mov'd his patience, or accidentally hurt his Person, taking away the oc∣casion of studying revenge. Before they begin, their Arms are put off, and hung upon some neighboring Tree, after which they make a long scrowl on the Sand, over which they shake Hands, and with loving Hearts scuffle for Victory. While the Men Play, the Boys Pipe, and the Women Dance and Sing Trophies of their Husbands Conquests; all being done, a Feast summons their departure.


Such is their dexterity in Shooting, that they can hit a running Hind, or flying Pigeon, without a standing pause or left-ey'd blinking; they draw their Arrows between their Fingers and the Thumb; their Bowes are quick, but not very strong, not killing at above six or seven score distance: Shooting at one another, they have a trick with swift conveyance to shun the Arrow; this they do to make them expert against time of War. They are train'd up to their Bowes even from their Childhood; for little Boys with Bowes made of little Sticks, and Arrows made of great Bents, will hit down a piece of Tobacco-pipe every time a good way off. As these 
Indians
 are good Marks-men, so are they well experienc'd where the very Life of every Creature lieth, and know where to smite him to make him die presently. Their Swimming is not after our 
English
 fashion, of spread Arms and Legs, which they hold too tiresom, but like Dogs, their Arms before them, cut∣ting through the Liquids with their right Shoulder: In this manner they will Swim very swift and far, either in rough or smooth Waters, sometimes for their ease lying as still as a Log; sometimes they will play the Dive-doppers, and come up in unexpected places.


For their Hunting, it is to be noted, that they have no swift-footed Greyhounds to let slip at the sight of the Deer, no deep-mouth'd Hounds, or scenting Beagles, to find out their desired Prey; themselves are all this, who in that time of the year when the Deer comes down, having certain Hunting-houses in such places where they know the Deer doth usually frequent, in which they keep their Rendezvouz, their Snares, and all their Accoutrements for that Employment: when they get sight of a Deer, 
Moose,
 or Bear, they study how to get the Wind of him, and ap∣proaching within shot, stab their Mark quite through, if the Bones hinder not. The chief thing they Hunt after is Deer, 
Mooses
 and Bears: It grieves them more to see an 
English
-man take one Deer, than a thousand Acres of Land. They Hunt likewise after Wolves, wild Cats, 
Rackoons,
 Otters, Beavers, and 
Musquashes,
 Trading both their Skins and Flesh to the 
English.
 Beside this Artillery they have other devices to kill their Game, as sometimes Hedges, a Mile or two Miles long, being a Mile wide at one end, and made narrower and narrower by degrees, lea∣ving onely a Gap of six Foot long; over against which in the day-time they lie lurking, to shoot the Deer which come through that narrow passage; so many as come within the circumference of that Hedge, seldom return back to leap over, unless they be forc'd by the chasing of some ravenous Wolf, or sight of some acci∣dental Passenger: In the Night, at the Gap of this Hedge, they set Deer-traps,

which are Springes made of young Trees, and smooth wrought Cords, so strong, that it will toss a Horse if he be caught in it.


In the Trade of Fishing they are very expert, being experienc'd in the know∣ledge of all Baits for several Fishes, and divers Seasons; being not ignorant like∣wise of the removal of Fishes, knowing when to Fish in Rivers, and when at Rocks, when in Bays, and when at Seas: Since the 
English
 came they are furnish'd with 
English
 Hooks and Lines, for before they made them of Hemp, being more curi∣ously wrought, of stronger Materials than ours, and hook'd with Bone-Hooks; but laziness drives them to buy, more than profit or commendations wins them to make of their own. They make likewise very strong Sturgeon-nets, with which they catch Sturgeons of twelve, fourteen, and sixteen, and some eighteen Foot long in the day-time, and in the night-time they betake themselves to their Birchen 
Canoos,
 in which they carry a forty-fathom Line, with a sharp-bearded Dart fastned at the end thereof; then lighting a Torch made of Birchen Rinds, they wave it to and again by their 
Canoo
 side, which the Sturgeon much delighted with, comes to them tumbling and playing, turning up his white Belly, into which they thrust their Lance, his Back being impenetrable; which done, they hale to the Shore their strugling Prize. They have often recourse into the Rocks whereupon the Sea beats, in warm Weather, to look out for sleepy Seals, whose Oyl they much esteem, using it for divers things. In Summer they Fish any where, but in Winter in the fresh Water onely, and Ponds; in frosty Weather they cut round Holes in the Ice, about which they will sit like so many Apes with their naked Breeches upon the cold Ice, catching of Pikes, Pearches, Breams, and other sorts of fresh-Water Fish.


Their Arts and Manufactures are divers, as first their dressing of all manner of Skins, which they do by scraping and rubbing, afterwards painting them with antique Embroiderings in unchangeable Colours; sometimes they take off the Hair, especially if it be not kill'd in season. Their Bowes they make of a handsom shape, strung commonly with the Sinews of 
Mooses;
 their Arrows of young Elder, feather'd with Feathers of Eagles Wings and Tails, headed with Brass in shape of a Heart or Triangle, fastned in a slender piece of Wood six or eight Inches long, which is fram'd to put loose in the pithy Elder, aftewards bound fast for riving: Their Arrows are made in this manner, because it might shake from his Head, and be left behind for their finding, and the Pile onely re∣main to gaul the wounded Beast. Their Cordage is so even, soft, and smooth, that it looks more like Silk than Hemp. Their Sturgeon Nets are not deep, nor above thirty or forty Foot long; which in ebbing low Waters they stake fast to the Ground where they are sure the Sturgeon will come, never looking more at it till the next low Water. Their 
Canoos
 are made either of Pine-trees, which before they were acquainted with 
English
 Tools, they burn'd hollow, scraping them smooth with Clam-shells and Oyster-shells, cutting their out-sides With Stone Hatchets. These Boats are not above a Foot and a half, or two Foot wide, and twenty Foot long. Their other 
Canoos
 be made of thin Birch Rinds, close Ribb'd, and on the in-side with broad thin Hoops, like the Hoops of a Tub; these are made very light, a Man may carry one of them a Mile, being made purposely to carry from River to River, and from Bay to Bay, to shorten Land-passages. In these cockling Fly-boats, wherein an 
English
-man can scarce sit without a fearful tottering, they will venture to Sea, when an 
English
 Shallop dare not bear a Knot of Sail, scudding over the over-grown Waves as fast as a wind-driven Ship, being driven by their Paddles, being much like Battle-doors; if a cross Wave (which is seldom) turn her Keel up-side down, they by swimming free her, and scramble into her again.




Their Language, is onely peculiar to themselves, not inclining to any of the more refined Tongues. Some have thought they might be of the dispersed 
Jews,
 because some of their words are near unto the 
Hebrew;
 but by the same rule they may conclude them to be some of the gleanings of all Nations, because they have words which sound after the 
Greek, Latine, French,
 and other Tongues. Their Lan∣guage is hard to learn, few of the 
English
 being able to speak any of it, or capable of the right pronunciation, which is the chief grace of their Tongue: They pro∣nounce much after the Diphthongs, excluding 
L
 and 
R,
 which in our 
English
 Tongue they pronounce with as much difficulty, as most of the 
Dutch
 do 
T
 and 
H,
 calling a Lobster a 
Nobstann.
 Every Countrey doth something differ in their Speech, even as our Northern People do from the Southern, and Western from them; espe∣cially the 
Tarrentine,
 whose Tongue runs so much upon 
R,
 that they wharle much in pronunciation. When any Ships come near the Shore, they demand whether they are King 
Charles
's 
Torries,
 with such a rumbling sound, as if one were beating on an unbrac'd Drum. In serious Discourse our Southern 
Indians
 use seldom any short Colloquies, but speak their minds at large, without any interjected Discourses from any, the rest giving diligent audience to his utterance; which done, some or other returns him as long an Answer: They love not to speak 
multa, sed multum;
 seldom are their words and their deeds strangers. According to the matter of their discourse, so are their acting Gestures in their Expressions.


The 
Indians
 are of lusty and healthful Bodies, not experimentally knowing those Diseases which are incident to other Countreys, as Feavers, Pleurisies, Calentures, Agues, Consumptions, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Dropsies, Gouts, Pox, Measles, or the like, but spin out the thred of their Days to a fair length, numbering sixty, eighty, some a hundred years: But when any one lies a dying, the doleful cries, and throbbing sighs of the Friends and Relations, express unspeakable sorrow; and when the Party is dead and laid in the Ground, they not onely weep and howl for a good space over the Grave, but also keep Annual Solemnities of Mourning, rubbing their Faces with black Lead all about the Eye-brows, and part of their Cheeks; yet do they hold the Immortality of the Soul, in which their 
Indian
 Faith jumps much with the 
Turkish Alchoran,
 dreaming of a certain Paradise, or South-West 
Elysium,
 wherein they shall everlastingly abide, solacing themselves in odori∣ferous Gardens, fruitful Corn-fields, green Meadows, bathing their tawny Hides in the cool Streams of pleasant Rivers, and sheltering themselves from Heat and Cold in the sumptuous Palaces fram'd by Nature, concluding, that neither care nor pain shall molest them, but that Natures bounty will administer all things with a vo∣luntary contribution from the Store-house of their 
Elysium;
 at the Portal whereof, they say, lies a great Dog, whose churlish snarlings deny admission to unworthy Intruders: wherefore it is their custom to bury with them their Bowes and Arrows, and good store of their 
Wampompeage
 and 
Mowhacks,
 the one to affright that affront∣ing 
Cerberus,
 the other to purchase more immense Prerogatives in their Paradise. For their Enemies and loose Livers, whom they account unworthy of this imagi∣nary Happiness, they say that they pass to the infernal Dwellings of 
Abamocho,
 to be tortur'd according to the Fictions of the ancient 
Heathen.


The drudgery of all laborious sorts of Work, and the management of all dome∣stick Affairs, lies wholly upon the 
Indian
 Women, who are made meer Slaves by their Husbands; they build the Houses, sowe and reap the Corn, provide Lobsters for their Husbands to bait their Hooks when they go a Fishing for 
Basse
 or Cod; and for these Lobsters they are many times forc'd to dive in the extreamest Wea∣ther, then lug home a great weight of them upon their Backs, as also all the Fish

which their Husbands catch for pleasure, from the places where they were caught: They dress all the Meat, serve it up to their Husbands, and waiting till they have fill'd their Bellies, are glad of their leavings. In Summer they gather Flags, of which they make Mats for Houses, and Hemp and Rushes, with Dying Stuff, of which they make curious Baskets, with intermixed Colours and Pourtraictures of antique Imagery. These Baskets are of all sizes from a Quart to a Quarter, in which they carry their Luggage. In Winter they are their Husbands Caterers, trudging to the Clam-banks for their Belly-timber, and their Porters to lug it home. They likewise sew their Husbands Shoes, and weave Coats of 
Turky
 Fea∣thers, besides all their ordinary Houshold drudgery which daily lies upon them, insomuch that a great Belly hinders no business, nor doth a Child-birth take much time, but the young Infant being greas'd and sooted, wrapp'd in a Beavers Skin, bound with his Feet up to his Bum, upon a Board two Foot long and one Foot broad, and his Face expos'd to all nipping Weather, this little 
Pappouse
 travels about with his bare-footed Mother to paddle in the Icy Clam-banks, after three or four days of Age have confirm'd her recovery. For their Carriage, it is very civil, Smiles being the greatest grace of their Mirth. Their Musick is Lullabies in Rocking their Chil∣dren, who generally are as quiet as if they had neither Spleen or Lungs. Their Voices are generally both sweet and well order'd, so far as pure Nature teacheth them. Their Modesty drives them to wear more Clothes than the Men, having al∣ways a Coat of Cloth or Skins, wrapp'd like a Blanket about their Loyns, reaching down to their Hams, which they never put off in Company.


There are to be reckon'd up forty five chief Towns, besides what others there may be of less note, built or made habitable by the 
English
 since their first arrival in 
New England,
 till about the Year 1650.


First, 
St. Georges Fort,
 where the first Plantation was setled,
 at the Mouth of the River 
Sagadebock,
 in a kind of 
Peninsula,
 or half Island.


The second, 
New Plymouth,
 seated no less commodiously upon a large Bay,
 call'd by the Natives 
Pautuxed;
 where they first setled that went over out of dissatisfa∣ction to the Church-Government of 
England.


The third, 
Salem,
 call'd by the 
Indians, Mahumbeak;
 which stands on the middle of a Neck of Land very pleasantly, having a South River on the one side, and a North River on the other side. This Town seems to have been built in the Year 1628. by a part of that Company, who, being sent over by the 
Merchant-Adventurers,
 setled themselves in this Cape.


The fourth 
Mashawmut,
 or 
Charles-town,
 situate on a Neck of Land on the North-side of the River 
Charles.
 The form of this Town, in the Frontispiece of it, re∣sembleth the Head, Neck, and Shoulders of a Man; through the right Shoulder whereof runs the Navigable River 
Mistick,
 which by its near approach to 
Charles
 River in one place, makes the chief part of the Town a 
Peninsula:
 It consists of a hundred and fifty Dwelling-houses, many of them beautifi'd with pleasant Gar∣dens and Orchards: Near the Water-side is a large Market-place, forth of which issue two fair Streets; and in it stands a large and well built Church.


The fifth, 
Matapan,
 or 
Dorchester,
 a Fronteer Town,
 standing over against the Island near the Sea-side: It is water'd with two small Rivers, and is built in the form of a Serpent turning its Head Northward; it hath Orchards and Gardens full of Fruit-trees.


The sixth is 
Boston,
 anciently 
Accomonticus,
 the Center and Metropolis of the rest,
 built in the form of a Heart, and fortifi'd with two Hills on the Front-part thereof, the one having great store of Artillery mounted thereon, the other having

a strong Battery, built of whole Timber, and fill'd with Earth: At the Descent of the Hill lies a large Cave or Bay, on which the chief part of this Town is built, over-topp'd with a third Hill, all three like over-topping Towers, keeping a con∣stant Watch to foresee the approach of foreign Dangers. The chiefest part of this City-like Town is crowded upon the Sea Banks, and wharf'd out with great Indu∣stry and Cost, the Edifices large and beautiful, whose continual enlargement pre∣sageth some sumptuous City.


The seventh,
 
Roxbury,
 situated between 
Boston
 and 
Dorchester,
 water'd with cool and pleasant Springs issuing from the Rocky Hills, and with small Freshets water∣ing the Valleys of this fertile Town: The form of it resembleth a Wedge double pointed, entring between the two above-mention'd Towns; and in the room of those Swamps, or tearing Bushes which were there before, they have now goodly Fruit-trees, fruitful Fields and Gardens.


The eighth is 
Lynne,
 or (according to the 
Indian
 Name, 
Saugus
) situated between 
Salem
 and 
Charles-town,
 near a River, whose strong Freshet at the end of Winter fills all her Banks, and with a violent Torrent vents it self into the Sea. This Town is almost square, consisting many years ago of above a hundred Dwelling-houses, ha∣ving also an Iron Mill in constant use: The Church being on a level Land, unde∣fended from the North-West Wind, is made with Steps descending into the Earth.


The ninth is call'd 
Water-town,
 anciently 
Pigsgusset,
 situated upon one of the Branches of 
Charles
-River, water'd with many pleasant Springs and small Rivulets, running like Veins throughout her Body. This Town began by occasion of Sir 
Richard Saltingstall,
 who arriving with store of Cattel and Servants, Winter'd in these Parts.


In the Year 1633. there was erected between 
Charles-town
 and 
Water-town,
 a Place call'd 
New-town,
 and by the 
Indians, Amongcangen,
 since nam'd 
Cambridge,
 being the tenth in order: It is in form like a List of Broad-cloth, reaching to the most Sou∣therly part of 
Merrimeck
 River; it hath comely and well order'd Streets, and two fair Colledges;
 the first call'd 
Harverd Colledge,
 from Mr. 
John Harverd,
 who at his Death gave a thousand Pounds to it; to the other Mr. 
John Harnes
 was the chief Be∣nefactor. This Town was appointed to be the Seat of the Government, but it continu'd not long.


The eleventh call'd 
Ipswich,
 or 
Sawacatuc
 by the 
Indians,
 is situated on a fair and delightful River, issuing forth from a very pleasant Pond, and afterwards breaking its Course through a hideous Swamp of large extent; it lies in the 
Sagamoreship,
 or Earldom of 
Aggawan,
 now by the 
English
 call'd 
Essex.


Twelve Miles from 
Ipswich,
 near upon the Streams of 
Merrimeck
 River, is situa∣ted the twelfth, call'd 
Newbury.


The People of 
New-town,
 or 
Cambridge,
 upon their removal of the Plantation of 
Canectico,
 passing up the River, built a Town, which they call'd 
Hartford,
 the thir∣teenth in number, divers others coming in the room of those that departed from 
Cambridge.


The fourteenth,
 seated upon a fair fresh River (whose Rivulets are fill'd with fresh Marsh, and her Streams with Fish, it being a Branch of that large River of 
Merri∣meck Allwives
) is built in the Inland Countrey, and call'd 
Concord:
 It consisted at first of above fifty Families: Their Buildings are for the most part conveniently plac'd on one streight Stream under a Sunny Bank, in a low Level. The People that first set forth to build this Town, sustain'd great hardship and misery, by rea∣son of the uncouth Ways, and extremity of the Weather, it being the first Inland Town that was built.




South-East of 
Charles
-River, upon the Sea-Coast,
 is situated the fifteenth Town 
Hingham;
 the form whereof is somewhat intricate to describe, by reason of the Sea∣wasting Crooks, where it beats upon a moultring Shore; yet in some places the Streets are compleat: It consisted at first of about sixty Families.


The sixteenth is in 
Plymouth
 Government, situate upon the Sea-Coast,
 first nam'd 
Dukes-bury,
 afterwards 
Sandwich.


About the year 1617. a new Supply coming over into these Parts,
 and not find∣ing in the 
Mattachusets
 Government any commodious place to settle in, they after much search took up a place somewhat more Southerly, near the 
Shalles
 of 
Capecod,
 where they found a commodious Harbor for Shipping, and a fit place to erect a Town in, which they built in a short time, with very fair Houses and compleat Streets; and shortly after several others: Amongst which they erected a new Government, which from their first Fronteer Town, being the seventeenth, was call'd 
Newhaven.


The eighteenth is in the Government of the 
Mattachusets,
 and call'd 
Dedham,
 being an Inland Town, situate about ten Miles from 
Boston
 in the County of 
Suffolk,
 well water'd with many pleasant Streams, and abounding with Gardens and Fruit-Trees: It consisted at first of about a hundred Families, being generally given to Husbandry.


The nineteenth being also in this Government is call'd 
Weymouth,
 batter'd on the East with the Sea Waves; on the South-West Rocks and Swamps make it delight∣ful to the Deer, as the ploughable Meadow-Lands to the Inhabitants.


About the Year 1638. 
Printing
 was brought over into 
New England.


About six Miles from 
Ipswich,
 North-Eastward,
 was erected another Town call'd 
Rowly,
 being the twentieth.


About the Year 1639. began the one and twentieth Town 
Hampton,
 in the County of 
Norfolk,
 to be built: It is situate near the Sea-Coast, not far from the River of 
Merrimeck:
 The great store of salt Marsh did entice the People to set down their Habitations there.


Not far from this Town of 
Hampton,
 was erected the two and twentieth,
 call'd 
Salisbury,
 seated upon the broad swift Torrent of 
Merrimeck
-River: It lieth on the Northern side, over against the Town of 
Newbury,
 the River between them being about half a Mile broad, but hath an Island in the midst thereof, which makes it the more easily passable. The situation of this Town is very pleasant, the Skirts thereof abounding in fair and goodly Meadows, with good store of stately Tim∣ber in many places upon the Uplands.


About the Year 1640. by a fresh Supply of People that setled in 
Long-Island,
 was there erected the twenty third Town, call'd 
Southampton;
 by the 
Indians, Agawom.


The same Year also the Town of 
Sudbury,
 being the twenty fourth,
 began to be built in the Inland Countrey: It is furnish'd with great store of fresh Marsh, but lying very low, it is much endammag'd with Land-floods.


About this time there was built at Mount 
Wollestone,
 by some old Planters and certain Farmers of the great Town of 
Boston,
 a Town nam'd 
Braintree,
 being the twenty fifth, within the 
Mattachusets
 Government: It is well peopled, and hath great store of Land in Tillage.


In the Year 1641. Mr. 
Richard Blindman
 coming from 
Green Harbour,
 a Place in 
Plymouth
 Patent, with some few People of his acquaintance, setled in 
Cape Anne,
 where they built the twenty sixth Town, and nam'd it 
Gloucester.


There is also situate upon 
Puscataque
 River, to the North-East of 
Boston,
 a Town call'd 
Dover,
 being the twenty seventh, the People by voluntary resignation being under the 
Mattachusets
 Government.




In the Year 1642. was erected the eight and twentieth Town,
 call'd 
Wooburn.


In the Year 1644. 
Reading
 the nine and twentieth Town was built,
 being in the Government of the 
Mattachusets;
 it is well water'd and situated about a great Pond, having two Mills, a Saw-Mill, and a Corn-Mill, which stand upon two several Streams.


A little after was built the thirtieth Town in this Colony,
 call'd 
Wenham,
 situate between 
Salem
 and 
Ipswich;
 it is very well water'd, as most Inland Towns are, and the People live altogether on Husbandry.


About the Year 1645. one Mr. 
Pinchin,
 having out of desire to improve his Estate by Trading with the 
Indians,
 setled himself in a place very remote from any of the Towns of the 
Mattachusets
 Colony, yet under their Government, and great store of People still resorting to him, they at last erected a Town upon the River 
Canectico,
 calling it 
Spring-field,
 being the one and thirtieth Town; it is very fitly seated for a Beaver Trade with the 
Indians,
 in regard it is situate upon this large Navigable River, and upon some Rivulets of the same.


In the Year 1648. was founded the Town of 
Haverhill,
 being the two and thir∣tieth, about a Mile or two from the place where the River of 
Merrimeck
 receives in∣to it self the River 
Shawshin,
 which is one of her three chief Heads.


Not long after,
 the Town of 
Malden,
 being the three and thirtieth Town, was built by certain People that came out of 
Charles-Town;
 these two Towns being se∣ver'd the one from the other by the large River of 
Mistick.


The rest we shall onely name, as 34. 
Berwick,
 alias 
Chawun.
 35 
Oxford,
 alias 
Sago∣quas. Falmouth,
 alias 
Totam.
 36. 
Bristol.
 37. 
Hull,
 alias 
Passataquack.
 38. 
Dartmouth,
 alias 
Bohanna.
 39. 
Norwich,
 alias 
Segocket.
 40. 
Taunton,
 alias 
Cohannet.
 41. 
Greens-Harbour.
 42. 
Yarmouth.
 43. 
Northam,
 alias 
Pascataqua.
 44. 
Exeter.
 45. 
Weymouth.


The chief Rivers of 
New England
 are, 
Pascataway, Sagadahoc, Pemmaquid, Agamentico, Merrimeck, Tachobacco, Mistick, Narraganset, Mishuwin, Connectacut, Newichwavoch, Kynebequy.


The 
Indian
 Natives are now become so weak in number, and in some measure reduc'd to a dread of the growth of the 
English,
 that of late years they have not practis'd any thing against them, or at least, not justifi'd them by numbers in open Hostility, willing rather to purchase their Peace and buy off Injuries com∣mitted by them at the Price of their Lands and Possessions.


And although care and expence hath been many years apply'd to the Conversi∣on of 
Indians
 to the Faith, however inclinable they seem'd at first to the imbracing thereof, not then so well discerning the insincerity of its Professors; yet there are so few of late who do imbrace it or persevere in it (wanting a good Foundation for instruction in Moral Honesty, and perhaps the example of it in those that undertake to instruct them in Religion;) that 
Christianity
 to them seems a 
Chimera,
 Religion a design to draw them from the libidinous Pleasures of a lazy Life; however, some there are who make Profession of 
Christianity,
 and some who are educated in the Schools of 
New Cambridge,
 to entitle them to Preach the Gospel in their own Lan∣guage.


One great hindrance to the Propagation of the Faith amongst those 
Heathens,
 is the diversity of their Languages; for it is commonly known, that the Natives themselves do not understand one another, if their Habitations are but at forty Miles distance.


Their Church-Government and Discipline is Congregational and Independent, yet in some places more rigid than others, for in many Towns there yet remains some leaven of 
Presbytery,
 from which Sects our 
Independency
 had its Original; inso∣much,

that one of the most remarkable Opposers of 
Episcopal Government,
 Doctor 
Bastwick
 (who, spoil'd so much Paper in railing at the Church Government of 
England,
 and crying up 
Liberty of Conscience
) finding the Apostacy of his own Bre∣thren of 
Boston
 from their first Principles, and his, generally prevail over them, even to the denying that liberty to others, which they seem'd only to aim at, did write a large and vehement 
Dehortatory Epistle
 to them from their 
New Lights
 or 
Paths,
 say∣ing, 
That according to their present Tenents, they could not pretend to be better, or other than a Christian Synagogue.


Their Laws and Methods of Government are wholly of their own framing, each Colony for themselves, makes an Annual choice of Governor, Deputy Go∣vernor, and a certain number of Assistants, by the plurality of Suffrages collected from their several Towns, the Electors are only Free-men and Church-Members; for he that is not a Member of their Church, can neither chuse, nor be chosen a Magistrate, nor have his Children Baptiz'd; besides the loss of many other Pri∣viledges, and liable moreover to frequent, if not constant Mulcts for absenting them∣selves from 
Divine Worship
 (so call'd) in their Meeting-houses.


Since the transmitting of the Patent in 
New England,
 the Election is not by Voi∣ces, nor erection of Hands as formerly, but by Papers, thus:


The general Court-electory sitting, where are present in the Church, or Meet∣ing-house at 
Boston,
 the old Governor, Deputy, and all the Magistrates, and two Deputies or Burgesses for every Town, or at least one; all the Freemen are bid to come in at one Door, and bring their Votes in Paper for the new Governor, and deliver them down upon the Table, before the Court, and so pass forth at another Door; those that are absent, send their Votes by Proxies. All being de∣liver'd in, the Votes are counted, and according to the major part, the old Gover∣nor pronounceth, 
That such an one is chosen Governor for the year ensuing.
 Then the Freemen, in like manner, bring their Votes for the Deputy Governor, who being also chosen, the Governor propoundeth the Assistants one after another. New Assistants are, of late, put in nomination, by an Order of general Court, before∣hand to be consider'd of: If a Freeman give in a Blank, that rejects the Man nam'd; if the Freeman makes any mark with a Pen upon the Paper which he brings, that elects the Man nam'd: Then the Blanks and mark'd Papers are num∣ber'd, and according to the major part of either, the Man in Nomination stands elected or rejected; and so for all the Assistants. And after every new Election, which is, by their Patent, to be upon the last Wednesday in 
Easter
 Term, the new Governor and Officers are all new Sworn. The Governor and Assistants chuse the Secretary. And all the Court consisting of Governor, Deputy, Assistants, and De∣puties of Towns, give their Votes as well as the rest; and the Ministers and El∣ders, and all Church-Officers, have their Votes also in all these Elections of chief Magistrates: Constables, and all other inferior Officers, are sworn in the general, quarter, or other Courts, or before any Assistant.


Every Free-man when he is admitted, takes a strict Oath, to be true to the So∣ciety or Jurisdiction.


There are two general Courts, one every half year, wherein they make Laws or Ordinances: The Ministers advise in making of Laws, especially Ecclesiastical, and are present in Courts, and advise in some special Causes Criminal, and in framing of Fundamental Laws.


There are besides four Quarter-Courts for the whole Jurisdiction, besides other petty Courts, one every quarter at 
Boston, Salem,
 and 
Ipswich,
 with their several Ju∣risdictions; besides every Town, almost, hath a petty Court for small Debts and Trespasses, under twenty Shillings.




In the general Court, or great quarter Courts, before the Civil Magistrates, are try'd all Actions and Causes Civil and Criminal, and also Ecclesiastical, especially touching Non-members: And they themselves say, that in the general and quarter Courts, they have the Power of Parliament, Kings-Bench, Common-Pleas, Chan∣cery, High-Commission, and Star-Chamber, and all other Courts of 
England,
 and in divers Cases have exercis'd that Power upon the Kings Subjects there, as is not difficult to prove. They have put to death, banish'd, fin'd Men, cut off Mens Ears, whip'd, imprison'd Men, and all these for Ecclesiastical and Civil Offences, and without sufficient Record. In the lesser quarter Courts are try'd, in some, Acti∣ons under ten Pounds, in 
Boston,
 under twenty, and all Criminal Causes not touch∣ing Life or Member. From the petty quarter Courts, or other Courts, the parties may appeal to the great quarter Courts, from thence to the general Court, from which there is no Repeal.


Twice a year,
 in the said quarter Courts held before the general Courts, are two Grand-Juries sworn for the Jurisdiction, one for one Court, and the other for the other; and they are charg'd to enquire and Present Offences reduc'd by the Gover∣nor who gives the Charge.


Matters of Debt,
 Trespass, and upon the Case, and Equity, yea and of Heresie also, are try'd by a Jury.


The Parties are warn'd to challenge any Jury-man before he be sworn; but be∣cause there is but one Jury in a Court for trial of Causes; and all Parties not pre∣sent at their Swearing, the liberty of challenge is much hinder'd, and some incon∣veniences do happen thereby. Jurors are return'd by the Marshal, he was at first call'd 
The Beadle of the Society.


The Parties in all Causes, speak themselves for the most part, and some of the Magistrates where they think cause requireth, do the part of Advocates without Fee or Reward.


Though among the several Colonies which were founded here by the conflu∣ence of dissenting Zealots, this Government is exercis'd, differing from that of the Church and State of 
England:
 yet in those Provinces which are granted by parti∣cular Persons, the Government is much more conformable to that of 
England;
 but as the 
Mattachusets
 or 
Bostoners
 were from the beginning the most Potent and Predo∣minant of all the rest of the Colonies, (insomuch, that 
Boston
 may well be accoun∣ted the Metropolis of all 
New England,
) so of late years they have still usurp'd more and more Power and Authority over the rest; and especially have not stuck to give Laws to the foresaid Provinces allotted to particular Persons, and have gone about wholly to subjugate those places to themselves, intrenching upon the rights of the true Proprietors; and that, even contrary to the Kings express Commands by his Officers, there, and as it were in open defiance of his Majesty and Government, as is evident from this following Narration, of their behavior upon a business of this nature.


IN the Year of our Lord 1665. his Majesties Commissioners for the Affairs of 
New England,
 being in the Province of 
Mayne,
 the People being much unsetled in Point of Government, by reason the 
Mattachusets
 Colony, or 
Boston
 Govern∣ment, did usurp compulsively a Power over them contrary to their wills; and the right of Sir 
Ferdinando Gorges
 Heir, who had his Commission then in the place, did unanimously Petition to his Majesties Commissioners to settle the Government; upon which the said Commissioners examin'd the Bounds and Right of Mr. 
Gorges
 Patent, with all the Allegations and Pretensions on both sides, and so according

to their Instruction from his Majesty, did settle a temporary Government under his Majesty's immediate Authority, until such time as his Majesty should give his final determination thereof; and for that end did Institute Justices of the Peace to Go∣vern the Province according to the true Laws of 
England.
 Also his Majesty was pleas'd by his 
Mandamus
 in 
April
 1666, to the Governors of 
Boston,
 to signifie that it was his will and pleasure, That the Province of 
Main
 should stand good as his Commissioners had setled it, until he had more leisure to determine it; yet not∣withstanding, after three years quiet possession, and exercising of Government by the Kings Justices, according to their Commission granted by his Majesty's Com∣missioners, the 
Bostoners,
 without any Conference with the said Justices, did in a hostile manner oppose the King's Power, 
July
 1668. which was as followeth:


The General Court of 
Boston
 sent their Warrants to keep Court at 
York
 under their Authority, and for that purpose Commissionated Magistrates by their own Authority, namely Major General 
John Leveret,
 Mr. 
Edward Ting,
 Captain 
Richard Walden,
 and Captain 
Robert Pike:
 Whereupon the King's Justices did oppose their Warrants, and sent Post to 
New York,
 with an Address to General 
Nicholas,
 for Ad∣vice what to do therein; who forthwith dispatch'd away to the Governors of 
Boston,
 informing them of the danger of their Proceeding, it being an open breach of Duty, to subvert the Government establish'd by his Majesty's Power; also sent the King's 
Mandamus, April
 1666. that will'd to the contrary. Notwithstanding the 
Boston
 Magistrates in 
July
 1668. in order to their 
Boston
 Commission, came to 
York
 Town in the said Province, with several Armed Men, Horse and Foot, to keep Court under their Authority; Opposition was made by the King's Justices, and his Majesty's Power was urg'd, but little regard thereunto shewn; his Majesties 
Mandamus
 was likewise much insisted upon, and produced by the Justices, who ask'd the 
Bostoners
 what they thought of it? and how they durst act so contrary to the King's Will and Pleasure? Major General 
Leveret
 told them, That he believ'd it might be the King's Hand, but he had a Commission from the general Court at 
Boston,
 which he would follow and observe by the help of God. The same day in the Afternoon the said Major General 
Leveret,
 with the rest of the 
Boston
 Magi∣strates, seiz'd and imprison'd the Province Marshal in doing his Office, and then forthwith went in warlike posture to the Court-house, where the King's Justices sat in Judicature, and putting them from their Seats, sat down themselves in their Places, and Executed their 
Boston
 Commission. The King's Justices drew a 
Protest
 against their Proceedings, and so left the Decision to God's Providence, and his Majesty's good Pleasure. Then they turn'd out all Officers, both Military and Ci∣vil, and Swore others in their Places under their Authority; they forc'd the whole Record of the Province out of the Recorders House contrary to his Will, by vertue of a Special Warrant from that Court. They imprison'd the Mayor of the said Province about three weeks, forcing him to give in five hundred Pound Bonds, not to act according to his Commission; which with some Reservations he was forc'd to deny for the security of his Estate.


These riotous Proceedings thus acted with such a precipitate fury, so incens'd his Majesty, that speedy care had been taken to reduce them to reason, had they not upon mature consideration bethought themselves afterwards to yield Obedience to his Majesties Orders.


Having treated at large of all that concerns 
New England
 in general, both in re∣ference to the Natives and the 
English
 Planters, we shall conclude with a brief view of the Provinces of 
Laconia
 and 
Main,
 as they are truly Describ'd (among other in∣genuous Collections and Observations of the Affairs of 
America,
 and especially

these Parts) by 
Ferdinando Gorges
 
Esq
 Heir to the above-mention'd Sir 
Ferdinando,
 and thereby sole Lord of the said Provinces, onely contracting what hath been by him deliver'd more at large.


Among divers Plantations of the 
English
 happily Founded in 
New England,
 is a Province to the Landward, nam'd 
Laconia,
 so call'd by reason of the great Lakes therein, but by the ancient Inhabitants thereof it is call'd 
The Countrey of the Troquois:
 It lies between the Latitude of forty four and forty five Degrees, having the Ri∣vers of 
Sagadehock
 and 
Merrimeck
 on the Sea-Coast of 
New England,
 Southerly from it; into each of which Rivers there is a short Passage, frequented by the Salvages inhabiting near the Lakes. Also it hath the great Lakes which tend towards 
Cali∣fornia
 in the South Sea on the West thereof: On the North thereof is the great River of 
Canada,
 into which the said River disgorgeth it self by a fair large River, well replenish'd with many fruitful Islands: The Air thereof is pure and wholesom, the Countrey pleasant, having some high Hills, full of goodly Forrests, and fair Valleys and Plains, fruitful in Corn, Vines, Chesnuts, Wallnuts, and infinite sorts of other Fruits, large Rivers well stor'd with Fish, and inviron'd with goodly Mea∣dows full of Timber-trees.


One of the great Lakes is call'd 
The Lake of Troquois,
 which together with a Ri∣ver of the same Name, running into the River of 
Canada,
 is sixty or seventy Leagues in length.


In the Lake are four fair Islands, which are low and full of goodly Woods and Meadows, having store of Game for Hunting, as Stags, Fallow-Deer, Elks, Roe-Bucks, Beavers, and other sorts of Beasts which come from the Main Land to the said Islands.


The Rivers which fall into the Lakes have in them good store of Beavers; of which Beasts, as also of the Elks, the Salvages make their chiefest Traffick.


The said Islands have been inhabited heretofore by the Salvages, but are now abandon'd by reason of their late Wars one with another: They contain twelve or fifteen Leagues in length, and are seated commodiously for Habitation in the midst of the Lake, which abounds with divers kinds of wholesom Fish.


From this Lake run two Rivers Southward, which fall into the Eastern and Southern Sea-Coast of 
New England.


Into this Lake there went many years since certain 
French
 of 
Quebeck,
 who sided with the 
Algovinquins,
 with the help of their 
Canoos,
 which they carried the space of five Miles over the 
Impossible Falls,
 to Fight a Battel in revenge of some former In∣juries done by the 
Troquois
 to the 
Algovinquins,
 who had the Victory; for which cause the 
French
 have been so hated ever since by the Nation of the 
Troquois,
 that none of them durst ever appear in any part of that Lake. But their Trade, said to be sixteen thousand Beavers yearly, is partly sold to the 
Dutch,
 who Trade with the West∣end of the said Lake over Land by Horses, from their Plantation upon 
Hudson
's 
River:
 and another part is conceiv'd to be purchas'd by the 
Hiroons,
 who being Newters, are Friends both to the one and the other; and these 
Hiroons
 bring down the greatest part of all by the River of 
Canada.


The Way over Land to this great Lake, from the Plantation of 
Pascataway,
 hath been attempted by Captain 
Walter Neale,
 once Governor, at the Charges of Sir 
Fer∣dinando Gorges,
 Captain 
Mason,
 and some Merchants of 
London,
 and the Discovery wanted but one days Journey of finishing, because their Victuals was spent, which, for want of Horses, they were enforc'd to carry with their Arms, and their Clothes, upon their Backs: They intended to have made a settlement for Trade by Pinnaces upon the said Lake, which they reckon to be about ninety or a hundred Miles from the Plantation over Land.




The People of the Countrey are given to Hunting of wild Beasts, which is their chiefest Food.


Their Arms are Bowes and Arrows. Their Armor is made partly of Wood, and partly of a kind of twisted Stuff like Cotton-Wool.


Their Meat is Flour of 
Indian
 Corn, of that Countreys growth, sodden to Pap, which they preserve for times of Necessity when they cannot Hunt.


This Province of 
Laconia,
 however known by a distinct Name, is included within the Province of 
Main,
 which offers it self next to our consideration.


All that part of the Continent of 
New England,
 which was allotted by Patent to Sir 
Ferdinando Gorges
 and to his Heirs, he thought fit to call by the Name of 
The Pro∣vince of Main.
 It takes it beginning at the entrance of 
Pascatoway
 Harbor, and so passeth up the same into the River of 
Newichwavoch;
 and through the same unto the farthest Head thereof; and from thence North-Westwards for the space of a hun∣dred and twenty Miles; and from the Mouth of 
Pascatoway
 Harbor aforesaid, North-Eastward along the Sea-Coast, to 
Sagadehock;
 and up the River thereof to 
Kinibequy
 River, even as far as the Head thereof; and into the Land North-West∣wards, for the space of a hundred and twenty Miles.


To these Territories are also adjoyn'd the North half of the Isles of 
Sholes,
 toge∣ther with the Isles of 
Capawick
 and 
Nautican,
 as also all the little Islands lying within five Leagues of the 
Main,
 all along the Sea-Coast, between the aforesaid Rivers of 
Pascatoway
 and 
Sagadehock.


He no sooner had this Province setled upon him, but he gave publick notice, That if any one would undertake by himself and his Associates, to Transport a competent number of Inhabitants, to Plant in any part of his Limits, he would assign unto him or them such a proportion of Land, as should in reason satisfie them, reserving onely to himself some small High-Rent, as 2 
s.
 or 2 
s.
 6 
d.
 for a hundred Acres 
per Annum:
 and if they went about to build any Town or City, he would Endow them with such Liberties and Immunities, as should make them capable to Govern themselves within their own Limits, according to the Liberties granted to any Town or Corporation within this Realm of 
England.
 And as for others of the meaner sort who went as Tenants, that they should have such quantities of Land assign'd them as they were able to manage, at the Rate of 4 
d.
 or 6 
d.
 an Acre, ac∣cording to the nature or situation of the Place they settle in.


And for the Division of the Province, and the Form of Government which he intended to Establish, he first divided the Province into several Parts; and those again he subdivided into distinct Regiments, as East, West, North, and South; those again into several Hundreds, Parishes and Tythings, and these to have their several Officers to Govern, according to such Laws as should be agreed upon by publick Assent of the Free-holders, with the approbation of himself or Deputy, and the principal Officers of the publick State.


The setled Government for the general State, to whom all Appeals were to be made, and from whom all Instructions for the welfare of the Publick were to issue, were to consist of himself or his Deputy, who was to be chosen every three year by himself, with the advice of his Council: Next a Chancellor for the determina∣tion of all Causes; A Treasurer, to whom the care of the publick Revenue was to be committed; A Marshal, whose Office was to oversee the Regiments, and to provide Men for publick Service; An Admiral, to take care of all Maritime Af∣fairs, to whom a Judge of the Admiralty was to be joyn'd to determine all Mari∣time Causes; A Master of the Ordnance, to look to the publick Arms and Am∣munition; A Secretary, to receive Intelligence, and to acquaint himself or Deputy

therewith. To these belong all their several Officers and Ministers for the Execu∣tion of all Matters proper to their several Places.


The chief Town of this Province is call'd 
Gorgiana,
 which is Govern'd by a Mayor, the rest are onely inconsiderable Villages or scatter'd Houses; but through Encouragement given to Adventurers and Planters, it may prove in time a very flourishing Place, and be replenish'd with many fair Towns and Cities, it being a Province both fruitful and pleasant.




SECT. II. New Netherland, now call'd New York.


THat Tract of Land formerly call'd 
The New Netherland,
 doth contain all that Land which lieth in the North parts of 
America,
 betwixt 
New England
 and 
Mary-Land;
 the length of which Northward into the Countrey, as it hath not been fully discover'd, so it is not certainly known: The breadth of it is about two hundred Miles. The principal Rivers within this Tract, are 
Hudson
's-River, 
Raritan
-River, 
Delaware-Bay
-River. The chief Islands are the 
Manhatans
-Island, 
Long
-Island, and 
Staten
-Island.


The first which discover'd this Countrey was 
Henry Hudson,
 who being hir'd by the 
East-India
 Company to seek a Passage in the 
Northern America
 to 
China,
 set Sail 
Anno
 1609. in the 
Half-Moon
 Frigat; coming before 
Terre-neuff,
 he stood about to∣wards the South-West, where Sailing up a great River, he found two Men Clad in in 
Ruffelo's
 Skins; and from thence arriv'd safe at 
Amsterdam.


New Netherland
 thus discover'd, invited many Merchants to settle a firm Plan∣tation there; to which purpose they obtain'd Letters Patents in 1614. granted them by the 
States
 in the 
Hague,
 That they might onely Traffick to 
New Nether∣land;
 whereupon they earnestly prosecuting the Design, sent out 
Adrian Block
 and 
Godyn,
 who discover'd several Coasts, Isles, Havens, and Rivers.


The Countrey, as they said, being then void, was therefore free for any body that would take possession of it: Notwithstanding which pretence, they were scarce warm in their Quarters, when Sir 
Samuel Argal,
 Governor of 
Virginia,
 having first spoil'd the 
French
 in 
Accadie,
 as we said, disputed the Possession with these also. And although they pleaded 
Hudson
's Right (who by Commission from King 
James,
 and upon an 
English
 Account, had lately discover'd those Parts) and pretended they had not onely bought all his Cards and Maps of the Countrey, but all his Interest and Right also, and had fully contented him for all his Pains and Charges in the Discovery; yet the said 
Hudson
 being an 
English
-man, and acting all that he did by Commission from the King of 
England,
 upon Debate it was concluded, That the Land could not be alienated after Discovery without the King of 
England
's consent, especially it being but a part of the Province of 
Virginia,
 already possess'd by the Subjects of 
England:
 So that they were forc'd to wave that Title, and the 
Dutch
 Go∣vernor submitted his Plantation to His Majesty of 
England,
 and to the Governor of 
Virginia,
 for and under him: Upon which Terms for a good while they held it. Afterwards, upon confidence, it seems, of a new Governor sent from 
Amsterdam,
 they not onely fail'd to pay the promis'd Contribution and Tribute, but fell to fortifie themselves, and to entitle the Merchants of 
Amsterdam
 to an absolute Propriety and Dominion of the Country, independent of any other; building Towns, as 
New Am∣sterdam;
 raising Forts, as 
Orange Fort,
 near the Branch of the 
Nordt River,
 which they call 
Hell-Gate.
 Complaint whereof being made to King 
Charles,
 and by his Am∣bassador







map of New England


NOVI BEL
 
Quod nune
 NOVI JORCK 
vocatur,
 NOVAE {que} ANGLIAE & Partis Virginiae 
Accuratissima et Novissima Delineatio.






bassador represented to the 
States,
 they disown the business, and declare by Publick Instrument, that it was onely a private Undertaking, 
viz.
 of the 
West-India
 Com∣pany of 
Amsterdam.
 Whereupon a Commission was granted to Sir 
George Calvert,
 made Lord 
Baltimore
 in 
Ireland,
 to Possess and Plant the Southern parts thereof, lying towards 
Virginia,
 by the name of 
Mary-land;
 and to Sir 
Edmund Loyden,
 to Plant the Northern parts towards 
New England,
 by the name of 
Nova-Albion:
 Which makes the 
Dutch
 the second time seem willing to compound; and for the Sum of two thousand and five hundred Pounds, they offer to be gone, and leave all they had there. But taking advantage of the troubles in 
England,
 which then began to appear, and soon after follow'd, they not only go back from their first Propositions, and make higher Demands, but also most mischievously (as some report) furnish the Natives with Arms, and teach them the use of them, as it may be thought, ex∣pecting to use their help upon occasion, against the 
English.


After His Majesties Restauration, His Majesty being truly inform'd of his just Pretences to all that Usurp'd Territory call'd 
New Netherland,
 (the same having been formerly part of 
New England
) and of how great prejudice to the Act of Na∣vigation, and how dangerous Intruders the 
Dutchmen
 are generally▪ upon other Princes Dominions, what mischief might ensue to all our 
English
 Plantations in time of War, if the 
Dutch
 were permitted to strengthen themselves in the very heart of His Majesties Dominions, being Masters of one of the most commodious Ports and Rivers in 
America:
 His Majesty resolv'd to seize upon the same, as his undoubted Right, and in 
May
 1664. having design'd four Commissioners to the perfecting of Affairs in 
New England,
 Collonel 
Richard Nichols,
 Sir 
Robert Carr, George Cartwnight,
 and 
Samuel Mawrick
 Esquires, with three Ships of War to convey them to 
Boston:
 The matter was so order'd, that the same Ships serv'd for the re∣ducing of the Town and Fort of 
New Amsterdam,
 upon conditions, advantageous to His Majesty, and easie to the 
Dutch.


Now begins 
New Netherland
 to lose the Name, for His Majesty having conferr'd by Patent upon his Royal Highness the Duke of 
York
 and 
Albany,
 all the Acquisiti∣ons made upon Foraigners, together with 
Long-Island,
 the West end whereof was wholly setled and Peopled by 
Dutch-men;
 his Royal Highness impower'd, by Commission as his Deputy-Governor, Colonel 
Nichols,
 Groom of his Bed-cham∣ber, to take the Charge and Direction of Reducing and Governing all those Terri∣tories; it was by him thought fit, to change some principal denominations of Places, 
viz. New Netherland
 into 
York-shire; New Amsterdam
 into 
New York; Fort-Amscel
 into 
Fort-James; Fort-Orange
 into 
Fort-Albany;
 and withal, to change 
Burgomasters, Schepen,
 and 
Schout,
 into Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriff, with Justices of the Peace; so that all the Civil Policy is conformable to the Methods and Practise of 
England,
 whereas 
New England
 retains only the name of 
Constable
 in their whole Rolls of Civil Offi∣cers.


It is plac'd upon the neck of the Island 
Manhatans,
 looking towards the Sea; en∣compass'd with 
Hudson's
 River, which is six Miles broad; the Town is compact and oval, with very fair Streets and several good Houses; the rest are built much after the manner of 
Holland,
 to the number of about four hundred Houses, which in those parts are held considerable: Upon one side of the Town is 
James-Fort,
 capable to lodge three hundred Souldiers and Officers; it hath four Bastions, forty Pieces of Cannon mounted; the Walls of Stone, lin'd with a thick Rampart of Earth; well accommodated with a Spring of fresh Water, always furnish'd with Arms and Ammunition, against Accidents: Distant from the Sea seven Leagues, it affords a safe Entrance, even to unskilful Pilots; under the Town side, Ships of

any Burthen may Ride secure against any Storms, the Current of the River being broken by the interposition of a small Island, which lies a Mile distant from the Town.


About ten Miles from 
New York
 is a Place call'd 
Hell-Gate,
 which being a nar∣row Passage, there runneth a violent Stream both upon Flood and Ebb; and in the middle lie some Rocky Islands, which the Current sets so violently upon, that it threatens present Shipwrack; and upon the Flood is a large Whirlwind, which continually sends forth a hideous roaring, enough to affright any Stranger from passing farther, and to wait for some 
Charon
 to conduct him through; yet to those that are well acquainted, little or no danger: It is a place of great Defence against any Enemy coming in that way, which a small Forticfiation would absolutely prevent, and necessitate them to come in at the West end of 
Long-Island
 by 
Sandy Hook,
 where 
Nutten Island
 forces them within the Command of the Fort at 
New York,
 which is one of the best Pieces of Defence in the North parts of 
America.
 It is built most of Brick and Stone, and cover'd with red and black Tyle, and the Land being high, it gives at a distance a pleasing prospect to the Spectators. The Inhabitants consist most of 
English
 and 
Dutch,
 and have a considerable Trade with 
Indians
 for Beaver, Otter, and 
Rackoon
-Skins, with other Furrs; as also for Bear, Deer and 
Elke
-Skins; and are supply'd with Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the 
Indians,
 which they buy at an easie Rate; and having the Coun∣trey round about them, they are continually furnish'd with all such Provisions as is needful for the Life of Man, not onely by the 
English
 and 
Dutch
 within their own, but likewise by the adjacent Colonies.


The 
Manhattans,
 or 
Great River,
 being the chiefest, having with two wide Mouths wash'd the mighty Island 
Watouwaks,
 falls into the Ocean. The Southern Mouth is call'd 
Port May,
 or 
Godyns Bay,
 In the middle thereof lies an Island call'd 
The States Island;
 and a little higher the 
Manhattans,
 so call'd from the Natives, which on the East side of the River dwell on the Main Continent. They are a cruel Peo∣ple, and Enemies to the 
Hollanders,
 as also of the 
Sanhikans,
 which reside on the Western Shore. Farther up are the 
Makwaes
 and 
Mahikans,
 which continually War one against another. In like manner all the Inhabitants on the West side of the Ri∣ver 
Manhattan
 are commonly at Enmity with those that possess the Eastern Shore; who also us'd to be at variance with the 
Hollanders,
 when as the other People Westward kept good Correspondency with them.


On a small Island near the Shore of the 
Makwaes,
 lay formerly a Fort, provided with two Drakes and eleven Stone Guns, yet was at last deserted.


This Countrey hath many removable Water-falls, descending from steep Rocks, large Creeks and Harbors, fresh Lakes and Rivulets, pleasant Fountains and Springs, some of which boyl in the Winter, and are cold and delightful to drink in Summer. The Inhabitants never receive any damage by Deluges; neither from the Sea, because the Water rises not above a Foot; nor by the swelling Rivers, which sometimes, for a few days covering the Plains, at their deserting them, leave them fat and fruitful. The Sea-Coast is Hilly, and of a sandy and clayie Soil, which produces abundance of Herbs and Trees.


The Oak grows there generally sixty or seventy Foot high,
 and for the most part free from Knots, which makes it the better fit for Shipping.


The Nut-trees afford good Fuel, and a strange Prospect when the Wood is set on fire, either to hunt out a Deer, or to clear the Ground fit to be Till'd.


Some Plants brought hither, grow better than in 
Holland
 it self, as Apples, Pears, Cherries, Peaches, Apricocks, Strawberries, and the like.








Their Vines grow wild in most places, and bear abundance of blue, white,
 and Muskadine Grapes: Sometime since the Inhabitants made a considerable advan∣tage by the Wine of them, which is not inferior to either 
Rhenish
 or 
French.


All manner of Plants known in 
Europe
 grow in their Gardens: The Water-Lemmons, no less pleasing to the Palate than healthful when grown ripe; they are about the bigness of an indifferent Cabbage: the 
English
 press a Juice out of them, which if it did not turn sowre in a short time, might well be compar'd with 
Spa∣nish
 Wine.


The 
Calabashes
 which grow there, made hollow, serve for Water-cups.


Pumpions are also there in great abundance.


Their Wheat though Set six Foot deep, grows very speedily:
 Kidney-Beans being planted amongst it, they will wind about the Stalks thereof.


Gray Pease grow here so fast, that they gather them twice a year.


In one Field Physical Herbs and 
Indigo
 grow wild in great abundance; and Bar∣ley springs above a Mans heighth.


Moreover, there are divers sorts of sweet-smelling Flowers.


The Hills are most of a fat and clayie Soil, fit to make Pots, Tobacco-pipes,
 or any other sort of Earthen Ware.


In some places also is Store of Mountain Crystal, and that sort of Mineral which we call 
Muscovia Glass:
 Others afford Marble, Serpentine Stone, and other sorts of hard Stone. And though the Natives did not think it worth their while, or were not in a capacity to dig for Minerals themselves, yet it remains without contradi∣ction, that the Mountains inclose both Gold and Silver.


When Captain 
William Clieff, Anno
 1645. us'd the 
Indian
 Interpreter 
Agheroense
 (to decide the Differences which arose between the 
West-India Company
 and the wild People call'd 
Makwaes,
) he observ'd him to paint his Face with a yellow glittering colour, which he judg'd to be of some rich Mineral: whereupon buying some of the said 
Agheroense,
 he put it into a Crusible, and gain'd two small pieces of Gold out of the same, valu'd at six Shillings; but keeping it private, and purchasing a

great quantity of the said Mineral from 
Agheroense
 (who had show'd him the Moun∣tain which produced the same) extracted good store of Gold out of it; which pos∣sessing 
Clieff
 with a belief of having found out a business of great consequence, he sent 
Arent Corsen
 of 
New-haven
 with the fore-mention'd Mineral to 
Holland;
 but the Ship being never heard, of afterwards, and the Princess Pink, in which Captain 
Clieff
 was himself, with store of the new-found Mineral, being cast away, the Bu∣siness came to nothing.


The Inhabitants, though divided into several Nations, yet agree in many things, as in painting their Bodies, Shields, Clubs, and other Utensils in their Houses. The! Colours wherewith they paint themselves they press out of Plants, or make them of certain Stones grownd into very fine Powder. The chiefest Plant is not unlike the Myrtle, onely it hath more Boughs, and bears red Berries; the Juice of which being dry'd in the Sun, is afterwards preserv'd in little Bags. The Na∣tives temper their Colours with Water, and paint their Bodies with the same: It is as good a Purple as can be found. They also draw Ships, Trees, and Beasts after a very rough manner: In stead of Feathers they wear pleited Hair, which being colour'd red, hath an excellent gloss, which never fades though it Rain on the same.


The Horses bred in this Countrey,
being either brought thither from 
Eng∣land
 or 
Utrecht,
 far exceed those of 
English
 breed; but are both of them subject to a strange Disease, of which many die in few hours. The same Distemper also seizes on Cattel if they go into Forrest Pasture: But the onely thing to cure the same, is Hay from salt Marshy Grounds.


The Oaken Woods have store of Hogs,
 which if taken and fatned with 
Turkish
 Wheat, are most delicious Meat.


The Sheep,
 though they breed well there, yet are very scarce, because the Plan∣ters not being able to spare Men to watch them, they are often devour'd by Wolves.


There are also abundance of Deer, all sorts of Fowls, Turkies, Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, and the like.


The Lyons,
 whosc Skins the 
Indians
 bring to Market, are taken on a high Moun∣tain fifteen days Journey South-West from thence.


There are likewise many black Bears, fearful of humane kind, but if Hunted, they run direct on those that pursue them: they sleep all the Winter, lying six Weeks Oh one side, and six on the other, and sucking their Feet all the time: They generally lurk among Brambles, or in the Concavities of some hollow Mountain.


On the Borders of 
Canada
 there is seen sometimes a kind of Beast which hath some resemblance with a Horse, having cloven Feet, shaggy Mayn, one Horn just on their Forehead, a Tail like that of a wild Hog, black Eyes, and a Deers Neck: it feeds in the nearest Wildernesses: the Males never come amongst the Females except at the time when they Couple, after which they grow so ravenous, that they not onely devour other Beasts, but also one another.


Towards the South of 
New York
 are many Buffles, Beasts which (according to 
Erasmus Stella
) are betwixt a Horse and a Stag: though they are of a strong Consti∣tution, yet they die of the smallest Wound, and are subject to the Falling-sick∣ness: they have broad branchy Horns like a Stag, short Tail, rough Neck, Hair colour'd according to the several Seasons of the Year, broad and long Ears, hang∣ing Lips, little Teeth, and Skin so thick, as not easie to be pierced: The Females differ from the Males, for they have no Horns; both may easily be made tame: when Hunted, they vorm
 a sort of scalding Liquor on the Dogs: they have





 great force in their Claws, for they can kill a Wolf with the same at one blow: their Flesh, either fresh or salted, is a good Diet: their Claws also cure the Falling-sickness.


But no Beasts are more plentiful here than Harts and Stags,
 which feed up and down in great Herds: when they are Hunted by Wolves or Men, they immedi∣ately take the next River, where they are caught several together, by being cross'd in their Swimming, and affrighted by the Eccho which comes from the Mountains, made by the Hunters hollowing on the other Shore, which makes them fearful of Landing: whilst the Huntsmen joyning several pieces of Wood together get up∣on them, and Rowing towards these Deer, intercept them, being tir'd and out of breath.


Moreover, this Countrey breeds many Musk Cats, especially in Marshy Grounds. These Beasts are beautiful to the Eye, having black speckled Skins, their Mouths, full of sharp Teeth, and their Tails being long trail after them.


Many of the Learned maintain a Dispute concerning Civet, Whether it be the Seed of the Civet-Cat? the Affirmative, which 
Cardanus
 maintain'd, is contradicted by 
Julius Scaliger. Matthiolus,
 an Author of no little credit, supposes that Civet is the Sweat of the Cat, because it is most chiefly taken when these Beasts are exceed∣ingly vex'd and wearied: But since the Sweat runs from all parts of the Body, which nevertheless do not all produce Civet, it is impossible that Sweat should be Civet. Others account Civet to be the Dung of the Cats; which last seems to come nearest to truth: for certainly it is nothing else but an Excrement in the fleshy parts about their Pizzle, or near the Fundament. The Cats being in pain to be discharg'd of this Civet, free themselves from it by rubbing a Tree; and also fawn on those which take it from them with a Spoon.


Besides all other wild Creatures, the Countrey according to 
Adrian Vander Donk,
 produces yearly eighty thousand Beavers.
 
Pliny
 relates, that these Beasts bite off their Pizzles and throw them to the Hunter, which are an exceeding good Me∣dicine to help Abortion, stop the Monethly Flowers, Giddiness in the Head,

Gout, Lameness, Belly and Toot-ach, Rhumes, Poyson, and the Evil. But 
Pliny
 makes a great mistake herein, for the Beavers have a small Pissel fasten'd to their Back bone, in such a manner, that they cannot loose them but with hazard of their lives: They live in the Water, and on the Shore, in great companies together, in Nests built of Wood, which deserve no small admiration, being made after this manner: The Beavers first gather all the loose Wood, which they find along the Banks of the Rivers, of which, if there be not enough, they bite the Bark off from the Trees in the neighboring Woods, then with their Tusks, of which two grow above, and two below in their Mouths, they gnaw the main body of the Tree so long, till it drops asunder: Their Nests very artificial, are six Stories high, cover'd on the top with Clay to keep out Rain; in the middle is a passage which goes to the River, into which they run so soon as they perceive a Man; to which purpose one of them stands Sentinel, and in the Winter keeps open the Water from freez∣ing, by continual moving of his Tail, which is flat without Hair, and the most delicious Meat that can be had. The Beavers go big sixteen Weeks, and once a year bring forth four young, which suck and cry like young Children, for the Dam of them rises on her hinder Feet, and gives her Teats, which grow between the fore-legs to two of her young, each of them one; the foremost legs of a Beaver resemble those of a Dog, the hindermost those of a Goose; on each side of the vent are two swellings within two thin Skins; out of their vent runs generally an Oily moysture, with which they anoint all the parts of their body which they can reach, to keep them from being wet; within they are like a cut-up Hog; they live on the Leaves and Barks of Trees; they love their young ones exceedingly; the long Hairs, which shining, stick out on the back, fall off in Summer, and grow again against Harvest; they have short Necks, strong Sinews and Legs, and move very swiftly in the Water, and on the Land; if incompass'd by Men or Dogs, they bite most severely; the right 
Castoreum,
 so highly esteem'd by Physicians, is a long 
Vesica,
 not unlike a Pear, within the body of the female Beaver, the 
Indians
 mince the Cods of the Male Beavers amongst their Tobacco, because they produce no 
Castoreum.


This Country abounds also with Fowls; for besides Hawks, Kites, and other Birds of Prey, there are abundance of Cranes, of several sorts, some grey, some brown, others quite white; all of them have firm Bodies, and Bones without Mar∣row, Claws of a finger long, strong and crooked Bills, their Brains dry, their Eyes little and hollow, hard Features, the left Foot lesser than the right, both deform'd, their Blood thick, and the Excrements of a horrid smell; they breed most in old Woods, whose ground is without Brambles, and also near the Water, for they feed on Fish, and devour all sorts of Fowls, nay, snatch up Hares, Rabbets, Tor∣tels, and several other sorts of Animals, which they carry away with them in the Air; nay, when hungry, they seize on one anorher; some of them fly abroad for their prey about noon, others at Sun-rising; they fall like Lightning on what e're they pursue; they drink little, except the Blood of those Creatures which they de∣vour; they are very libidinous, coupling above thirty times a day, not only with their like, but also with the Hens of Hawks, and other Birds; they lay their big∣gest Eggs in thirty days, and the lesser in twenty days; they generally bring forth three young; those of them that cannot endure to look full against the Sun, are thrown out of their Nests; the young ones when they begin to be fledg'd, are by the old carry'd into the Air, and let flie, but supported by them; their sight is wonderful quick; for though they flie as high as ever they are able to be discern'd, yet they can see the lead Fish that is in the Water, and a Hare lying in the Bushes: their Breath stinks horribly, wherefore their Carcases suddenly rot; though they

are libidinous, yet they live long; most of them die of hunger, because their Bills when they grow old, grow so crooked, that they cannot open the same, where∣fore they flie up into the Air against the Sun, and falling into the coldest Rivers, loose their Feathers and die.


Besides the foremention'd Birds of prey, there are abundance of Storks, Ravens, Crows, Owls, Swallows, Gold-finches, Ice-birds, Kites, Quails, Pheasants, and Winter-
Kings,
 and which are most remarkable for their rich Feathers, the 
Spechtes,
 they pick great holes in Trees, and make a noise as if a Man were cutting down a Tree. The Pigeons flie in such flocks,
 that the 
Indians
 remove with them to the place where they make their Nests, where the young ones being taken by hundreds, serve them for a Moneths Provision.


Moreover, 
New York
 breeds a strange Bird about a Thumb long,
 full of gli∣stering Feathers; it lives by sucking of Flowers like a Bee, and is so tender, that it immediately dies if water be spirted upon it; the Carcase being dry'd, is kept for a Rarity.


But this Countrey abounds chiefly in Turkies, whose plenty deserves no less admiration than their bulk, and the delicious taste of their Flesh, for they go feeding forty or fifty in a flock, and weigh sometime forty or fifty pound apiece; the Na∣tives either shoot them, or take them with a Bait stuck on an Angle: In 
March
 and Harvest the Waters swarm with Geese, Teal, Snites, Ducks, and Pelicans, besides many strange sorts of Fowls not known in 
Europe.


The Rivers and Lakes produce Sturgeon, Salmon, Carps, Pearch, Barbils,
 all sorts of Eels, and many other Fish which are taken near Water-falls: The Sea af∣fords Crabs with and without Shells, Sea-cocks, and Horses, Cod, Whiting, Ling, Herrings, Mackrel, Flounders, Tar-buts, Tortels, and Oysters, of which some are a Foot long, and have Pearl, but are a little brownish.


Amongst the Poysonous Creatures which infest 
New York,
 the chiefest and most dangerous, is the 
Rattle-Snake,
 whose description we have already had at large in 
New England.


The Inhabitants have their Hair black as Jet, harsh like Horse-hair; they are broad Shoulder'd, small Wasted, brown Ey'd, their Teeth exceeding white; with Water they chiefly quench their Third: Their general Food is Flesh, Fish,
 and 
Indian
 Wheat, which stamp'd, is boyl'd to a Pap, by them call'd 
Sappaen:
 They observe no set time to Eat, but when they have an Appetite their Meals begin. Beavers Tails are amongst them accounted a great Dainty: When they go to Hunt, they live several days on parch'd Corn, which they carry in little Bags ty'd about their middle; a little of that said Corn thrown into Water swells exceedingly.


Henry Hudson
 relates, That Sailing in the River 
Montains,
 in forty Degrees, he saw the 
Indians
 make strange Gestures in their Dancing and Singing; he observ'd farther, that they carry'd Darts pointed with sharp Stones, Sodder'd to the Wood; that they slept under the Sky on Mats or Leaves; took much Tobacco, and very strong; and that though courteous and friendly, they were very Thieves. He Sailing thirty Leagues further, went in his Boat to an old 
Indian
 Commander of forty Men and seventeen Women, who conducted him to the Shore, where they all dwelt in one Housse, artificially built of the Barks of Oak-trees; round about it lay above three Ships load of Corn, and 
Indian
 Beans to dry, besides the Plants which grew in the Fields. No sooner had 
Hudson
 enter'd the House, but he was receiv'd on two Mats spread on the ground; and two Men immediately were sent out to shoot Venison or Fowls; and instantly returning, brought two Pigeons; a fat Dog, whom they nimbly flea'd with shells, was also laid down to the fire:





 They also made other Preparations for 
Hudsons
 Entertainment, but not willing to venture himself amongst them, that Night, tasted not of it, notwithstanding the 
In∣dians
 breaking their Darts, threw them into the fire, that thereby they might drive away all fears and jealousies from him.


The Habits of the Natives, especially of the Men, are few; the Women go more neat than the Men; and though the Winter pinches them with excessive, cold, yet they go naked tiil their thirteenth year: Both Men and Women wear a Girdle of Whale-fins and 
Sea-shells;
 the Men put a piece of Cloth, half an Ell long, and three quarters broad, between their Legs, so that a square piece hangs behind be∣low his Back, and another before over his Belly. The Women wear a Coat which comes half way down their Legs, so curiously wrought with 
Sea-shells,
 that one Coat sometimes costs thirty Pounds. Moreover, their Bodies are cover'd with Deer∣skins, the lappets or ends of which hang full of Points; a large Skin button'd on the right Shoulder, and ty'd about the middle, serves for an upper Garment, and in the Night for a Blanket: Both Men and Women go for the most part bare∣headed; the Women tie their Hair behind in a tuft, over which they wear a square Cap wrought with 
Sea-shells,
 with which they adorn their Foreheads, and also wear the same about their Neck and Hands, and some also about their middle. Before the 
Hollanders
 were Planted here, they wore Shoes and Stockings of 
Buffelo's
-skins; some likewise made Shoes of Wheaten-straw, but of late they come nearer to our Fashions: The Men Paint their Faces with several Colours; the Women only put here and there a black Spot; both of them are very reserv'd.


Their Houses are most of them built of one fashion, onely differing in length; all of them agree in breadth of twenty Foot: They build after this manner, they set Peel'd Boughs of Nut-Trees in the ground, according to the bigness of the place which they intend to build, then joyning the tops of the Boughs together, they cover the Walls and top with the Bark of Cypress, Ashen, and Chest-nut-Trees, which are laid one upon another, the smallest side being turn'd inwards: according to the bigness of the Houses, several Families, to the number of fifteen

dwell together, every one having his Apartment. Their Fortifications are most of them built on steep Hills, near Rivers; the access to them is onely at one place, they are built after this manner: They set great Poles in the Ground, with Oaken 
Pallisadoes
 on each side, cross-ways one amongst another; between the crosses they set other Trees, to strengthen the Work: Within this inclos'd they generally build twenty or thirty Houses, of which some are a hundred and eighty Foot long, and some less, all of them full of People: In the Summer they pitch Tents along by the River side to Fish; against Winter they remove into the Woods,
 to be near their Game of Hunting, and also Fuel.


To take many Women is not customary here, only amongst Military Officers, who Marry three or four Wives, which so well agree, that there is never any dif∣ference betwixt them; those that are not of Age, never Marry but with the consent and advice of their Parents: Widows and unmarry'd Men follow their own opini∣on and choice; only they take Cognizance of their Estates and Extraction: The Bridegroom always presents the Bride; for the least offence, the Man after having soundly beaten his Wife, turns her out of Doors, and Marries another, insomuch,
 that some of them have every year a new Wife: On breach of Marriage, the Chil∣dren follow the Mother, from whom they account their Generation: They ac∣count Adultery, if committed under the bare Canopy of Heaven, a great Sin: Whoring is Licenc'd to single Women, if they receive Money for it,
 and no Man scruples to Marry them; nay, those that are Marry'd, boast how many they have enjoy'd before their Marriage: She that is inclin'd to Marry,
 covers her whole body, and sets her self wrapt up in the middle of the way, where a Batchelor passing by sees her, and makes up the Match blindfold: When impregnated, they take great care that their Fruit receives no hindrance nor prejudice:
 When the time of their Delivery approaches, (which they know exactly) they go to a Melan∣cholly place in the Woods, though in the coldest Weather, where they raise up a Hut of Mats, and bring the Child into the World without any help or Company, wash the Child in cold Water, and wrap it up in Mats; then a few days after go∣ing home, they bring up the Infant with great care, none putting them out to Nurse: So long as a Woman gives suck, or is quick with Child, she will not ad∣mit of Copulation; one who hath the Flowers, never comes abroad: In time of sickness they faithfully assist one another: When any die,
 the nearest Relations shut their Eyes; and after having watch'd them some days, they are Interr'd after this manner: The Corps is plac'd sitting with a Stone under its Head, near it they set a Pot, Kettle, Dish, Spoons, Money, and Provisions to use in the other World; then they pile Wood round about it, and cover it over with Planks, on which throwing Earth and Stones, they set 
Pallisadoes,
 and make the Grave like a House, to which they shew Veneration, wherefore they account it a great piece of villany to deface any thing of it: The Men make no shew of sorrow over the Dead, but the Women mourn exceedingly, and carry themselves very strangely, beating their Breasts, scratching their Faces, and calling night and day on the name of the De∣ceas'd: The Mothers make great Lamentation at the Death of their Children,
 es∣pecially Sons, for they shave off the Hair of their Heads, which at the Funeral is burnt in the presence of all their Relations; which is also perform'd by the Wo∣men when their Husbands die; besides, they black all their Faces, and putting on a Hart-skin Shirt, mourn a whole year, notwithstanding they liv'd very conten∣tiously together.


On some occasions they go a Worshipping of the Devil,
 to a certain place where the Sorcerers shew strange Feats of Activity, tumbling over and over, beating

themselves, and hot without great noise leaping in and about a great Fire: at last they make a great Cry all together; upon which (as they say) the Devil appears to them in the shape either of a tame or wild Beast: the first signifies bad, and the other good fortune; both inform them of future Events, though darkly; and if the bu∣siness fall out contrary, they affirm that they have not rightly understood the De∣vil's meaning. Moreover they bewitch some in such a manner, that they foam at the Mouth, throw themselves into the Fire, and beat themselves severely; and so soon as they whisper in the Ear of those whom they have bewitch'd, they immedi∣ately recover their former health.


The Language of this Countrey is very various, yet it is divided into onely four principal Tongues, as the 
Manhattans, Wappanoo, Siavanoo,
 and 
Minqua's,
 which are very difficult for Strangers to learn, because they are spoken without any Grounds or Rules.


Their Money is made of the innermost Shells of a certain Shell-fish,
 cast up twice a year by the Sea: These Shells they grind smooth, and make a Hole in the middle, cutting them of an exact bigness, and so put them on Strings, which then serve in stead of Gold, Silver, and Copper Coin.


Now to say something of the Vices and Vertues of the Inhabitants. They are in the first place very slovenly and nasty, stubborn, covetous, revengeful, and much addicted to filching and stealing. Some appear reserv'd, using few words, which they utter after serious consideration, and remember a long time. Their Under∣standings being improv'd by the 
Hollanders,
 they are quick of apprehension, to di∣stinguish good from bad: they will not endure any Oppression, but are very patient of Heat,
 Cold, Hunger and Thirst. They have a strange way of using Stoves, which are set in the Ground and cover'd with Earth, into which they go through a little Door. A sick Person coming into the same, sets himself down, and places hot Stones round about him; which done, and having sweat a considerable time, he leaps into cold Water, by which he finds ease of all his Distempers.


Though these People know no great distinction between Man and Man, as other Nations, yet they have noble and ignoble Families amongst them; superior and inferior Offices, which they enjoy by Inheritance; but sometimes the Martial Offices are bestowed according to the Valour of the Persons: Their Generals sel∣dom give their Enemies a Field-Battel, by drawing or dividing their Men into Re∣giments or Companies, but make it their whole Design to defeat their Enemies by sudden Sallies from Ambuscado's; for they never stand out a close Fight, unless compell'd to it, but if encompass'd round, they fight to the last Man. When any danger threatens, the Women and Children are convey'd to a secure place. Their Arms formerly were Bowes and Arrows,
 and Battel-axes, but now they use Mus∣quets, which they have learn'd to-handle with great dexterity. Their square Shields cover all their Bodies and Shoulders. About their Heads they tie a Snakes Skin, in the middle of which sticks either a Fox's or Bear's Tail. They cannot be known by their Faces, they are all over so besmear'd with Paint of divers colours. They seldom give Quarter to their Enemies,
 except Women and Children, which the Conquerors use as their own, that by that means they may increase and strengthen themselves: and if any Prisoner is not kill'd presently after the Battel, but falls into the Hands of one whose Relations have formerly been slain by his Party, he is Roasted three days by degrees before he gives up the Ghost. It de∣sences no small admiration, that the Sufferer during the whole time of his Torture, Sings till he breathes his last. They have few or no Punishments for any Offence, committing few Crimes which are by them accounted Capital.
 If any one steal,

and the Goods be found in his custody, the Governor of the place where he resides commands him onely to restore the same to the Owner. If any one murther or kill the other, the Relations of the slain, if they can take the Malefactor in twenty four hours, may without Examination or delay put him to death also; but that time being once expir'd, the Revenger is liable to be kill'd in the same time by his Rela∣tions whom he slew. All Obligations have their power and vertue from certain Presents deliver'd upon the making of a Contract, which is done thus: They dry as many Sticks as they have Articles, which if they agree upon, every Man on the concluding of the Discourse lays a Present before the others Feet. Sometimes they hang up the Presents, because they are often three days in Consultation before they resolve; after which if the Presents be taken down, it is a certain sign of their Agreement; but if not, they proceed no farther, unless the Articles and Presents are alter'd. On Businesses of consequence the Commonalty repair to their Gover∣nor's House,
 there to hear and enquire what the Nobility there assembled have concluded or resolv'd on; at which the best Orator standing up, tells them their Intentions. It happens sometimes that a turbulent Person making a Mutiny, and refusing to hearken to reason, is immediately beheaded by one of the Nobility; in contradiction of which none dare presume to speak the least word.


There are scarce any steps of Religion found amongst these People,
 onely they suppose the Moon to have great influence on Plants. The Sun, which over-looks all things, is call'd to witness whene're they Swear. They bear great respect, and stand much in fear of 
Satan,
 because they are often plagued by him when they go a Hunting or Fishing: wherefore the first of what they take is burnt in honor of him, that he to whom they ascribe all wickedness might not hurt them.
 When they feel pain in any part of their Body, they say that the Devil sits in the same. They acknowledge that there resides a God above the Stars,
 but troubles not him∣self with what the Devil doth on Earth, because he continually recreates himself with a most beautiful Goddess, whose original is unknown: She on a certain time (say they) descended from Heaven into the Water,
 (for before the Creation all things were Water) into which she had instantly sunk, had not the Earth arose un∣der her Feet, which grew immediately to such a bigness, that there appear'd a World of Earth, which produc'd all sorts of Herbs and Trees; whilst the Goddess taking to her self a Hart, Bear, and Wolf, and Conceiving by them, she was not long after delver'd of several Beasts at one time: and from thence proceeded not onely the diversity of Beasts, but also Men, of which some are black, white, or sallow; in nature fearful like a Hart, or cruel and valiant like a Bear, or deceitful like Wolves: after this the Mother of all things ascended up to Heaven again, and sported there with the Supream Lord, whom they say they know not, because they never saw him: wherefore they shall have less to answer for than 
Christians,
 which pretend to know him to be the Punisher of things both good and bad, which are daily committed by them: and for this ridiculous Opinion they can hardly be brought to embrace the 
Christian
 Faith.


Concerning the Souls of the Deceased, they believe, that those which have been good in their life-time, live Southward in a temperate Countrey, where they enjoy all manner of pleasure and delight; when as the Wicked wander up and down in a miserable Condition. The Eccho which resounds from the Cries of wild Beasts in the Night, they suppose to be the Spirits of Souls transmigrated into wicked Bodies.


At their 
Cantica's,
 or Dancing-Matches, where all Persons that come are freely Entertain'd, it being a Festival time. Their Custom is when they Dance, for the









Spectators to have short Sticks in their Hands, and to knock the Ground and Sing altogether, whilst they that Dance sometimes act Warlike postures, and then they come in painted for War with their Faces black and red, or some all black, some all red, with some streaks of white under their Eyes, and so jump and leap up and down without any order, uttering many Expressions of their intended Valour. For other Dances they onely shew what antick Tricks their ignorance will lead them to, wringing of their Bodies and Faces after a strange manner, sometimes jumping into the Fire, sometimes catching up a Firebrand, and biting off a live Coal, with many such tricks, that will affright rather than please an 
English
-man to look upon them, resembling rather a company of infernal Furies than Men.


When their King or 
Sachem
 sits in Council, he hath a Company of Arm'd Men to guard his Person, great respect being shewn him by the People, which is princi∣pally manifested by their silence. After he hath declared the cause of their Con∣vention, he demands their Opinion, ordering who shall begin: The Person or∣der'd to speak, after he hath declar'd his mind, tells them he hath done: no Man ever interrupting any Person in his Speech, nor offering to speak, though he make never so many long stops, till he says he hath no more to say. The Council having all declar'd their Opinions, the King after some pause gives the definitive Sentence, which is commonly seconded with a shout from the People, every one seeming to applaud and manifest their Assent to what is determin'd.


If any Person be condemn'd to die, which is seldom, unless for Murther or In cest, the King himself goes out in Person (for you must understand they have no Prisons, and the guilty Person flies into the Woods) where they go in quest of him, and-having found him, the King shoots first, though at never such a distance, and then happy is the Man that can shoot him down; for he that hath the for∣tune to be Executioner, is for his pains made some Captain, or other Military Officer.


They grease their Bodies and Hair very often, and paint their Faces with seve∣ral Colours, as black, white, red, yellow, blue, 
&c.
 which they take great pride in, every one being painted in a several manner.


Within two Leagues of 
New York
 lieth 
Staten-Island,
 it bears from 
New York
 West something Southerly: It is about twenty Miles long, and four or five broad, mosr of it very good Land, full of Timber, and producing all such Commodities as 
Long-Island
 doth, besides Tin and store of Iron Oar; and the 
Calamine
 Stone is said likewise to be found there: There is but one Town upon it, consisting of 
English
 and 
French,
 but it is capable of entertaining more Inhabitants.


Betwixt this and 
Long-Island
 is a large Bay, which is the coming in for all Ships and Vessels out of the Sea.


On the North-side of this Island 
After-skull
 River puts into the Main Land, on the West-side whereof there are two or three Towns, but on the East-side but one. There are very great Marshes or Meadows on both sides of it, excellent good Land, and good convenience for the setling of several Towns. There grows black Wal∣nut and Locust, as there doth in 
Virginia,
 with mighty, tall, streight Timber, as good as any in the North of 
America:
 It produceth any Commodity which 
Long-Island
 doth.


Hudson
's River runs by 
New York
 Northward into the Countrey, towards the Head of which is seated 
New Albany,
 a Place of great Trade with the 
Indians,
 be∣twixt which and 
New York,
 being above a hundred Miles, is as good Corn-Land as the World affords, enough to entertain hundreds of Families, which in the time of the 
Dutch
 Government of these Parts could not be setled by reason of the 
Indians,
 ex∣cepting

one Place, call'd 
The Sopers,
 which was kept by a Garrison, but since the Re∣ducement of these Parts under His Majesties Obedience, and a Patent granted to his Royal Highness the Duke of 
York,
 which is about six years, by the care and dili∣gence of the Honorable Collonel 
Nichols,
 sent thither as Deputy to his Highness, such a League of Peace was made, and Friendship concluded betwixt that Colony and the 
Indians,
 that they have not resisted or disturb'd any 
Christians
 there, in the setling or peaceable possessing of any Lands within that Government, but every Man hath sat under his own Vine, and hath peaceably reap'd and enjoy'd the Fruits of their own Labors, which God continue.


Westward of 
After-skull
 River before mention'd, about eighteen or twenty Miles, runs in 
Raritan
 River Northward into the Countrey some scores of Miles; both sides of which River are adorn'd with spacious Meadows, enough to feed thousands of Cattel: The Wood-Land is very good for Corn, and stor'd with wild Beasts, as Deer, Elks, and an innumerable multitude of Fowl, as in other parts of the Countrey. This River is thought very capable for the erecting of several Towns and Villages on each side of it, no place in the North of 
America
 having better con∣venience for the maintaining of all sorts of Cattel for Winter and Summer Food.


Upon this River is no Town setled, onely one at the Mouth of it; but next to it, Westward, is a Place call'd 
Newasons;
 where are two or three Towns and Villages setled upon the Sea-side, but none betwixt that and 
Delaware-Bay,
 which is about sixty Miles, all which is a rich Champain Countrey, free from Stones, and indiffe∣rent level, having store of excellent good Timber, and very well water'd, having Brooks or Rivers ordinarily, one or more in every Miles travel. This Countrey is peopled onely with wild Beasts, as Deer, Elks, Bears, and other Creatures, so that in a whole days Journey you shall meet with no Inhabitants except a few 
Indians,
 It is also full of stately Oaks, whose broad-branch'd tops serve for no other use, but to keep off the Suns heat from the wild Beasts of the Wilderness, where is Grass as high as a Man's Middle, which serves for no other end, except to main∣tain the Elks and Deer, who never devour a hundredth part of it, than to be burnt every Spring to make way for new. How many poor People in the World would think themselves happy, had they an Acre or two of Land, whilst here is hundreds, nay thousands of Acres that would invite Inhabitants.


Delaware Bay,
 the Mouth of the River,
 lieth about the mid way betwixt 
New York
 and the 
Capes
 of 
Virginia.


The best Commodities for any to carry with them to this Countrey is Clothing, the Countrey being full of all sorts of Cattel, which they may furnish themselves withal at an easie Rate, for any sort of 
English
 Goods, as likewise Instruments for Husbandry and Building, with Nails, Hinges, Glass, and the like. They get a Live∣lihood principally by Corn and Cattel, which will there fetch them any Commodi∣ties: Likewise they Sowe store of Flax, which they make every one Cloth of for their own wearing; as also Woollen Cloth, and Linsey-woolsey; and had they more Tradesmen amongst them, they would in a little time live without the help of any other Countrey for their Clothing; for Tradesmen there are none but live happily there, as Carpenters, Blacksmiths, Masons, Taylors, Weavers, Shoemakers, Tanners, Brickmakers, and so any other Trade: Them that have no Trade be∣take themselves to Husbandry, get Land of their own, and live exceeding well.


We shall conclude our Discourse of this Countrey with a notable Character gi∣ven thereof by a late Writer, as to the great advantage of happy living in all re∣spects, for whosoever shall be pleas'd to betake himself thither to live.




IF there be any terrestrial happiness (saith he) to be had by any People, especi∣ally of an inferior rank, it must certainly be here. Here any one may furnish himself with Land, and live Rent-free, yea, with such a quantity of Land, that he may weary himself with walking over his Fields of Corn, and all sorts of Grain, and let his Stock amount to some hundreds; he needs not fear there want of Pasture in the Summer, or Fodder in the Winter, the Woods affording suffici∣ent supply, where you have Grass as high as a Man's Knees, nay, as high as his Waste, interlac'd with Pea-Vines, and other Weeds that Cattel much delight in, as much as a Man can pass through: And these Woods also every Mile or half-Mile are furnish'd with fresh Ponds, Brooks, or Rivers, where all sorts of Cattel, during the heat of the day, do quench their thirst, and cool themselves. These Brooks and Rivers being inviron'd of each side with several sorts of Trees and Grape-Vines, Arbor-like interchanging places, and croding these Rivers, do shade and shelter them from the scorching beams of the Sun. Such as by their utmost Labors can scarcely get a Living, may here procure Inheritances of Lands and Possessions, stock themselves with all sorts of Cattel, enjoy the benefit of them whilst they live, and leave them to their Children when they die. Here you need not trouble the Shambles for Meat, nor Bakers and Brewers for Beer and Bread, nor run to a Linnen-Draper for a supply, every one making their own Linnen, and a great part of their woollen Cloth for their ordinary wearing. And how prodigal (if I may so say) hath Nature been to furnish this Countrey with all sorts of wild Beasts and Fowl, which every one hath an interest in, and may Hunt at his pleasure; where, besides the pleasure in Hunting, he may furnish his House with excellent fat Venison, Turkies, Geese, Heath-hens, Cranes, Swans, Ducks, Pigeons, and the like; and wearied with that, he may go a Fishing, where the Rivers are so furnish'd, that he may supply himself with Fish before he can leave off the Recreation. Here one may travel by Land upon the same Continent hundreds of Miles, and pass through Towns and Villages, and never hear the least complaint for want, nor hear any ask him for a Farthing. Here one may lodge in the Fields and Woods, travel from one end of the Countrey to another, with as much security as if he were lock'd within his own Chamber: And if one chance to meet with an 
Indian
 Town, they shall give him the best Entertain∣ment they have, and upon his desire direct him on his Way. But that which adds happiness to all the rest, is the healthfulness of the Place, where many Peo∣ple in twenty years time never know what Sickness is; where they look upon it as a great Mortality, if two or three die out of a Town in a years time. Besides the sweetness of the Air, the Countrey it self sends forth such a fragrant smell, that it may be perceiv'd at Sea before they can make the Land: No evil Fog or Vapor doth any sooner appear, but a North-West or Westerly Wind immediately dissolves it, and drives it away. Moreover, you shall scarce see a House, but the South-side is begirt with Hives of Bees, which increase after an incredible man∣ner: So that if there be any terrestrial 
Canaan,
 'tis surely here, where the Land floweth with Milk and Honey.








map of northern Virginia


Noua TERRA-MARIAE tabula


This Northerne part of Virginia (the limitts whereof extend farther Southwards) is heere inserted for the better description of the entrance into the Bay of Chesapeack.














A NEW DESCRIPTION OF MARY-LAND.




SECT. III.


B
Efore We proceed to the Description of this Countrey, it will be first requisite to relate the true occasion and means, whereby this part of 
America
 came to be erected into a Pro∣vince, and call'd 
Mary-land.


In the Year of our Lord 1631. 
George
 Lord 
Baltimore
 ob∣tain'd of King 
Charles
 the First, of 
Great Brittain, &c.
 a Grant of that part of 
America,
 (first discover'd by the 
English
) which lies between the Degrees of thirty seven and fifty Minutes, or thereabouts, and forty of Northerly Latitude, which is bounded on the South by 
Virginia;
 on the North, by 
New England,
 and 
New Jersey,
 part of 
New York,
 lying on the East side of 
Delaware Bay;
 on the East, by the Ocean; and on the West, by that part of the Continent which lies in the Longitude of the first Fountains of the River call'd 
Patomeck.


In pursuance of this Grant to his said Lordship, a Bill was prepar'd, and brought to His Majesty to Sign, who first ask'd his Lordship, what he should call it, there being a Blank in the Bill designedly left for the Name, which his Lordship inten∣ded should have been 
Crescentia;
 but his Lordship leaving it to His Majesty to give it a Name, the King propos'd to have it call'd 
Terra-Mariae,
 in 
English, Mary-land,
 in honor of his Queen, whose Name was 
Mary;
 which was concluded on, and inser∣ted into the Bill, which the King then Sign'd; and thereby the said Tract of Land was erected into a Province by that Name.


His Lordship somewhat delaying the speedy passing of it under the Great Seal of 
England,
 dy'd in the 
interim,
 before the said Patent was perfected; whereupon a

Patent of the said Province was shortly afterwards pass'd to his Son and Heir, (who was Christen'd by the Name of 
Coecil,
 but afterwards confirm'd by the Name of 
Coecilius,
) the now Lord 
Baltemore,
 under the Great Seal of 
England,
 bearing Date 
June
 20. 1632. in the eighth Year of His said Majesties Reign, with all Royal Ju∣risdictions and Prerogatives, both Military and Civil in the said Province, as Pow∣er to Enact Laws, Power of pardoning all manner of Offences, Power to confer Honors, 
&c.
 to be held of His said Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, Kings of 
Eng∣land
 in common Soccage, as of His Majesties Honor of 
Windsor
 in the County of 
Berks
 in 
England;
 yielding and paying yearly for the same to His Majesty and to His Heirs and Successors for ever, two 
Indian
 Arrows of those parts, at the Castle of 
Windsor
 aforesaid, on Tuesday in 
Easter
 Week, and the fifth part of all Gold and Sil∣ver Oar, which shall happen to be found in the said Province.


 By the said Patent is Granted to his Lorship, his Heirs and Assigns, all that part of a 
Peninsula,
 lying in the parts of 
America,
 between the Ocean on the East, and the Bay of 
Chesapeack
 on the West; and divided from the other part thereof by a right Line drawn from the Promontory, or 
Cape
 of Land call'd 
Watkin's-Point,
 situate in the aforesaid Bay, near the River of 
Wigcho
 on the West, unto the main Ocean on the East, and between that bound on the South, unto that part of 
Delaware Bay
 on the North, which lies under the fortieth Degree of Northerly Latitude from the Equinoctial, where 
New England
 ends; and all that Tract of Land between the bounds aforesaid, that is to say, passing from the aforesaid Bay call'd 
Delaware Bay,
 in a right Line by the Degree aforesaid, unto the true 
Meridian
 of the first Fountains of the River of 
Patomeck;
 and from thence stretch∣ing towards the South, unto the furthest Bank of the said River, and following the West and South side thereof, unto a certain place call'd 
Cinquack,
 near the Mouth of the said River, where it falls into the Bay of 
Chesapeack,
 and from thence by a streight Line unto the aforesaid Promontory, or place call'd 
Watkins-Point,
 which lies in thirty seven Degrees and fifty Minutes, or thereabouts, of Northern Latitude.


By this Patent his Lordship and his Heirs and Assigns are Created the true and absolute Lords and Proprietaries of the said Province,
 saving the Allegiance and Soveraign Dominion due to His Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors; so that he hath thereby a Soveraignty Granted to him and his Heirs, dependant upon the Sover∣eignty of the Crown of 
England.


His Lordship, in the Year 1633. sent his second Brother Mr. 
Leonard Calvert,
 and his third Brother Mr. 
George Calvert,
 with divers other Gentlemen of Quality, and Servants to the number of two hundred Persons at least, to settle a Plantation there; who set Sail from the 
Cowes
 in the 
Isle of Wight
 in 
England,
 on 
Novemb.
 22. in the same Year; having made some stay by the way, at the 
Barbadoes
 and 
St. Chri∣stophers
 in. 
America,
 they arriv'd at 
Point Comfort
 in 
Virginia,
 on 
February
 24. following; from whence shortly after they Sail'd up the Bay of 
Chesapeack,
 and 
Patomeck
 Ri∣ver: And having review'd the Country, and given Names to several places, they pitch'd upon a Town of the 
Indians
 for their first Seat, call'd 
Yoacomaco,
 (now Saint 
Maries
) which the then Governor Mr. 
Leonard Calvert,
 freely Purchas'd of the Na∣tives there, for the Lord Proprietaries use, with Commodities brought from 
England.


That which facilitated the Treaty and Purchase of the said place from the 
In∣dians,
 was a resolution which those 
Indians
 had then before taken, to remove higher into the Countrey where it was more Populous, for fear of the 
Sansquehanocks,
 (another, and more Warlike People of the 
Indians,
 who were their too near Neigh∣bors,

and inhabit between the Bays of 
Chesapeack
 and 
Delaware
) there being then actual Wars between them, insomuch, that many of them were gone thither before the 
English
 arriv'd: And it hath been the general practice of his Lordship, and those who were employ'd by him in the Planting of the said Province, rather to purchase the Natives Interest, (who will agree for the same at easie rates) than to take from them by force, that which they seem to call their Right and Inheritance, to the end all Disputes might be remov'd touching the forcible Incroachment upon others, against the Laws of Nature or Nations.


Thus this Province at the vast Charges, and by the unweary'd Industry and en∣deavor of the present Lord 
Baltemore,
 the now absolute Lord and Proprietary of the same was at first Planted , and hath since been supply'd with People and other Necessaries, so effectually,
 that in this present Year 1671. the number of 
English
 there amounts to fifteen or twenty thousand Inhabitants, for whose Encourage∣ment there is a Fundamental Law establish'd there by his Lordship, whereby 
Li∣berty of Conscience
 is allow'd to all that Profess to believe in 
Jesus Christ;
 so that no Man who is a 
Christian
 is in danger of being disturb'd for his Religion; and all Persons being satisfi'd touching his Lordships Right, as Granted by his Superior So∣veraign, the King of 
Great Brittain,
 and possess'd by the consent and agreement of the first 
Indian
 Owners, every Person who repaireth thither, intending to become an Inhabitant, finds himself secure, as well in the quiet enjoyment of his Property, as of his Conscience.


Mr. 
Charles Calvert,
 his Lordships onely Son and Heir, was in the Year 1661. sent thither by his Lordship to Govern this Province and People, who hath hi∣therto continu'd that Charge of his Lordships Lieutenant there, to the general sa∣tisfaction and encouragement of all Persons under his Government, or otherwise concern'd in the Province.


The precedent Discourse having given you a short Description of this Province from its Infancy to this day, together with an account of his Lordships Patent and Right, by which he holds the same; we will here speak something of the Nature of the Countrey in general, and of the Commodities that are either naturally afforded there, or may be procur'd by Industry.


The Climate is very healthful, and agreeable with 
English
 Constitutions; but New-comers have most of them heretofore had the first year of their Planting there in 
July
 and 
August,
 a Sickness, which is call'd there 
A Seasoning,
 but is indeed no other than an Ague, with cold and hot Fits, whereof many heretofore us'd to die for want of good Medicines, and accommodations of Diet and Lodging, and by drinking too much Wine and Strong-waters; though many, even in those times, who were more temperate, and that were better accommodated, never had any 
Seasonings
 at all; but of late years, since the Countrey hath been more open'd by the cutting down of the Woods, and that there is more plenty of 
English
 Diet, there are very few die of those Agues, and many have no 
Seasonings
 at all, especially those that live in the higher parts of the Country, and not near to the Marshes and Salt-water.


In Summer, the heats are equal to those of 
Spain,
 but qualifi'd daily about Noon, at that time of the Year, either with some gentle Breezes, or small Showres of Rain: In Winter there is Frost and Snow, and sometimes it is extremely cold, insomuch, that the Rivers and the Northerly part of the Bay of 
Chesapeack
 are Fro∣zen, but it seldom lasts long; and some Winters are so warm, that People have gone in half Shirts and Drawers only at 
Christmas:
 But in the Spring and Autumn, (
viz.
) in 
March, April,
 and 
May, September, October,
 and 
November,
 there is generally

most pleasant temperate Weather: The Winds there are variable, from the South comes Heat, Gusts, and Thunder; from the North or North-West, cold Weather; and in Winter, Frost and Snow; from the East and South-East, Rain.


The Soyl is very fertile, and furnish'd with many pleasant and commodious Rivers, Creeks, and Harbors.


The Country is generally plain and even, and yet distinguish'd with some pret∣ty small Hills and Risings, with variety of Springs and Rivulets: The Woods are for the most part free from Underwood, so that a Man may Travel or Hunt for his Recreation.


The ordinary entrance by Sea into this Country is between two 
Capes,
 distant each from the other about seven or eight Leagues; the South 
Cape
 is call'd 
Cape Henry;
 the North, 
Cape Charles;
 within the 
Capes
 you enter into a fair 
Bay,
 Navi∣gable for at least two hundred Miles, and is call'd 
Chesapeack Bay;
 stretching it self Northerly through the heart of the Countrey, which adds much to its Fame and Value: Into this Bay fall many stately Rivers, the chief whereof is 
Patomeck,
 which is Navigable for at least a hundred and forty Miles: The next Northward, is 
Pa∣tuxent,
 at its entrance distant from the other about twenty Miles, a River yielding great Profit as well as Pleasure to the Inhabitants; and by reason of the Islands and other places of advantage that may Command it, both fit for Habitation and De∣fence: Passing hence to the Head of the Bay, you meet with several pleasant and commodious Rivers, which for brevity we here omit to give any particular ac∣count of: On the Eastern Shore are several commodious Rivers, Harbors, Creeks, and Islands; to the Northward whereof you enter into another fair Bay, call'd 
Delaware Bay;
 wide at its entrance about eight Leagues, and into which falls a very fair Navigable River.


This Countrey yields the Inhabitants many excellent things for Physick and Chyrurgery; they have several Herbs and Roots which are great Preservatives against Poyson, as 
Snake-Root,
 which presently cures the bitings of the 
Rattle-Snake,
 which are very Venomous, and are bred in the Countrey; others that cure all manner of Wounds; they have 
Saxafras , Sarsaparilla,
 Gums and Balsoms, which Experience (the Mother of Art) hath taught them the perfect use of.


An 
Indian
 seeing one of the 
English
 much troubled with the Tooth-ach, setch'd a Root out of a Tree, which apply'd to the Tooth, gave ease immediately to the Par∣ty; other Roots they have fit for Dyers, wherewith the 
Indians
 Paint themselves as 
Pacoone
 (a deep red,) 
&c.


The Timber of these parts is good and useful for Building of Houses and Ships, the white Oak for Pipe-staves, the red for Wainscot; there is likewise black Wall-Nut, Cedar, Pine, and Cypress, Chest-nut, Elme, Ash, and Popelar, all which are for Building and Husbandry: Fruit-trees, as Mulberries, 
Persimons,
 with several kind of Plumbs, and Vines in great abundance.


Of Strawberries there is plenty, which are ripe in 
April,
 Mulberries in 
May,
 Ras∣berries in 
June,
 and the 
Maracok,
 which is something like a Lemon, is ripe in 
August.
 In Spring time there are several sorts of Herbs, as Corn-sallet, Violets, Sorrel, Pur∣slane, and others which are of great use to the 
English
 there.


In the upper parts of the Countrey are 
Buffeloes, Elks, Tygers, Bears, Wolves,
 and great store of Deer; as also Beavers, Foxes, Otters, Flying-Squirils, 
Racoons,
 and many other sorts of Beasts.


Of Birds, there is the Eagle, Goshawk, Falcon, 
Lanner,
 Sparrow-hawk, and 
Mar∣lin;
 also wild Turkies in great abundance, whereof many weigh fifty Pounds in weight and upwards, and of Partridge great plenty: There are likewise sundry

sorts of singing Birds, whereof one is call'd a 
Mock Bird,
 because it imitates all other Birds; some are red, which sing like Nightingales, but much louder; others black and yellow, which last sort excels more in Beauty than tune, and is by the 
English
 there call'd the 
Baltemore-Bird,
 because the Colours of his Lordships Coat of Arms are black and yellow: Others there are that resemble most of the Birds in 
England,
 but not of the same kind, for which we have no names: In Winter there are great plenty of Swans, Cranes, Geese, Herons, Duck, Teal, Widgeons, Brants, and Pidgeons, with other sorts, whereof there are none in 
England.


The Sea, the Bays of 
Chesapeack
 and 
Delaware,
 and generally all the Rivers, do abound with Fish of several sorts; as Whales, Sturgeon, Thorn-back, Grampuses, Porpuses, Mullets, Trouts, Soules, Plaice, Mackrel, Perch, Eels, Roach, Shadd, Herrings, Crabs, Oysters, Cockles, Mussels, 
&c.
 but above all these, the Fish where∣of there are none in 
England,
 as 
Drums, Sheeps-head, Cat-fish, &c.
 are best, except Stur∣geon, which are there found in great abundance, not inferior to any in 
Europe
 for largeness and goodness.


The Minerals may in time prove of very great consequence, though no rich Mines are yet discover'd there; but there is Oar of several sorts, 
viz.
 of Tin, Iron, and Copper, whereof several trials have been made by curious Persons there with good success.


The Soyl is generally very rich, the Mould in many places black and rank, in∣somuch, that it is necessary to Plant it first with 
Indian
 Corn, Tobacco, or Hemp, before it is fit for 
English
 Grain; under that is found good 
Loam,
 whereof has been made as good Brick as any in 
Europe:
 There are store of Marsh-grounds for Mea∣dows; great plenty of Marle, both blue and white; excellent Clay for Pots and Tiles: To conclude, there is nothing that can be reasonably expected, in a place lying in the same Latitude with this, but what is either there found naturally, or may be procur'd by Industry, as Oranges, Lemons, and Olives, 
&c.


We need not here mention 
Indian
 Corn, (call'd 
Mayz
) Pease and Beans of several sorts, being the peculiar products Planted by the 
Indians
 of that part of 
America.


All sorts of 
English
 Grain are now common there, and yield a great encrease; as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Pease, Beans, 
&c.
 good Beer of Wheat or Barley Malt, after the 
English
 Mode, is made, even in the meanest Families there; Some drink Beer of 
Indian
 Corn, others of the Stalks thereof, or of the Chipps of the 
Pockykerry
-Tree, all which make a fort of fresh and pleasant Drink; but the general Diet of the Country is now 
English,
 as most agreeable to their Constitutions.


There are few able Planters there at present, but what are plentifully supply'd with all sorts of Summer and Winter Fruits. as also of Roots and Herbs, of all sorts out of their Gardens and Orchards, which they have Planted for their Profit as well as Pleasure: They have Pears, Apples, Plumbs, Peaches, 
&c.
 in great abun∣dance, and as good as those of 
Italy;
 so are their Mellons, Pumpions, Apricocks, Cherries, Figgs, Pomegranates, 
&c.
 In fine, there is scarce any Fruit or Root that grows in 
England, France, Spain,
 or 
Italy,
 but hath been try'd there, and prospers well.


You may have there also Hemp, Flax, Pitch, and Tar, with little labor; the Soyl is apt for Hops, Rape-seed, Annice-seed, Woad, Madder, Saffron, 
&c.
 there may be had Silk-worms, the Country being stor'd with Mulberry-trees, and the su∣perfluity of the Wood will produce Pot-ashes.


There is a great quantity of Syder made there at present, and as good as in any other Countrey; good Perry and Quince-drink is there likewise made in great plenty: The Ground doth naturally bring forth Vines in great quantities, the quali∣ty

whereof being something corrected by Industry, (as there have been several trials thereof already made there) may no doubt produce good Wine, to the great en∣couragement and advantage of the Undertakers.


Brave Ships may be built there with little charge, Clab-board, Wainscot, Pipe∣staves, and Masts for Ships, the Woods will afford plentifully; some small Ves∣sels have been already built there: In fine, Beef, Furrs, Hides, Butter, Cheese, Pork, and Bacon, to Transport to other Countreys, are no small Commodities, which by Industry, are, and may be had there in great plenty, the 
English
 being al∣ready plentifully stock'd with all sorts of Cattel and Horses; and were there no other Staple-Commodities to be hop'd for, but Silk and Linnen (the materials of which apparently will grow there) it were sufficient to enrich the Inhabitants.


But the general Trade of 
Mary-land
 at present depends chiefly upon Tobacco, it being the Planters greatest concern and study to store himself betimes with that Commodity, wherewith he buys and sells, and after which Standard all other Commodities receive their Price there; they have of late vented such quantities of that and other Commodities, that a hundred Sail of Ships from 
England, Barbadoes,
 and other 
English
 Plantations, have been usually known to Trade thither in one Year; insomuch, that by Custom and Excize paid in 
England
 for Tobacco and other Commodities Imported from thence, 
Mary-land
 alone at this present, hath by his Lordships vast Expence, Industry, and Hazard for many years, without any charge to the Crown, improv'd His Majesties, the King of 
Englands
 Revenues, to the value of Forty thousand Pounds 
Sterl. per annum
 at least.


The general way of Traffick and Commerce there is chiefly by Barter, or Ex∣change of one Commodity for another; yet there wants not, besides 
English
 and other foraign Coyns, some of his Lordships own Coyn, as Groats, Sixpences, and Shillings, which his Lordship at his own Charge caus'd to be Coyn'd and dispers'd throughout that Province; 'tis equal in fineness of Silver to 
English Sterling,
 being of the same Standard, but of somewhat less weight, and hath on the one side his Lordships Coat of Arms stamp'd, with this Motto circumscrib'd, 
Crescite & Mal∣tiplicamini,
 and on the other side his Lordships Effigies, circumscrib'd thus, 
Caecilius Dominus Terrae-Mariae,
 &c.


The Order of Government and settled Laws of this Province, is by the Prudence and endeavor of the present Lord Proprietary, brought to great Perfection; and as his Dominion there is absolute (as may appear by the Charter aforementioned) so all Patents, Warrants, Writs, Licenses, Actions Criminal, 
&c.
 Issue forth there in his Name: Wars, Peace, Courts, Offices, 
&c.
 all in his Name made, held, and ap∣pointed.


Laws are there Enacted by him, with the advice and consent of the General As∣sembly, which consists of two Estates, namely, the first is made up by the Chan∣cellor, Secretary, and others of his Lordships Privy-Council, and such Lords of Mannors, and others as shall be call'd by particular Writs for that purpose, to be Issu'd by his Lordship: The second Estate consists of the Deputies and Delegates of the respective Counties of the said Province, elected and chosen by the free voice and approbation of the Free-men of the said respective Counties.


The Names of the Governor and Council in this present Year 1671. are as fol∣loweth, Mr. 
Charles Calvert,
 his Lordships Son and Heir, Governor; Mr. 
Philip Cal∣vert,
 his Lordships Brother, Chancellor; Sir 
William Talbot
 Baronet, his Lordships Nephew, Secretary; Mr. 
William Calvert,
 his Lordships Nephew, Muster-Master-General; Mr. 
Jerome White,
 Surveyor-General; Mr. 
Baker Brooke,
 his Lordships Ne∣phew; Mr. 
Edward Lloyd,
 Mr, 
Henry Coursey,
 Mr. 
Thomas Trueman,
 Major 
Edward Fits-Herbert, Samuel Chen
 
Esq
.




His Lordship, or his Lieutenant there for the time being, upon due occasion, Convenes, Prorogues, and Dissolves this Assembly; but whatsoever is by his Lordships Lieutenant there, with the consent of both the said Estates Enacted, is there of the same Force and Nature as an Act of Parliament is in 
England,
 until his Lordship declares his dis-assent; but such Laws as his Lordship doth assent unto, are not afterwards to be Alter'd or Repeal'd but by his Lordship, with the consent of both the said Estates.


Their chief Court of Judicature is held at St. 
Maries
 Quarterly every Year, to which all Persons concern'd resort for Justice, and is call'd 
The Provincial Court,
 whereof the Governor and Councilare Judges: To the Court there doth belong se∣veral sworn Attorneys, who constantly are present there, and act both as Barristers and Attorneys; there are likewise chief Clerks, Bayliffs, and other Officers, which duly attend the Court in their respective places.


The Province is divided at present, so far as it is inhabited by 
English,
 into Counties, whereof there be ten, 
viz.
 St. 
Maries, Charles, Calvert, Anne Arandel,
 and 
Baltemore
 Counties, which first five lie on the West side of the Bay of 
Chesapeack;
 on the Eastern side whereof, commonly call'd 
The Eastern-Shore,
 lies 
Sommerset, Dorche∣ster, Talbot, Caecil,
 and 
Kent Counties,
 which last is an Island lying near the Eastern∣shore of the said Bay.


Besides the Provincial Court aforenam'd, there are other inferior Courts, ap∣pointed to be held in every one of the Counties six times in the year, for the dis∣patch of all Causes, not relating to Life or Member, and not exceeding the value of three thousand weight of Tobacco; the decision of all other Causes being re∣serv'd to the Provincial or higher Court before-mention'd, and there lies Appeals from the County-Courts, to the Provincial Court.


There are Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers appointed by the Lord and Proprietary, or his Lordships Lieutenant for the time being, in the said respective Counties; and without four Justices, of which one to be of the 
Quorum,
 none of the said respective County-Courts can be held; any of his Lordships Privy Council may sit as Judge, in any of the said County-Courts, by vertue of his place.


These Courts are appointed to be held at convenient Houses in the said Coun∣ties, which commonly are not far distant from some Inn, or other House of Enter∣tainment, for accommodation of Strangers; one of the said six County Courts in each County is held for settling of Widows and Orphans Estates.


There are Foundations laid of Towns, more or less in each County, according to his Lordships Proclamation, to that effect Issu'd forth in the year 1668. In 
Cal∣vert County,
 about the River of 
Patuxent,
 and the adjacent Cliffs, are the Bounds of three Towns laid out, one over against 
Point Patience,
 call'd 
Harvy Town,
 another in 
Battel-Creek,
 call'd 
Calverton,
 and a third upon the Cliffs, call'd 
Herrington,
 and Hou∣ses already built in them, all uniform, and pleasant with Streets, and Keys on the Water side. In the County of St. 
Maries,
 on the East side of St. 
Georges
 River, is the principal and original Seat of this Province, where the general Assembly, and Pro∣vincial Courts are held, and is call'd St. 
Maries,
 being erected into a City by that Name, where divers Houses are already built: The Governor hath a House there call'd 
St. John
's; the Chancellor Mr. 
Philip Calvert,
 his Lordships Brother, hath an∣other, and in this place is built and kept the Secretaries Office, where all the Re∣cords are kept, all Process, Grants, for Lands, Probates of Wills, Letters of Admi∣nistration are issu'd out: the Plat of a Fort and Prison is lately laid there, upon a point of Land, term'd 
Windmil-Point,
 from a Windmil which formerly stood there,

the situation is proper, for that it commands the breadth of the said River of Saint 
Georges;
 so that when it is finish'd, all Shipping may safely Ride before the Town, without the least fear of any sudden Assault, or Attempt of Pirats or other Enemy whatsoever. This City has formerly been the usual place of abode for his Lord∣ships Lieutenants, and their Retinue; but of late years the present Governor, Mr. 
Charles Calvert,
 hath built himself a fair House of Brick and Timber, with all Out-houses, and other Offices thereto belonging, at a place call'd 
Mattapany,
 near the River of 
Patuxent
 before-mention'd, where he and his Family reside, being a pleasant, healthful, and commodious Seat, about eight Miles by Land distant from St. 
Maries.


The 
Indians
 in 
Mary-land
 ate a People generally of streight, able, and well pro∣portion'd Bodies, something exceeding the ordinary pitch of the 
English,
 their Com∣plexion Swarthy, their Hair naturally long and black, without Curle, which ge∣nerally they cut after some strange Fantastical Mode; nay, sometimes they Dye it with red and other preposterous Colours: They Liquor their Skins with Bears Grease, and other Oyls, which renders them more tawny, and less apt to receive injury from the Weather: They are subtile from their Infancy, and prone to learn any thing their Fancy inclines them to, in other things slothful.


There are as many distinct Nations among them as there are 
Indian
 Towns, (which are like Countrey-Villages in 
England,
 but not so good Houses) dispers'd throughout the Province: Each Town hath its King (by them term'd 
Werowance
) and every forty or fifty Miles distance differs much from its Neighbors in Speech and Disposition: The 
Sasquahanocks,
 though but few in number, yet much exceed the rest in Valor , and Fidelity to the 
English;
 the rest being generally of a more Treacherous Spirit, and not so stout, and the number of the 
English
 do already ex∣ceed all the 
Indians
 in the Province.


The 
Werowance
 is assisted by Councellors, call'd 
Wisoes,
 who are commonly of the same Family, and are chosen at the pleasure of the 
Werowance:
 They have Cap∣tains in time of War which they term 
Cockorooses.


Most of their Governments are Monarchical, (except the 
Sasquabanocks,
 which is a Re-publick) but for succession they have a peculiar Custom, that the Issue of the Males never succeed, but the Issue-Male of the Female succeed in Government, as the surer side: They all submit to, and are protected by the Lord Proprietaries Government; and in case of any Assault or Murder, committed on any 
English,
 the Party offending is try'd by the Laws of the Province; and in case of any new Ele∣ction of King or Emperor among them, they present the Person so Elected to the Governor for the time being, who as he sees cause, either alters or confirms their Choice.


In the Year 1663. at the 
Indians
 Request, the present Governor Mr. 
Charles Calvert,
 and some others of his Lordships Privy-Council there, went to 
Pascatoway,
 in this Province, to be present at the Election of a new Emperor for that Nation: They presented a Youth nam'd 
Nattawasso,
 and humbly Requested to have him confirm'd Emperor of 
Pascatoway,
 by the Name of 
Wahocasso;
 which after some charge given them in general, to be good and faithful Subjects to him, the Governor according∣ly did, and receiv'd him into his Protection.


They pay great Respect and Obedience to their Kings and Superiors, whose Commands they immediately Execute, though with an apparent hazard of their Lives.


The Mens chief employment is Hunting, and the Wars, in both which they commonly use Bowes and Arrows; some of late have Guns and other Weapons, by a private Trade with some 
English
 Neighboring Plantations: They are excel∣lent

Marks-men, it being the onely thing they breed their Youth to: The Women Plant and look after the Corn, make their Bread, and dress what Provisions their Husbands bring home. Their way of Marriage is by agreement with the Womens Parents or Friends, who for a certain Sum of their Money, or other Goods, deliver her to the Man at a day appointed, which is commonly spent in jollity.


There are two sorts of 
Indian
 Money, 
Wampompeage
 and 
Roanoack,
 these serve among them as Gold and Silver do in 
Europe,
 both are made of Fish-shells, which they string like Beads; 
Wampompeage
 is the largest Bead, sixty whereof countervails an Arms length of 
Roanoack,
 which is valued at six Pence 
Sterling;
 with this they purchase Commodities of the 
English,
 as Trading-Cloth, 
&c.
 of which they make themselves Mantles, which is something shaggy, and is call'd 
Dutch Duffels;
 this is their Winter Habit; in Summer they onely wear a narrow slip of the same to cover those parts, which natural modesty teaches them to conceal; the better sort have Stockings made thereof, and pieces of Deer-Skin, stitch'd together about their Feet in stead of Shooes: The Womens Apparel is the same, but those of the best Quality among them bedeck themselves with 
Wampompeage
 or 
Roanoack,
 or some other toy.


Their Houses are rais'd about the height of a large Arbor, and cover'd with Barks of Trees very tite, in the middle whereof is the Fire-place, they lie generally upon Mats of their own making, plac'd round the Fire, a Woodden-bowl or two, an Earthen Pot, and a Mortar and Pestle, is their chiefest Houshold-stuff; he that hath his Bowe and Arrows, or Gun, a Hatchet, and a 
Canoo,
 (a term they use for Boats) is in their minds rarely well provided for; each House contains a distinct Family, each Family hath its peculiar Field about the Town, where they Plant their Corn, and other sorts of Grain afore-mention'd.


They are courteous to the 
English,
 if they chance to see any of them coming to∣wards their Houses, they immediately meet him half-way, conduct him in, and bid him welcome with the best Cates they have: The 
English
 giving them in like manner civil Entertainment, according to their Quality.


The 
Werowance
 of 
Patuxent
 having been Treated for some days at St. 
Maries,
 by the then Governor, Mr. 
Leonard Calvert,
 his Lordships Brother, at his first coming thither to settle that Colony, took his leave of him with this Expression, 
I love the
 English 
so well, that if they should go about to kill me, if I had so much breath as to speak, I would Command my People not to revenge my death; for I know they would not do such a thing, except it were through my own default.


In Affairs of concern, they are very considerate, and use few words in declaring their intentions; for at Mr. 
Leonard Calverts
 first arrival there, the 
Werowance
 of 
Pas∣catoway
 being ask'd by him, 
Whether he would be content, that the
 English 
should fit down in his Countrey?
 return'd this answer, 
That he would not bid him go, neither would he bid him stay, but that he might use his own discretion.
 These were their expressions to the Governor at his first entrance into 
Mary-land,
 whom then they were jealous of, whether he might prove a Friend or a Neighbor, but by his discreet Demeanor to∣wards them at first, and friendly usage of them afterwards, they are now become, not only civil, but serviceable to the 
English
 there upon all occasions.


The 
Indians
 of the Eastern shore are most numerous, and were formerly very re∣fractory, whom Mr. 
Leonard Calvert
 some few years after his first settling the Colo∣ny, was forc'd to reduce, and of late the Emperor of 
Nanticoke,
 and his Men were deservedly defeated by the present Governor, Mr. 
Charles Calvert,
 who reduc'd him about the year 1668. which has since tam'd the ruder sort of the neighboring 
Indi∣ans,
 who now by experience, find it better to submit and be protected by the Lord

Proprietaries Government, than to make any vain attempt against his Power.


These People live under no Law, but that of Nature and Reason, which not∣withstanding leads them to the acknowledgement of a Deity, whom they own to be the Giver of all good things, wherewith their Life is maintain'd, and to him they Sacrifice the first Fruits of the Earth, and of that which they acquire by Hunt∣ing and Fishing: The Sacrifice is perform'd by their Priests, who are commonly ancient Men, and profess themselves Conjurers; they first make a Speech to their God, then burn part, and eat and distribute the rest among them that are present; until this Ceremony be ended, they will not touch one bit thereof; they hold the Immortality of the Soul, and that there is a place of Joy, and another of Torment after Death, prepar'd for every one according to their Merits.


They bury their Dead with strange expressions of Sorrow (the better sort upon a Scaffold, erected for that end) whom they leave cover'd with Mats, and return when his flesh is consum'd to Interr his Bones; the common sort are committed to the Earth without that Ceremony; but they never omit to bury some part of their Wealth, Arms, and Houshold-stuff with the Corps.






SECT. IV. Virginia.


THe most Southerly part of 
Virginia
 (for all that Tract of Land, reaching from 
Norumbega
 to 
Florida,
 and containing 
New-England, New-York, Mary∣land,
 and this part we are now about to Treat of, was by Sir 
Walter Raw∣leigh
 term'd 
Virginia,
 in Honor of our Virgin-Queen 
Elizabeth
) lies between 
Mary∣land,
 which it hath on the North, and 
Carolina,
 which it hath on the South, from thirty six, to near thirty eight Degrees of Northern Latitude; and with the rest of those Countries which were comprehended under the same Denomination, was by the Encouragement, and at the Expence of the said Sir 
Walter Rawleigh,
 first Disco∣ver'd (as some say) by Captain 
Francis Drake,
 for his many notable and bold Ex∣ploits, afterwards Knighted by the Queen:
 But upon examination we find little reason to ascribe the first Discovery thereof to Sir 
Francis Drake,
 whose chief per∣formances, from the time he first made himself Eminent at Sea, were against the 
Spaniards,
 and for the most part in the 
Spanish-Indies;
 as his taking of 
Nombre de Dios,
 and 
Vinta Cruz,
 with an infinite mass of Treasure; his taking of 
Santo Domingo
 in 
Hispaniola,
 and of 
Carthagena
 in 
Castella Anna;
 and that which seems to have given occasion of attributing to him the first Discovery of these parts, was his touching upon the North part of the Isle of 
California,
 where being nobly Entertain'd by 
Hioh,
 a King of that Countrey, and having a Surrendry thereof made to him, in behalf of the Queen of 
England,
 he upon a Pillar erected, Inscrib'd the Arms of 
England,
 with the Queens Name and his own, and call'd the place 
Nova Albion:
 Certain indeed it is, that Sir 
Walter Rawleigh
 was the first Promoter of this Disco∣very; for, after Mr. 
Martin Forbisher
 had been sent by Queen 
Elizabeth
 to search for the North-West Passage, which was in the year 1576. and for which he also was by the Queen advanc'd to Knight-hood, and nobly rewarded; and Sir 
Humphrey Gilbert
 obtaining the Queens Letters Patents, for attempting a Plantation, had reach'd 
New-found-land
 (though perishing in his return) he upon these Relations and Inducements undertook by others (for his employments would not permit him to go in Person) to gain Discoveries to the Southward; and accordingly in the year of our Lord 1584. obtain'd a Commission from the Queen, to discover and Plant







map of northern Virginia


NOVA VIRGINIAE TABULA.


Notarum Explicatio 
Domus Regum Ordinariae Domus Incubrationes Anglos


Milliaria Germanica communia.






new Lands in 
America,
 not actually possess'd by any 
Christians,
 who, with the assi∣stance of Sir 
Richard Greenvil
 and others, provided two small Barques, under the Command of Captain 
Philip Amidas,
 and Captain 
Arthur Barlow,
 who setting Sail the 27. of 
April,
 fell the 2
d
 of 
July
 following with the Coast of 
Florida,
 and made Discovery of the Isle of 
Wokokon, Roanoack,
 and the Continent of 
Wingandacoa,
 which they left; and arriving in 
England
 about the midst of 
September
 following, Her Ma∣jesty upon the relation of their Discoveries, was pleas'd to call this Countrey 
Virginia.


April
 9. 1585. Sir 
Richard Greenvil,
 with seven Sail, and several Gentlemen, left 
Plymouth;
 and on 
May
 26. Anchor'd at 
Wokokon,
 but made their first Seat at 
Roanoack
 on 
August
 17. following, which lies in thirty six Degrees of Northerly Latitude, or thereabouts, where they continu'd till 
June
 1586. during which time they made several Discoveries in the Continent and adjacent Islands; and being endanger'd by the treachery of the Salvages, return'd for 
England,
 and Landed at 
Portsmouth
 on 
July
 27. following.


Sir 
Walter Rawleigh
 and his Associates, in the year 1586. sent a Ship to relieve that Colony, which had deserted the Countrey some while before, and were all re∣turn'd for 
England
 as is before-mention'd.


Some few days after they were gone, Sir 
Rirchard Greenvil,
 with three Ships, ar∣riv'd at the Plantation at 
Roanoack,
 which he found deserted, and leaving fifty Men there to keep Possession of that Countrey, return'd for 
England.


The year following, Mr. 
John White,
 with three Ships, came to search for the fifty 
English
 at 
Roanoack,
 but found them not, they having been set upon by the Na∣tives, and dispers'd so, as no News could be heard of them, and in their room left a hundred and fifty more to continue that Plantation.


In 
August
 1589. Mr. 
John White
 went thither again, to search for the last Colony which he had left there; but not finding them, return'd for 
England
 in 
Septemb.
 6. 1590.


This ill Success made all further Discoveries to be laid aside, till Captain 
Gosnol
 on 
March
 26. 1602. set Sail from 
Dartmouth,
 and on 
May
 11. following, made Land at a place, where some 
Biscaners,
 as he guess'd by the Natives information, had formerly fish'd, being about the Latitude of forty eight Degrees Northerly Lati∣tude; from hence putting to Sea, he made Discovery of an Island which he call'd 
Mar∣thas Vineyard,
 and shortly after of 
Elizabeth's
 Isle, and so return'd for 
England, June
 18. following.


In the Year 1603. the City of 
Bristol
 rais'd a Stock, and furnish'd out two Barques for Discovery, under the Command of Captain 
Martin Pring,
 who about 
June
 7. fell with the North of 
Virginia
 in the three and fortieth Degree, found plenty of good Fish, nam'd a place 
Whitson-Bay,
 and so return'd.


In the Year 1605. the Right Honorable 
Thomas Arundel
 the first, Baron of 
Warder,
 and Count of the 
Roman
 Empire, set out Captain 
George Waymouth,
 with twenty nine Sea-men, and necessary Provisions, to make what Discoveries he could; who by contrary Winds, fell Northward about one and forty Degrees and twenty Mi∣nutes of Northerly Latitude, where they found plenty of good Fish; and Sailing further, discover'd an Island, where they nam'd a Harbor, 
Pentecost-Harbor;
 and on 
July
 18. following, came back for 
England.


In the Year 1606. by the sollicitation of Captain 
Gosnol,
 and several Gentlemen, a Commission was granted by King 
James
 of 
Great Brittain, &c.
 for establishing a Council, to direct those new Discoveries; Captain 
Newport
 (a well practic'd Mar∣riner) was intrusted with the Transportation of the Adventurers in two Ships,

and a Pinace, who on 
Decemb.
 19. 1606. set Sail from 
Black-wall,
 and were by Storm, contrary to expectation, cast upon the first Land, which they call'd 
Cape Henry,
 at the Mouth of the Bay of 
Chesapeack,
 lying in thirty seven Degrees, or thereabouts, of Northerly Latitude: Here their Orders were open'd and read, and eight declar'd of the Council, and impower'd to chose a President for a year, who with the Council should Govern that Colony: Till 
May
 13. they sought a place to Plant in, Mr. 
Winkfield
 was chose the first President, who caus'd a Fort to be rais'd at 
Powhatan,
 now call'd 
James-Town:
 In 
June
 following, Captain 
Newport
 re∣turn'd for 
England,
 leaving a hundred Men behind him; since which time they have been sufficiently supply'd from 
England,
 and by the indefatigable Industry and Cou∣rage of Captain 
John Smith,
 (one of the Council at that time, and afterward Presi∣dent of the Colony) they made several Discoveries on the Eastern shore, and up to the Head of the Bay of 
Chesapeack,
 and of the principal Rivers which fall into the said Bay.


Virginia
 being thus Discover'd and Planted, King 
James
 by his Letters Patent bearing Date 
April
 10. in the fourth year of his Reign, 1607. Granted Licence to Sir 
Thomas Gates,
 Sir 
George Summers,
 and others, to divide themselves into two se∣veral Colonies, for the more speedy Planting of that Countrey, then call'd 
Virgi∣nia,
 between the Degrees of thirty four and forty five of North Latitude, that is to say, taken in that large extent, mention'd in the beginning: The first Colony to be undertaken by certain Knights, Gentlemen, and Merchants, in, and about the City of 
London:
 The second to be undertaken, and advanc'd by certain Knights, Gentlemen, and Merchants, and their Associates, in, or about the City of 
Bristol, Exon, Plymouth,
 and other parts.


At the first Colonies Request, in the seventh year of the same King, a second Patent was Granted to several Noblemen and Gentlemen, (including Sir 
Thomas Gates,
 and some of his former Fellow-Patentees) bearing Date 
May
 23. 1610. where∣by they were made a Corporation, and Body Politique, and stil'd, 
The Treasurer, and Company of Adventurers and Planters of the City of
 London, 
for the first Colony of
 Vir∣ginia: And by this Patent, there was Granted to them, their Successors and As∣signs, two hundred Miles to the Southward, from a 
Cape
 of Land in 
Virginia,
 call'd 
Point Comfort;
 and two hundred Miles to the Northward of the said 
Cape,
 along the Sea-shore, and into the Land from Sea to Sea.


And on 
March
 12. 1612. the said King, in the ninth year of his Reign, Grants them a third Patent, of all Islands lying in the Sea, within two hundred Miles of the Shore of that Tract of Land on the Continent, granted to them by the said for∣mer Patent, 
Jac.
 7.


In the Year 1615. Captain 
Smith
 procur'd by his Interest at Court, and the King's Favor, a Recommendation from His Majesty, and divers of the Nobility, to all Cities and Corporations, to Adventure in a standing Lottery, which was erected for the benefit of this Plantation, which was contriv'd in such a manner, that of 100000. Pounds which was to be put in, 50000. onely, or one half was to return to the Adventurers, according as the Prizes fell out; and the other half to be dispos'd of for the Promotion of the Affairs of 
Virginia,
 in which, though it were three years before it was fully accomplish'd, he had in the end no bad Success.


In the eighteenth Year of the said King's Reign, at the Request of the second Colony, a Patent was Granted to several Noblemen and Gentlemen, of all that Tract of Land lying in the parts of 
America,
 between the Degrees of forty and for∣ty eight of Northerly Latitude, and into the Land from Sea to Sea, which was call'd by the Patent 
New England in America:
 For the better Government whereof,

one Body-Politick and Corporate was thereby appointed and ordain'd in 
Plymouth,
 consisting of the said Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, to the number of forty Persons, by the Name of 
The Council establish'd at
 Plymouth 
in the County of
 Devon, 
for the Planting, Ruling, Ordering, and Governing of
 New England 
im
 America.


The Miscarriages and Misdemeanors of the aforesaid Corporation for the first Colony of 
Virginia,
 were so many and so great, that His said Majesty was forc'd, in or about 
October
 1623. to direct a 
Quo Warranto,
 for the calling in of that former Patent, which in 
Trinity
 Term following was legally Evinc'd, Condemn'd, and made Void, by Judgment in the Court of the then 
Kings-Bench;
 as also all other Patents, by which the said Corporation claim'd any Interest in 
Virginia.
 Thus this Corporation of the first Colony of 
Virginia
 was dissolv'd, and that Plantation hath been since Govern'd and Dispos'd of by Persons Constituted and Impower'd for that purpose from time to time, by immediate Commissions from the Kings of 
England.


In the Year of our Lord 1631. the Right Honorable 
George
 Lord 
Baltemore
 ob∣tain'd a Grant, of King 
Charles
 the First of 
Great Britain, &c.
 of part of that Land to the Northward, which is now call'd 
Mary-land;
 but this Patent of 
Mary-land
 was not perfected till 1632. as you may understand more fully by the precedent Dis∣course of 
Mary-land,
 which by express words in the said Patent is separated from, and thereby declar'd not to be reputed for the future, any part of 
Virginia.


And in the fifteenth Year of the Reign of King 
Charles
 the Second of 
Great Bri∣tain, &c.
 on 
March
 24. 1663. 
Edward
 Earl of 
Clarendon,
 then High-Chancellor of 
England, George
 Duke of 
Albemarle, William,
 now Earl of 
Craven, John
 Lord 
Berkley, Anthony
 Lord 
Ashley,
 Sir 
George Carterett
 Knight and Baronet, Sir 
William Berkley
 Knight, and Sir 
John Colleton
 Knight and Baronet, obtain'd a Patent from His Ma∣jesty, of the Province of 
Carolina,
 which lies to the Southward of 
Virginia,
 in which is included some part of that Land which formerly belong'd to the said dissolv'd Company of 
Virginia.
 So that 
Virginia
 at present extendeth it self onely, and is situ∣ated between thirty six and thirty seven Degrees and fifty Minutes, or thereabouts, of Northern Latitude, and is bounded on the North, by 
Mary-land;
 on the South, by 
Carolina;
 on the East, by the Ocean; and on the West, by the South-Seas.


The Entrance by Sea into this Countrey is the same with that of 
Mary-land,
 be∣tween 
Cape Henry
 and 
Cape Charles,
 plac'd on each side of the Mouth of the Bay of 
Chesapeak;
 on the West side whereof you first meet with a pleasant and commodi∣ous River call'd 
James-River,
 about three Miles wide at its Entrance, and Naviga∣ble a hundred and fifty.


Fourteen Miles from this River Northward lies 
York-River,
 which is Navigable sixty or seventy Miles, but with Ketches and small Barques thirty or forty Miles farther.


Passing hence to the North you discover a third stately River, call'd 
Rappahanock,
 which is Navigable about a hundred and thirty Miles — from whence following the Shore to the North you enter into 
Patomeck-River,
 which is already describ'd in the precedent Discourse of 
Mary-land,
 to which Province this River belongs, whose Southerly Bank gives Bounds to that part of 
Virginia
 and 
Mary-land.


To these Rivers many other Inland Branches and Rivulets are reduc'd, the chief of which are hereafter specifi'd.


The Countrey is generally even, the Soil fruitful, the Climate healthful, and agreeable with 
English
 Constitutions, especially since the increase of Inhabitants, and accommodation of good Diet and Lodging, which the first Planters found great want of heretofore. For many years, till of late, most New-comer
 had the

first Year in 
July
 and 
August,
 a Disease which is call'd 
A Seasoning,
 whereof many died, like to what is mention'd before in the Description of 
Mary-land,
 though more mortal and common than in 
Mary-land,
 because 
Virgina
 is a lower Countrey, and somewhat hotter, insomuch that formerly divers ill of that Distemper have come purposely from 
Virginia
 to 
Mary-land,
 to recover their Health; but now, since the Countrey is more open and clear from Wood, few die of it, and many have no 
Seasonings
 at all.


This Countrey affordeth generally all such Roots, Herbs, Gums, and Balsoms, as are express'd before in the Relation of 
Mary-land.


All sorts of Trees for Building and Husbandry,
 Fruit-Trees; Vines, 
&c.
 are found in both Countreys, equal in goodness and quantity, onely in such things as require more Sun, and that may be produc'd by Industry) there may be some little difference, because 
Virginia
 is somewhat more to the Southward of 
Mary-land,
 as in Vines, Oranges, Lemmons, Olives, Silk, 
&c.


There is a Plant grows naturally in this Countrey,
 and in 
Mary-land,
 call'd 
Silk-Grass,
 which will make a fine Stuff with a silky Gloss, and better Cordage than Hemp or Flax, both for strength and durance.


The wild Beasts, Birds, and Fish, are much the same also in this Countrey as are before describ'd in the precedent Description of 
Mary-land:
 Nevertheless we shall think it proper not to omit some Fruits, Plants, Beasts, 
&c.
 mention'd by the most authentick Describers of 
New England,
 as peculiar to that Countrey. The Fruits are, their 
Putchamines,
 which are a kind of Damsons; 
Messamines,
 a kind of Grapes; 
Chechinquamins,
 a sort of Fruit; resembling a Chesnut; 
Rawcomens,
 a Fruit resembling a Gooser-berry; 
Macoquer,
 a kind of Apple; 
Mettaquesunnauks,
 a sort of Fruit resem∣bling 
Inkian
 Figs; 
Morococks,
 resembling a Straw-berry, besides a Berry which they call 
Ocoughtanamnis,
 somewhat like to Capers.


Their peculiar Roots are 
Tockawaugh,
 good to eat; 
Wichsacan,
 of great vertue in healing of Wounds; 
Pocones,
 good to asswage Swellings and Aches; 
Musquaspen,
 wherewith they Paint their Targets and Mats. Also they have in great request a Pulse call'd 
Assentamen,
 and the Plant 
Mattouna,
 of which they make Bread.


Their peculiar Beasts are,
 the 
Aroughena,
 resembling a Badger; the 
Assapanick
 or 
Flying-Squerril; Opassum,
 a certain Beast having a Bag under her Belly, wherein she carrieth and suckleth her Young; 
Mussascus,
 which smelling strong of Musk, re∣sembleth a Water-Rat; 
Utchunquois,
 a kind of wild Cat.


Their peculiar Fish are 
Stingrais.


On the West side of the Bay of 
Chesapeak,
 between 
Cape Henry
 and the Southerly Bank of the River of 
Patomeck,
 are three fair Navigable Rivers, as is before men∣tion'd, into which the other small Rivulets fall,
 which here we will give some ac∣count of, as also of the 
Indian,
 or antient Names by which these three principal Ri∣vers were formerly known. The first whereof is 
Powhatan
 (now call'd 
James-River
) according to the Name of a large and considerable Territory that lieth upon it. The Rivers that fall into this Southward, are 
Apamatuck;
 Eastward, 
Quiyonycohanuc, Nansamund,
 and 
Chesopeak;
 and Northward, 
Chickamahania.


The second Navigable River is 
Pamaunkee,
 by the 
English
 now term'd 
York-River.
 The Rivulet that falls into this is 
Poyankatanck.


The third (which is before describ'd, and usually known by the Name of 
Rap∣pahanoc
) was formerly term'd 
Toppahanoc.


This we thought fit here to insert, to the end no colour of mistake might remain to after Ages concerning the derivation or original change of such proper Names, especially being Places of great advantage to the Colony.




The chiefest of those Tribes or Divisions of People among the 
Indians,
 that were by Name known to the 
English
 at their first arrival, were, upon the River 
Pouhatan
 the 
Kecoughtans,
 the 
Paspaheghes,
 (on whose Land is seated 
James-Town
) the 
Weanocks, Arrohatocks,
 the 
Appametocks,
 the 
Nandsamunds,
 the 
Chesapeacks,
 &c. On the River 
Pa∣maunkee,
 are the 
Younghtanunds,
 the 
Mattapaments,
 &c. On the River 
Toppahanoc,
 the 
Manahoacks,
 the 
Moraughtacunds,
 and the 
Cuttatawomens.
 On the River 
Patawomek,
 the 
Wighcocomocans,
 the 
Onawmanients,
 and the 
Moyanances.
 On the River 
Pawtuxunt,
 the 
Acquintacsuacs,
 the 
Pawtuxunts,
 and the 
Matapunients.
 On the River 
Bolus,
 the 
Sasque∣sabanoes:
 Southward from the Bay, the 
Chawonocks;
 the 
Mangoacks,
 the 
Monacans,
 the 
Mannahocks,
 the 
Masawomecks,
 the 
Atquanahucks,
 and the 
Kuscarawaocks,
 besides a num∣ber not material to be nam'd, as having had little of Transaction that we hear of with the Planters.


The number of 
English
 Inhabitants in this Countrey are in this present Year 1671. about thirty or forty thousand, who are plentifully stock'd with all sorts of tame Cattel, as Cows, Sheep, Horses, Swine, 
&c.
 and all sorts of 
English
 Grain; great store of brave Orchards for Fruit, whereof they make great quantities of Cy∣der and Perry.


They have been much oblig'd by that worthy Gentleman Mr. 
Edward Digges,
 Son of Sir 
Dudley Digges,
 who was Master of the Rolls, and a Privy Councellor to King 
Charles
 the First, of 
Great Brittain, &c.
 For the said Mr. 
Digges
 at his great Charge and Industry, hath very much advanc'd the making of Silk in this Coun∣trey, for which purpose he hath sent for several Persons out of 
Armenia
 to teach them that Art, and how to wind it off the Cods of the Silk-Worms; and hath made at his own Plantation in this Colony for some years last past, considerable quantities of Silk, which is found to be as good Silk as any is in the World, which hath encourag'd divers others to prosecute that Work.


Though this Countrey be capable of producing many other good Commodities, yet the Planters have hitherto imploy'd themselves for the most part in Planting of Tobacco, as they do in 
Mary-land;
 whereof there are two sorts, one which is call'd 
Sweet-scented,
 and the other call'd 
Oranoack,
 or 
Bright and Large,
 which is much more in quantity, but of lesser Price than the former; and the Plantations upon 
York River
 are esteem'd to produce the best of that sort of 
Sweet-scented:
 There is so much of this Commodity Planted in 
Virginia,
 and Imported from thence into 
England,
 that the Custom and Excize paid in 
England
 for it, yields the King about fifty or threescore thousand Pounds 
Sterling, per annum:
 With this Commodity the Planter buys of the Ships that come thither for it (which are above a hundred Sail yearly from 
England,
 and other 
English
 Plantations) all Necessaries of Clothing, and other Utensils of Houshold-stuff, 
&c.
 which they want, though they make some Shoes, and Linnen and Woollen Cloth in some parts of 
Virginia,
 of the growth and Manufacture of the Countrey; and if they would Plant less Tobacco (as it is probable they will e're long find it convenient for them to do, it being now grown a Drug of very low value, by reason of the vast quantities Planted of it) they might in a little time provide themselves of all Necessaries of Livelyhood, and pro∣duce much richer and more Staple-Commodities for their advantage.


Their usual way of Traffique in buying and selling is by exchange of one Com∣modity for another; and Tobacco is the general Standard, by which all other Commodities receive their value; but they have some 
English
 and foreign Coyns, which serve them upon many occasions.


The Government is by a Governor and Council, Appointed and Authoriz'd from time to time by immediate Commission from the King of 
Great Brittain:
 And

Laws are made by the Governor, with the consent of a General Assembly, which consists of two Houses, an Upper and a Lower; the first consists of the Council, and the latter of the Burgesses chosen by the Freemen of the Countrey; and Laws so made are in Force there till His Majesty thinks fit to alter them.


The Chief Court of Judicature is call'd 
The Quarter-Court,
 because it is held eve∣ry quarter of a Year, where all Causes Criminal and Civil are heard and deter∣min'd, and the Judges of this Court are the Governor and Council: The present Governor in this Year 1671. is Sir 
William Berkley,
 who was made Governor by King 
Charles
 the First, of 
Great Brittain,
 &c. in the Year 1640. And those of the Council are Sir 
Henry Chichesly,
 who is one of the greatest and most considerable Planters there, and Mr. 
Edward Diggs
 before-mention'd, Mr. 
Thomas Ludwel
 Secreta∣ry, Major-General 
Robert Smith,
 and divers other worthy Gentlemen.


That part of the Countrey where the 
English
 are Planted, is divided into nine∣teen Counties, 
viz. Northampton-County
 in 
Acomack,
 on the Eastern shore; and on the Western shore, 
Corotuck, Lower-Norfolk, Nansemund, Isle of Wight, Surry, Warwick, Henerico, James, Charles, York, New-Kent, Gloucester, Middlesex, Lancaster, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Rappahanock,
 and 
Harford-Counties.


In every one of these Counties there are inferior County-Courts kept every Moneth; these take no Cognizance of Causes relating to Life or Member, or ex∣ceeding a certain limited Value, such being refer'd to the Quarter-Courts only, to which likewise there lie Appeals from their Inferior Courts.


There are Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in every respective County, appointed by the Governor, for the Administration of Justice, who sit there according to his Order, and whereof these County-Courts are chiefly compos'd.


There are few Towns as yet erected in this Colony; the Principal Seat of the 
English
 there, is at a place call'd 
James-City,
 in Honor of King 
James
 of 
Great Brit∣tain,
 &c. This is situated in a 
Peninsula,
 on the North side of 
James-River,
 and has in it many fair Brick and other good Houses: In this place are held the Quarter-Courts, General Assemblies, the Secretary's Office, and all other Affairs and greatest Concerns of the Colony are here dispatch'd. On the same side, nearer the Mouth of this River, stands 
Elizabeth-City,
 containing also several good Houses of Brick and Timber.


Sir 
William Berkley,
 the present Governor resides at a place somewhat distant from 
James-City,
 call'd 
Green-Spring,
 a fair Brick House, which he himself caus'd to be built.


The other Towns of Note belonging to the 
English,
 only 
Henricopolis,
 or 
Hen∣ry's-Town,
 (so nam'd from Prince 
Henry
 then living, built in a very convenient place, more within Land, about eighty Miles distant from 
James-City
) and 
Dale's-Gift,
 so nam'd, and Planted at the Charges of Sir 
Thomas Dale,
 Deputy-Governor of the Countrey, about the Year 1610.


The 
Indians
 of 
Virginia,
 in Stature, Complexion, and Disposition, differ very lit∣tle from those of 
Mary-land:
 Their Laws and Customs; their way of Living and Apparel; their Religion, Money, and manner of Burial, are the same in both pla∣ces; all which are more particularly express'd in the precedent Description of that Province, to which we refer the Reader.


Yet these 
Indians
 far exceed those of 
Mary-land,
 in Treachery and Cruelty to the 
English
 there, as will appear by this following Relation of their Proceedings towards them, since the first Seating of that Colony, wherein nevertheless, the Civility of some particular Persons at their first Landing is not to be omitted.




Upon the first arrival of Captain 
Amidas
 and Captain 
Barlow
 in 
Wingandacoa,
 now 
Virginia,
 they were accosted by 
Granganimeo
 (the King's Brother of that Countrey) who, attended with a Train of forty or fifty Men, came in a very civil manner to Treat about a Commerce of Trade and Traffick, which immediately began be∣tween them, and several Barters were made: 
Granganimeo,
 who was very just of his Word, and always kept his promis'd Day of meeting, fancying most a Pewter Dish, gave twenty Deer-skins for it, and boring a Hole therein, hung it about his Neck for a Breast-plate; afterwards he, with his whole Company, and his Wife and Children, frequently and familiarly did eat and drink aboard the 
English
 Ships, the King him∣self, call'd 
Wingina,
 lying sick at his chief Town, six days Journey off, of a dangerous Wound which he had receiv'd from a neighboring King his mortal Enemy. Some of the 
English
 going to Land upon the Isle of 
Roanoack,
 were met by 
Granganimeo's
 Wife, who, her Husband being absent, commanded her Servants some to draw their Boat ashore, some to carry them on their Backs to Land, others to carry in their Oars into the House for fear of stealing; and having caus'd a great Fire to be made, to warm them, and to dry those that had been wet in their Voyage, she afterwards Entertain'd them with a very plentiful Feast or Banquet after that Countrey fa∣shion; and when they took alarm at the coming of two or three of her Men with Bowes and Arrows, she caus'd the Bowes to be broken, and the Men to be beaten out of the House, besides several other demonstrations of extraordinary civility; and when notwithstanding all this they could not be perswaded to Lodge any where but in their Boat, she us'd all means imaginable to make them quit their jealousie, and accept of a Lodging in the House.


In the Year 1585. a Company that went over with Sir 
Richard Greenvill,
 burnt the Town of 
Aquascogoc,
 by reason of a Silver Cup that was stoln by some of the 
Indians,
 took Prisoner 
Menatonon,
 King of 
Chawonoc,
 who gave a large Relation of another King about three days Journey off, who possess'd an Island wonderfully rich in Pearl, which was taken in great abundance in a deep Water that inviron'd it. Going towards the Countrey of the 
Mangoacks
 (among whom in the Province of 
Chaunis Temoatan,
 they heard of a Mine of strange Copper call'd 
Wassador,
 with 
Skiko,
 the King of 
Chowonock
's Son, and 
Manteo,
 a faithful Salvage, for their Guide) they were treacherously dealt with by 
Wingina,
 alias 
Pemissapan
 (for so, his Brother 
Granganimeo
 being lately dead, he had alter'd his Name) who endeavor'd to stir up a Confederacy of the 
Chawonocks, Moratocks,
 and 
Mangoacks
 against them; yet by the urgent perswasions of 
Ensenore
 his Father, the truest Friend the 
English
 had, after the death of 
Granganimeo,
 and seeing them safe return'd from their Journey, wherein he thought they had all perish'd, and especially upon 
Menatonon's
 sending Messen∣gers to them with Pearl, and 
Okisco,
 King of 
Weopomeock,
 to yield himself Vassal to the Queen of 
England,
 his Hatred was somewhat cool'd; but 
Ensenore
 deceasing soon after, he return'd to his old treacherous Practises again, and in the end, while he was contriving mischief against the Planters, he himself was shot, taken Prisoner, and beheaded.


After the Company left upon 
Virginia
 by Sir 
Richard Greenwill,
 (for he himself was return'd) tir'd out with hunger, hardship, and the many extremities they were at last reduc'd to, had deserted the Place, and obtain'd Passage for 
England,
 through the civility of Sir 
Francis Drake,
 pitying their distress, fifty Men more were Landed upon 
Roanoack-Isle
 by the same Person, who how they were surpris'd and destroy'd by the Natives, was discover'd at large to the Supply that was sent over in the Year 1587. by Mr. 
White.








A Party of those that went over with Captain 
Bartholomew Gosnol,
 Captain 
John Smith,
 &c. were by the 
Indians
 set upon as they were raising a Fort near 
Cape Henry,
 where they Landed, seventeen Men hurt, one slain, and all in danger to have been utterly destroy'd, had not a Shot happily made from the Ships by chance frighted away the Salvages. Another small Party under Captain 
Smith,
 going down the River to 
Keconghean,
 were very fiercely assaulted by sixty or seventy 
Indians,
 but their Musquet-shot did such Execution amongst them, that they fled into the Woods and left behind them the Image of their God, which had been carried before them as their Standard, and not long after sent one of their 
Queiongcasocks
 to offer Peace, and to redeem their 
Okee;
 which 
Smith
 granting, on condition six onely of them would come unarm'd and load his Boat with Provisions; and promising moreover to become their Friend, and furnish them with Beads, Copper, and Hatchets: They accepted the Condition, and brought him Venison, Turkies, wild Fowl, Bread, and what else they had, Singing and Dancing in sign of Friendship till they de∣parted. In his Return he discover'd the Town and Countrey of 
Warraskayock,
 and the People of 
Chickahamania.


In his next Voyage for the discovery of the Head of 
Chickamahania
 River, he was, through neglect of his Sea-men who were sent to watch the Booty, taken Prisoner; in which condition he was kept a whole Moneth: then being released, he got Pro∣visions for the People in 
James-Town;
 which had they not timely receiv'd, they had all abandon'd the Place, and return'd to 
England.


While Affairs stood thus in a mean condition, Captain 
Newport
 arriving there with a Ship and sixty Men to strengthen the Plantations, he went to 
Weromocomoco,
 where King 
Powhatan
 kept his Court,
 and found him sitting on a Bed of Mats, and an Embroider'd Leather Cushion, Cloth'd in Deer-skins; at his Feet fat a young Maiden, and on each side of the House twenty Concubines; his Head and Shoul∣ders were painted red, and a Chain of white Beads hung about his Neck. 
Newport,
 to oblige him, gave him an 
English
 Youth; in requital whereof he receiv'd 
Powha∣tan
's bosom Friend, 
Mamontak;
 with whom returning, he found a sad Accident,

for the Fire had not onely burnt the Houses of the new Planters, but also the Pal∣lisado's about 
James-Town,
 made for a Defence against the Enemies Assaults,
 and most of their Store; which was so much the worse, because it hapned in the Winter, and indeed had prov'd very fatal, had not a Ship, which was suppos'd to be lost, happily arriv'd there with a considerable quantity of Provisions.


Whilst the Town was rebuilding, 
Smith
 set Sail in an open Barque with fourteen Men, and discover'd two Isles before 
Point Charles,
 to which he gave his Name; then ran into the Inlet 
Chesapeack,
 in the midst of which lay several Islands,
 by the Sea-men call'd 
Russels.
 Before the River 
Wighcomoco
 they found a disturbed Sea, and more Northerly a Bay with fresh and hot Water, and at last he met with two 
Virgi∣nians,
 which conducted the 
English
 along a Creek to 
Onawmoment,
 where some hun∣dreds of them lay in Ambuscade, according to 
Powhatan
's appointment, to cut off 
Smith;
 who leaping forth on a Hidden appear'd like Devils, all painted but the Bullets flying about made them all run away. 
Smith,
 whose Design was onely to dis∣cover the Countrey, and the Silver Mine of 
Patawomeck,
 ten Leagues up into the Countrey, found the Metal to be of little value, so that he return'd with little Suc∣cess, being newly cur'd of a poysonous Wound in the Arm, which was given him by a Fish not unlike a Shark, whilst he lay aground near 
Toppahanock.


A while after being inform'd of 
Powhatan
's Design to destroy the 
English,
 (though he had been lately Presented by 
Newport
 with a Silver Basin, a rich Chair, Bed, and Furniture belonging to it, with other things of value) he, to prevent him, chose forty eight out of two hundred Men which were Garrison'd in 
James-Town,
 then going to 
Werowocomoco,
 Landed with much trouble, the River being frozen above half a Mile from the Shore.


A 
German
 Soldier amongst 
Smith
's Company giving private notice to 
Powhatan
 of the Design of the 
English,
 made his Escape by flight: But 
Smith
 going on to 
Pamaunke,
 found King 
Opechancangough
 with seven hundred Men in Arms, threat∣ning a fierce Battel; but 
Smith
 making directly up to him, set his Pistol on his Breast, and forc'd him to lay down his Arms. 
Powhatan
 by this time provided with Swords and Musquets by two 
Dutch
-men, also began to bestir himself afresh; but his Intentions being too soon known, he was again quieted, and forc'd a second time to send 
Smith
 a String of Pearl; after which a Peace was concluded between all the Natives and the 
English.


Many other Quarrels and Encounters there were in the Infancy of the Planta∣tion between the 
Indians
 and the 
English,
 wherein it would be endless to recount all the Treacheries and Ambuscades of the Salvages, some of which had prov'd very pernicious to the Planters, had they not been betray'd to Captain 
Smith
 by 
Poca∣honta,
 King 
Powhatan
's Daughter, who upon all occasions shew'd her self a great Friend to the 
English,
 having sav'd the Captain's Life, when, being her Father's Pri∣soner, he was just brought to Execution.


This Lady was afterwards brought into 
England,
 Christned by the Name of 
Rebekah,
 and Married to one Mr. 
Rolf,
 and died at 
Gravesend
 in an intended Voy∣age back to her own Countrey.


Nor did their Cruelties and Treacheries end when the Plantation came to be more setled, for on the two and twentieth of 
March
 about the Year 1621. in the time of Sir 
Francis Wyat
's Government, they generally combin'd to destroy all the 
English
 there; and carried on this devilish Design with such dissimulation and dex∣terity, that in one day they cut off seven hundred Men, Women, and Children, there being at that time not above fifteen hundred in the Countrey.


Since which time, in the Year of our Lord 1643. there hapned another bloody

Massacre, wherein near five hundred 
English
 were in one Night miserably butcher'd by those barbarous and perfidious Salvages: whose Blood the present Governor, Sir 
William Berkley,
 nobly and justly reveng'd the Year following, utterly destroying most of them, and taking Prisoner their chief Emperor, 
Opichancono,
 who died not long after in Prison.


Having given but a small hint, in its proper place, of the Story of Captain 
Smith
's Imprisonment by 
Powhatan,
 and his deliverance from Death by 
Pocahonta;
 we have thought not improper to reserve the Story of it, being very remarkable for a particular Relation, before we conclude our Description of 
Virginia,
 since otherwise we should have interrupted the Series of our former Discourse.




The Relation of Captain 
Smith
's being taken Prisoner by 
Powhatan,
 and of his being deliver'd from Death by his Daughter 
Pocahonta.


THe Salvages having drawn from one 
George Cassen,
 whither Captain 
Smith
 was gone, prosecuting that opportunity, they follow'd him with three hundred Bowe-Men, conducted by the King of 
Pamaunkee,
 who in divisions, searching the turnings of the River, found two of his Men by the fire side, whom they shot full of Arrows, and slew. Then finding the Captain, who, as is said, us'd the Salvage that was his Guide as his Shield, (three of them being slain, and others sore gall'd) the rest would not come near him: Thinking thus to have return'd to his Boat, regarding them as he march'd, more than his way, he slipp'd up to the middle in an Osier-Creek, and his Salvage-with him, yet durst they not come to him, till being near dead with cold, he threw away his Arms: Then according to their composition, they drew him forth, and led him to the Fire, where his Men were slain; diligent∣ly they chaf'd his benumm'd Limbs, he demanding for their Captain, they shew'd him 
Opechankanough,
 King of 
Pamaunkee,
 to whom he gave a round Ivory double compass Dyal. Much they marvel'd at the playing of the Fly and Needle, which they could see so plainly, and yet not touch it, because of the Glass that cover'd them; but when he demonstrated by that Globe-like Jewel, the roundness of the Earth, and Skies; the Sphere of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and how the Sun did chase the Night round about the World continually; the greatness of the Land and Sea; the diversity of Nations, variety of Complexions, and how we were to them 
Antipodes,
 and many other such like matters, they all stood as amaz'd with admiration: Notwithstanding, within an hour after they ty'd him to a Tree, and as many as could stand about him prepar'd to shoot him; but the King holding up the Compass in his Hand, they all laid down their Bowes and Arrows, and in a triumphant manner led him to 
Orapaks,
 where he was after their manner kindly Feasted, and well us'd.


Their order in conducting him was thus; Drawing themselves all in Fyle, the King in the midst had all their Bowes and Swords borne before him. Captain 
Smith
 was led after him by three great Salvages, holding him fast by each Arm; and on each side six went in Fyle with their Arrows nocked. But arriving at the Town (which was but onely thirty or forty Hunting Houses made of Mats, which they remove as they please, as we our Tents) all the Women and Children staring and gazing at him, the Souldiers first all in Fyle wheel'd off to the Rear in good Order; on each Flank were Officers, like Serjeants to see them keep their Postures: A good time they continu'd this Exercise, and then cast themselves in a Ring, Dancing in such several Postures, and singing and yelling out such hellish Notes

and Screeches; being strangely Painted, every one his Quiver of Arrows, and at his Back a Club; on his Arm a Fox or an Otters-skin, or some such matter for his vambrace; their Heads and Shoulders Painted red, with Oyl and 
Pocones
 mingled together, which Scarlet-like colour, made an exceeding handsome show; his Bowe in his Hand, and the Skin of a Bird with her Wings abroad dry'd, ty'd on his Head, a piece of Copper, a white Shell, a long Feather, with a small Rattle growing at the Tails of their Snaks ty'd to it, or some such like Toy. All this while 
Smith
 and the King stood in the midst, guarded, as before is said, and after three Dances they all departed. 
Smith
 they conducted to a long House, where thirty or forty tall Fel∣lows did guard him, and e're long, more Bread and Venison was brought him than would have serv'd twenty Men, I think his Stomack at that time was not ve∣ry good; what he left, they put in Baskets and ty'd over his Head. About mid∣night they set the Meat again before him; all this time none of them would eat a bit with him, till the next Morning they brought him as much more, and then did they eat all the old, and reserv'd the new as they had done the other, which made him think they would feed him for slaughter: Yet in this desperate estate to fend him from the cold, one 
Maocassater
 brought him his Gown, in requital of some Beads and Toys 
Smith
 had given him at his first arrival in 
Virginia.


Two days after a man would have slain him (but that the Guard prevented it) for the death of his Son, to whom they conducted him to recover the poor man then breathing his last. 
Smith
 told them, that at 
James-Town
 he had a Water would do it, if they would let him fetch it, but they would not permit that; but made all the preparations they could to assault 
James-Town,
 craving his advice, and for re∣compence he should have Life, Liberty, Land, and Women. In part of a Table∣book he writ his mind to them▪ at the Fort, what was intended, how they should follow that direction to affright the messengers, and without fail send him such things as he writ for, and an Inventory with them. The difficulty and danger, he told the Salvages, of the Mines, great Guns, and other Engines, exceedingly af∣frighted them, yet according to his Request they went to 
James-Town,
 in as bitter weather as could be of Frost and Snow, and within three days return'd with an An∣swer.


But when they came to 
James-Town,
 seeing Men sally out as he had told them they would, they fled; yet in the night they came again to the same place where he had told them they should receive answer, and such things as he had promis'd them, which they found accordingly, and with which they return'd with no small expedition, to the wonder of them all, supposing that he could either Divine, or the Paper could speak: then they led him to the 
Youthtanunds,
 the 
Mattapanients,
 the 
Payankatanks,
 the 
Nantaughtacunds,
 and 
Onawmanients
 upon the Rivers of 
Rapahanock,
 and 
Patawomek,
 through intricate ways, and back again by divers other several Na∣tions, to the Kings Habitation at 
Pamaunkee,
 where they entertain'd him with most strange and fearful Conjurations. Not long after, early in the Morning, a great fire was made in a long House, and a Mat spread on each side thereof; on the one they caus'd him to sit, and all the Guard went out of the House, and presently there came skipping in a great grim Fellow, all Painted over with Coal, mingled with Oyl; and many Snakes and Wesels skins stuff'd with Moss, and all their Tails ty'd together, so as they met on the Crown of his Head in a Tassel; and round about the Tassel was a Coronet of Feathers, the Skins hanging round about his Head, Back, and Shoulders, and in a manner cover'd his Face; with a hellish voice, and a Rattle in his Hand. With most strange gestures and passions he began his Invocation, and environ'd the fire with a Circle of Meal; which

done, three more such like Devils came rushing in with the like antique Tricks, Painted half black, half red; but all their Eyes were Painted white, and some red strokes like 
Mutchato's,
 along their Cheeks: round about him those Fiends Danc'd a pretty while, and then came in three more as ugly as the rest, with red Eyes, and white strokes over their black Faces; at last they all sate down right against him, three of them on the one hand of the chief Priest, and three on the other; then all with their Rattles began a Song, which ended, the chief Priest laid down five Wheat Corns, then stretching his Arms and Hands with such violence, that he sweat, and his Veins swell'd, he began a short Oration: at the conclusion, they all gave a short groan, and then laid down three Grains more; after that, began their Song again, and then another Oration, ever laying down so many Corns as before, till they had twice incircled the Fire; that done, they took a bunch of lit∣tle Sticks, prepared for that purpose, continuing still their Devotion, and at the end of every Song and Oration, they laid down a Stick between the Divisions of Corn: rill night, neither he nor they did either eat or drink, and then they fea∣sted merrily, with the best Provisions they could make: Three days they us'd this Ceremony, the meaning whereof they told him, was to know if he intended them well, or no. The Circle of Meal signifi'd their Countrey, the Circles of Corn the bounds of the Sea, and the Sticks his Countrey. They imagin'd the World to be flat and round, like a Trencher, and they in the midst. After this they brought him a Bag of Gun-powder, which they carefully preserv'd till the next Spring, to Plant as they did their Corn, because they would be acquainted with the nature of that Seed; 
Opitchapam,
 the King's Brother, invited him to his House, where, with as ma∣ny Platters of Bread, Fowl, and wild Beasts, as did environ him, he bid him well∣come, but not any of them would eat a bit with him, but put up all the remainder in Baskets. At his return to 
Opechancanoughs,
 all the Kings Women, and their Chil∣dren, flock'd about him for their Parts, as a due by Custom, to be merry with such Fragments.


At last, they brought him to 
Meronocomoco,
 where was 
Powhatan
 their Emperor. Here more than two hundred of those grim Courtiers stood wondering at him, as he had been a Monster; till 
Powhatan
 and his Train had put themselves in their greatest Braveries. Before a Fire, upon a seat like a Bedsted, he sat cover'd with a great Robe, made of 
Rarowcun
-Skins, and all the Tails hanging by. On either hand did sit a young Maid, of sixteen ox eighteen years of Age, and along on each side the House, two rows of Men, and behind them as many Women, with all their Heads and Shoulders Painted red; many of their Heads bedeck'd with the white Doun of Birds, but every one with something, and a great Chain of white Beads about their Necks. At his entrance before the Emperor, all the People gave a great shout. The Queen of 
Appamatuck
 was appointed to bring him Water to wash his Hands, and another brought him a bunch of Feathers, in stead of a Towel to dry them: Having Feasted him after their barbarous manner as well as they could, a long consultation was held, but in conclusion, two great Stones being brought before 
Powhatan,
 as many as could, laid Hands on him, dragg'd him to them, and thereon laid his Head, when being ready with their Clubs, to beat out his Brains, 
Pocahontas,
 the Emperors dearest Daughter, seeing no intreaty could prevail, got his Head in her Arms, and laid her own upon his to save him from death; whereat, the Emperor was contented he should live to make him Hatchets, and her Bells, Beads, and Copper; for they thought him a Man of all Occupations like them∣selves; for the King himself will make his own Robes, Shoes, Bowes, Arrows, Pots, Plant, Hunt, or do any thing as well as the rest.




Two days after, 
Powhatan
 having disguis'd himself in the most fearful minner he could, caus'd Captain 
Smith
 to be brought forth to a great House in the Woods, and there upon a Mat by the Fire to be left alone. Not long after, from behind a Mat that divided the House, was made the most doleful noise he ever heard; then 
Powhatan,
 more like a Devil than a Man, with about two hundred more as black as himself, came unto him, and told him, That now they were Friends, and presently he should go to 
James-Town,
 to send him two great Guns and a Grindstone, for which he would give him the Countrey of 
Capahowosick;
 and for ever esteem him as his Son 
Nantaquoud.
 So to 
James-Town
 with twelve Guides 
Powhatan
 sent him. That Night they Quarter'd in the Woods, he still expecting (as he had done all this long time of his Imprisonment) every hour to be put to one Death or other, for all their Feasting: but Almighty God (by his Divine Providence) had molli∣fi'd the Hearts of those stern 
Barbarians
 with compassion. The next Morning be∣times they came to the Fort, where 
Smith
 having us'd the Salvages with what kind∣ness he could, he shew'd 
Rawhunt, Powhatan
's trusty Servant, two Demi-Culverins and a Milstone, to carry to 
Powhatan:
 they found them somewhat too heavy; but when they saw him Discharge them, they being loaded with Stones, amongst the Boughs of a great Tree loaded with Isickles, the Ice and Branches came so tumbling down, that the poor Salvages ran away half dead with Fear. But at last we re∣gain'd some Conference with them, and gave them some Toys, and sent to 
Powha∣tan
's Women and Children such Presents, as gave them in general, full content.








SECT. V. Carolina.


CArolina
 is that part of 
Florida
 which lies between twenty nine and thirty six Degrees and thirty Minutes of Northern Latitude: It is wash'd on the East and South, with the 
Atlantick
 Ocean; on the West with 
Mare Pacifi∣cum,
 or the South Sea; and on the North, bounds on 
Virginia.
 A Countrey wherein Nature shews how bountiful she can be without the assistance of Art, the Inhabi∣tants (excepting a little 
Maiz
 which their old Men and Women Plant) depending meerly on the natural and spontaneous Growth of the Soil for their Provisions, the Woods furnishing them with store of Fruit and Venison, and the Rivers with plenty of several sorts of wholsom and savory Fish.


This Maintenance, which without forecast or toil they receive from the natural fruitfulness of the Countrey, will, if we consider either the largeness of their Growth, or the duration of their Lives, be thought neither scanty nor unhealthy, their Stature being of a larger size than that of 
English
-men, their Make strong and well proportion'd, a crooked or mis-shapen Person being not to be found in the whole Countrey; and (where the chance of War, which they are almost continu∣ally engag'd in one against another in their little Governments, spares any of them) they live to an incredible old age; so that when the 
English
 came there, they found some of their Kings, who saw descend from them the sixth Generation.


The Soil is very rich and fertile, producing naturally Walnuts, Grapes (of which the 
English
 who are there Planted have made very good Wine) Apricocks, Bullys, with a multitude of others; besides the Woods also are full of very good Peaches, and all the Season of the Year strew'd all over with Strawberries. Mul∣berry-Trees are the common growth of the Woods; and to assure you they are the natural Offspring of the Place, and grow to an incredible bigness, one whereof the

English
 (who are new Planted at 
Albemarle Point
 on 
Ashley
 River) made use to fasten the Gate of their Pallisado to, was so large, that all who came from thence say, they never saw any Oak in 
England
 bigger, which is but the ordinary size of the Mul∣berry-Trees of this Countrey, which is so sure an Argument of the richness of the Soil, that the Inhabitants of 
Virginia
 enquiring of the Seamen who came from thence, concerning the Quality and Product of the Countrey, when they were in∣form'd of the large Mulberry-Trees it produc'd, were so well satisfi'd with it, that they made no farther Enquiry. There are also other Trees, as Ash, Poplar, and Bay, with several sorts unknown to us of 
Europe;
 but those which make it almost all one general Forrest of large Timber-Trees, are Oak, both red and white, and Cedar. There are also here and there large Groves of Pine-Trees, some a hundred Foot high, which afford a better sort of Mast than are to be had either in 
Mary-Land
 or 
Norway.
 These larger Trees weaving their luxuriant Branches into a close Shade, suffer no Under-wood to grow between them, either by their Droppings, or else the Heads of Deer which loosening all the tender Shoots, quite destroy it; so that a great part of the Countrey is as it were a vast Forrest of fine Walks, free from the heat of the Sun, or the incumbrance of Shrubs and Bushes, and so clear and open, that a Man may easily ride a Hunting amongst the Trees, yielding a Prospect very pleasant and surpassing. On the Skirts of these Woods grow lesser Trees and Shrubs of several sorts; amongst them are sundry Dying Materials, which how well the Inhabitants know how to make use of, appears in the Deer-Skins that the chief of them wear, which are Painted, or rather Dy'd, with several lively Colours. But amongst their Shrubs, one of most note and use is that whose Leaves make their 
Casini,
 a Drink they frequently use, and affirm to be very advantageous for the pre∣servation of Health; which, by the description our 
English
 give of the size, colour, and shape of the Leaf, the sort of Tree it grows on, and the taste, colour, and effects of the Drink, which is nothing but the Decoction of the Leaf, seems to be the very same with the 
East-India TEE,
 and by those who have seen and tasted both, af∣firm'd to be no other, and may very probably be a spontaneous and native Plant of this Place, since those who give us an account of it, tell us, that this so much valu'd Leaf grows most plentifully in 
Nanking,
 a Province in 
China
 under the very same Latitude, and very much agreeing in Soil and Situation with this of 
Carolina.


What Herbs else the Countrey produces, the 
English
 Enquirers (who by minding their Plantations and Settlement there, have been taken off from such unprofitable Actions) give us but little account, onely they say, that those Plats of Ground which have been formerly clear'd off by the 
Indians
 for the Planting their Corn, they found thick cover'd with three-leav'd Grass and Dazies, which the fertility of the Soil thrusts forth, whenever the Natives remove their Tillage to some other place, and leave the Earth to its own production; and in other parts they found plenty of Garden Herbs growing wild. The low and Moorish Grounds are for the most part overgrown with Sedge and Reeds, and such other Trash, which usu∣ally incumbers rich and uncultivated Lands; those they call 
Swamsas,
 which with a little Husbandry would prove very good Meadows. There are also some large and pleasant 
Savanas,
 or grassy Plains.


These are a part of the Trees and Plants best known to us, that Nature of her self produces, in a Soil which contrives and nourishes any thing. The 
English
 who are now Planted in the most Northern parts of it, at 
Albemarle,
 bordering on 
Virgi∣nia,
 have Apples, Pears, Cherries, Apricocks, Plumbs, and Water-Melons, equal∣ling, and if you will believe the Inhabitants, both in largeness of size and goodness of taste, exceeding any in 
Europe.
 And they who are Setled farther South on 
Ashley


River, have found that the Oranges, Lemmons, Pomegranates, Limes, Pome∣citrons, 
&c.
 which they Planted there, have thriven beyond expectation; and there is nothing which they have put into the Earth, that through any defect in the Soil, hath fail'd to prosper.


Besides those things which do serve to satisfie Hunger, or provoke it, the Land doth with great return produce Indigo, Ginger, Tobacco, Cotton, and other Com∣modities fit to send abroad and furnish foreign Markets; and when a little time shall have brought those kind of Plants to maturity, and given the Inhabitants leisure to furnish themselves with Conveniences for ordering those things aright, the Trials that they have already made of the Soil and its fitness for such Plan∣tations, assure you, that besides Silk, enough to store 
Europe,
 and a great many other considerable Commodities, they shall have as great plenty of good Wine and Oyl, as any part of the World.


The Mould is generally black, mellow, and upon handling feels soft, and (to use their Expression who have been there) soapy, and is generally all over the Countrey just like the fine Mould of our well order'd Gardens. Under this black Earth, which is of a good thickness in most places that they have try'd, there lies a Bed of Marle, and in some parts Clay.


The Rivers are stor'd with plenty of excellent Fish of several sorts, which are ta∣ken with great ease in abundance, and are one great part of the Natives Provision, who are never like to want this Recruit, in a Countrey so abounding in large Ri∣vers, there being in that one small Tract between 
Port Rasal
 and 
Cape Carteret,
 which are not one Degree distant, five or six great Navigable Rivers, that empty themselves into the Sea. These Rivers are also cover'd with Flocks of Ducks and Mallard, whereof millions are seen together, besides Cranes, Herons, Geese, Cur∣lews, and other Water-Fowl, who are so easie to be kill'd, that onely rising at the discharge and noise of a Gun, they instantly light again in the same place, and pre∣sently offer a fresh Mark to the Fowler. At the Mouths of the Rivers, and along the Sea-Coast, are Beds of Oysters, which are of a longer Make than those in 
Europe,
 but very well tasted, wherein are often found good large Pearls, which though the unskilful 
Indians
 by washing the Oysters do commonly discolour, and spoil their lustre, yet 'tis not to be doubted, but if rightly order'd, there will be found many of value, and the Fishing for them turn to some account.


Besides the easie Provisions which the Rivers and Sea afford, their Woods are well stock'd with Deer, Rabbets, Hares, Turtle-Doves, Phesants, Partridges, and an infinite number of Wood-Pigeons and wild Turkies, which are the ordinary Dishes of the 
Indians,
 whose House-keeping depends on their Fishing and Hunting, and who have found it no ill way of Living in so fertile a Countrey, to trust them∣selves without any labor or forecast, to the Supplies which are there provided to their hands, without the continual trouble of Tillage and Husbandry. Besides, these Woods are fill'd with innumerable variety of smaller Birds, as different in their Notes as Kinds.


The Temperature of this Province is agreeable to a Countrey, whose Position is on the warmer side of the temperate 
Zone,
 but yet the Heat is not so sultry nor offensive, as in Places under the same Latitude in the 
Old World;
 to which modera∣tion of Heat, as well as the healthiness of it, the vast 
Atlantick
 Ocean, lying to the East and South of it, may perhaps not a little contribute, an instance whereof some think 
China
 to be; to which deservedly admir'd Countrey 
Carolina
 exactly an∣swers in its Position and Latitude, the trending from North-East to South-West of its Coast, and the lowness of its Shore, and wants nothing but Inhabitants, to

make it equal, if not excell, in all conveniences of Life, as it doth in richness of Soil, that flourishing Empire. The healthiness of the Air is such, that it is not onely benign and favorable to the home-bred 
Indians,
 and Constitutions accustom'd to it, but the 
English
-men who first Planted on 
Ashley
 River, though for some other Conveniences they Planted on the side, or almost middle of a Morass, and were en∣compass'd with a salt Marsh, where the Air, pent up with Woods that surrounded them, had not that freedom it hath in open and cultivated Countreys, yet lost not in a whole years time, of a considerable number, any one Person, of any Disease to be imputed to the Countrey, those few that dy'd in that time sinking under lin∣gring Distempers which they brought with them, and had almost worn them out before they came thither. The 
Bermudians
 (who being accustom'd to the pure Air of their own Island, cannot without hazard of their Lives put themselves into any other Place) assur'd of the healthiness of this Place, which is the next Land to them, and under the same Latitude, venture hither. And generally all the 
English
 Planting in the 
West-Indies,
 are so taken with the Conveniences of this Countrey, which, as some of the most considerable of the 
English
 in those Parts say of it, pro∣mises all that the Heart of Man can wish, that they send the overplus of their Peo∣ple hither; to which the Inhabitants of 
Barbados,
 a skilful and wary sort of Plan∣ters, well knowing in all the parts of the 
West-Indies,
 have been found to remove the Hands they could spare. As the Summer is not intolerably nor offensively hot, so the Winter is not troublesom nor pinching, but enough to correct the Humors of Mens Bodies, the better to strengthen them, and preserve their Healths; and so far to check the growth of Plants, that by this stop they may put out more regularly, and the Corn and other Fruits the better ripen together, and be ready seasonably at the Harvest, the want whereof in some Countreys hinders the beneficial Growth of several valuable Commodities, the continual Spring all the year long making that their Crops are never ready, their Trees being laden with green and ripe Fruit at the same time, which is to be seen in the Vines growing between the 
Tropicks,
 where, though they bear excellent Grapes, yet they cannot make any Wine, whilest the mixture of ripe and sowre Grapes upon the same Branch, renders them unfit for the Press, which from Grapes so blended, though of a good kind, would squeeze out a very crude and useless Liquor. This also is the reason why many Parts where our Wheat will grow very well, do yet lose the benefit of it, whilest the se∣veral Ears ripening unequally, never make the Crop fit for the Sickle. But this Countrey hath Winter enough to remove that Inconvenience, and to put such a stop to the Rise of the Sap, and the Budding of Plants, as to make the several kinds of Fruits Bud and Blossom in their distinct Seasons, and keep even pace till they are fit to be gather'd.


To this happy Climate the native Inhabitants are very well suited, a strong, lusty, and well shap'd People, who to their well knit and active Bodies, want not stout and vigorous Minds; they are a People of a good Understanding, well Hu∣mor'd, and generally so just and Honest, that they may seem to have no notice of, as their Language hath no word for, Dishonesty and Cheating; and the worst Name they have for ill Men is, that they are not good. They are a stout and va∣liant People, which appears in the constant Wars they are engag'd in, not out of covetousness, and a desire of usurping others Possessions, or to enrich themselves by the Spoils of their Neighbors, but upon a pitch of Honor, and for the glory of Vi∣ctory, which is their greatest joy, there being no parts of their Lives wherein they enjoy so much satisfaction, and give themselves so wholly to Jollity, as in their Triumphs after Victory. Valor therefore is the Vertue they most esteem and

reward, and he which hath behav'd himself well in the Wars, is suffer'd to wear the Badges of Honor, and is advanc'd beyond others with some Marks of his Courage; which amongst some is blacking the Skin below his Eyes, with black Lead, in fashion something of an Half-Moon; which Mark of Courage is, not suf∣fer'd to be worn by any, but those who by some brave Action, as killing the Ene∣my's Leader, 
&c.
 hath signaliz'd himself in their Encounters. They are faithful to their Promises, fair and candid in their Dealings, and so far from Dishonesty, that they want even the Seeds of it, 
viz.
 Forecast and Covetousness; and he will be very little apt to deceive you to Day, who troubles not himself much about to Morrow, and trusts for the Provisions of the Day to the Day it self; which pro∣ceeds not in them for want of Wit, but desire of Content and Quiet, or by the help of their natural Reason they enjoy that Happiness which the Philosophers could not by their Study and Reading attain to, whilest these Men cut off those Desires which Learning could never help the other to Govern, and which if once permit∣ted to run out beyond the present, are capable of no rest nor Bounds. In their Conversation they are courteous and civil, and in their Visits make Presents to one another; when they meet, their way of Salutation is stroaking on the Shoulders, and sucking in their Breath; and if he be a great Man whom they Salute, they stroak his Thighs too; as civil an Address, as those Patterns of good Breeding, the Hero's, us'd to their Princes, who in their greatest Courtships, we are told, em∣brac'd their Knees: After their Salutation they sit down; and it is usual with them to sit still almost a quarter of an hour before they speak, which is not an effect of stupidity or sullenness, but the accustom'd Gravity of their Countrey; for they are in their Tempers a merry, frollick, gay People, and so given to Jollity, that they will Dance whole Nights together, the Women sitting by and Singing, whilest the Men Dance to their Ayrs, which though not like ours, are not harsh or unplea∣sing, but are something like the Tunes of the 
Irish:
 So that if we will not let our selves too fondly admire onely the Customs we have been bred up in, nor think Men are to be valu'd for making Legs after our Mode, or the Clothes they wear, which, the finer and gayer they are, always the more to be suspected of Luxury and Effeminateness; if we will allow but these Men to follow the Garbs of their own Countrey, and think them fine enough in a shape onely to hide their Nakedness before, or a Deer-skin hanging loosely on their Shoulders, and their Women not ill Dress'd in Garments of Moss, and Necklaces of Beads, whilest the Fashion of their Courts require no other Ornaments; if, I say, a long and pleasant Life, without Distemper or Care, be to be valu'd, without the incumbrance of unne∣cessary Trinkets; if Men are to be esteem'd for Valor, Honesty, Friendship, Hu∣manity and good Nature, though Strangers to the ceremonious Troubles we are accustom'd to, the Natives of 
Carolina
 will as little, or perhaps less, deserve the Name of 
Miserable,
 or 
Salvage,
 as those that give it them. 'Tis true, the 
French
 and 
Spaniards
 who have Planted amongst them, or with little Armies travell'd their Countrey, have been ill handled by them; but yet the 
Indians
 never did them any harm, or treated them otherwise than Friends, till those 
Europeans
 by their breach of Faith and several Outrages, had provok'd their just Revenge; and they did nothing but what most vertuous and generous sort of Men are apt to do, to revenge those Affronts, which did not agree with their Tempers tamely to endure. That this did not proceed from treachery and inconstancy in their Natures, is apparent in the contrary Correspondence they have had with the 
English
 Setled amongst them, to whom they have been all along very kind, as they were at first very cove∣tous of their Company; for after that some of their King's Relation had been at

Barbados,
 and had seen and admir'd the Temper, Fashions, and Strength of the 
English
 there, and had been very civilly Treated in that Island, they were so well satisfi'd with them, that at the coming of the 
English
 to Settle there, the several little Kingdoms strove with all the Arts and Arguments they could use, each of them to draw the 
English
 to Plant in their Dominions, by commending the richness of their Soil, conveniency of their Rivers, the healthiness of their Countrey, the disparage∣ment of their Neighbors, and whatever else they judg'd might allure the 
English
 to their Neighborhood. Nor was this onely the first heat of Men fond of Novelties, and as soon weary of them again, but ever since the 
English
 first Planted at 
Albemarle Point,
 on 
Ashley
 River, they have continu'd to do them all manner of friendly Of∣fices, ready on all occasions to supply them with any thing they have observ'd them to want, not making use of our Mens Necessities, as an opportunity to en∣hance the Price of their Commodities, a sort of fair Dealing we could scarce have promis'd them amongst civiliz'd, well bred, and religious Inhabitants of any part of 
Europe;
 and though they are much frighted with our Guns, both small and great, yet like innocent and well-meaning People, they do not at all distrust our Power, but freely, without suspicion, trust themselves, both Men and Women, even their Kings themselves, in our Town, Lodging and Dancing there frequently whole Nights together, upon no other Pledges but the bare confidence of our mutual Friendship; nor do our Men use any greater caution in Conversing with them, stragling up and down, and travelling singly and unarm'd through their Woods for many Miles about, and are so far from receiving any injury or ill treatment from them, that on the contrary they are kindly us'd and Entertain'd, and guided by them in their Way whenever they desire it; and when any of our Men meet them in their Walks, the 
Indians
 all stand still till they are gone by, civilly Salu∣ting them as they pass. Nor doth this Assurance of theirs bound it self within their own Homes, they of their own accords venturing themselves aboard our Ships, have gone voluntarily with our Men to 
Virginia
 and 
Barbados.
 Nor have the 
English
 been wanting on their parts in any thing that may preserve this Amity, being ve∣ry cautious of doing them any injury, bartering with them for those things they receive of them, and buying of them even the waste Land they make no use of.


Besides the simplicity of the 
Indians
 Diet, it is very remarkable, that they have a general aversion to those two things which are most acceptable to our Palates, and without which few of us either eat or drink with any delight; for in their Meats they cannot endure the least mixture or rellish of Salt; and for their Drink, they utterly abominate all manner of strong Liquor; to the latter whereof, their large Growth and constant Health, is perhaps not a little owing.


Every little Town is a distinct Principality, Govern'd by an Hereditary King, who in some places is not Son, but Sisters Son to the precedent King, the Succes∣sion of the Blood-Royal being continu'd by the safer side. The great Business of those Princes is to lead their Men out against their Enemies in War, or against the Beasts in Hunting; for unless it be to appoint them where to Hunt, or else to Consult about making some Attempt upon their Enemy, he hath but small trouble in the Government of his Subjects, who either through their own Honesty, or the few occasions they have for Controversies in their 
extempore
 way of Living, need few Laws, and little Severity to keep them in order; but yet they Govern their People without Contract, and fail not of a ready Obedience to their Commands; so that when some of them have bought things of such of the 
English,
 who by the Orders made amongst our selves were not to Traffick with the 
Indians,
 they have, upon Complaint made to their 
Casiques,
 been restor'd again, though in strict Rules

of Law they were neither bound by, nor oblig'd to take notice of the Rules which were made onely to Govern our own People, and had at just Prices bought what they carry'd away; such is the Honesty of Men, whose Principles not being cor∣rupted with Learning and Distinction, are contented to follow the Dictates of right Reason, which Nature has sufficiently taught all Men for the well ordering of their Actions, and enjoyment and preservation of humane Society, who do not give themselves up to be amus'd and deceiv'd by insignificant Terms, and minding what is just and right, seek not Evasions in the Niceties and Fallacies of Words.


The same is to be said of the first discovery of this Countrey, as hath been for∣merly said of 
Virginia
 and 
Florida,
 of both which it partakes; but as to the present Interest and Propriety, the 
English,
 besides all 
Virginia
 intirely, have also so much of 
Florida
 as makes up this considerable Province of 
Carolina,
 which soon after, the happy Restauration of His present Majesty King 
Charles
 II. from whom it receives Denomination, was granted by Patent to 
Edward
 Earl of 
Clarendon,
 L. Chancellor of 
England, George
 Duke of 
Albemarle, William
 Earl of 
Craven, John
 Lord 
Berkley, Anthony
 Lord 
Ashley,
 Sir 
George Carteret,
 Vice-Chamberlain of His Majesty's Houshold, Sir 
William Berkley,
 Knight and Baronet, and Sir 
John Colleton,
 Knight and Baronet.


The Lords-Proprietors of this Countrey, for the better Settlement of it accord∣ing to their Patent granted unto them by His Majesty, and for the enlargement of the King's Dominions in those parts of 
America,
 have been at great Charge to secure this so rich and advantageous a Countrey to the Crown of 
England,
 to whom of an∣cient Right, by the Discovery of Sir 
Sebastian Cabott
 in the time of 
Henry
 the Seventh, it doth belong, and for its Situation, Fertility, Neighborhood to our other Plantati∣ons and several other Conveniences, of too valuable consideration to be negligently lost: By the Care therefore and Endeavors of those Great Men,
 it hath now two considerable Colonies Planted in it, the one of 
Albemarle,
 on the North side, border∣ing on 
Virginia,
 where are some hundreds of 
English
 Families remov'd thither from 
New England,
 and some of our other Plantations in the 
West-Indies;
 and ano∣ther towards the middle of the Countrey, at 
Charles-Town,
 or 
Ashley-River,
 a Settle∣ment so hopeful, for the healthiness of the Land, and convenience of access by a large deep Navigable River, and so promising in its very Infancy, that many of the rich Inhabitants of 
Barbados
 and 
Bermudas,
 who are now crowded up in those flourishing Islands, and many in our other 
American
 Plantations, are turning their Eyes and Thoughts this way, and have already remov'd part of their Stock and Servants thither. Nor is it to be doubted, but that many, following the Example of those who went to 
Albemarle,
 will be drawn to this better Plantation at 
Ashley-River,
 from 
New-England,
 where the heat of their Zeal, and the coldness of the Air, doth not agree with every Man's Constitution; and therefore it is to be thought, that many well temper'd Men, who are not much at ease under such Extreams, will be forward to remove hither.


The Lords-Proprietors, for the comfortable subsistence, and future enrichment of all those who shall this Year 1671. Transport themselves and Servants thither, allow every Man a hundred Acres 
per
 Head, for himself, his Wife, Children and Servants, he carries thither, to him and his Heirs for ever, paying onely one Peny an Acre, as a Chief-Rent; which Peny an Acre is not to be paid these nineteen years; and those Servants who go along thither with their Masters, shall each also have a hundred Acres upon the same Terms, when he is out of his Time. But though these Conditions are very advantageous, and the Countrey promises to the Planter Health, Plenty and Riches at a cheap Rate, yet there is one thing that makes this Plantation more valuable than all these, and that is the secure possession of all these

things with as great certainty as the state of humane Affairs, and the transient things of this Life are capable of, in a well continu'd Form of Government, wherein it is made every Man's Interest to pre∣serve the Rights of his Neighbor with his own; and those who have the greatest Power, have it limi∣ted to the Service of the Countrey, the Good and Welfare whereof whilest they preserve and pro∣mote, they cannot miss of their own, the Lords. Proprietors having no other aim, than to be the greatest Men in a Countrey where every one may be happy if it be not his own fault, it being almost as uncomfortable, and much more unsafe, to be Lord over, than Companion of a miserable, un∣happy, and discontented Society of Men.


With this Design the Lords-Proprietors, who are at great Charge for carrying on this Plantation, have put the framing of a Government into the Hands of one, whose Parts and Experience in Affairs of State are universally agreed on, and who is by all Men allow'd to know what is convenient for the right ordering Men in Society, and setling a Government upon such Foundations, as may be equal, safe, and lasting; and to this hath a Soul large enough to wish well to Mankind, and to desire, that all the People where he hath to do might be happy. My Lord 
Ashley
 therefore, by the consent of his Bre∣thren, the rest of the Lords Proprietors, hath drawn up, to their general satisfaction, some funda∣mental Constitutions, which are since, by their joynt approbation, confirm'd to be the Model and Form of Government in the Province of 
Carolina;
 the main Design and Ballance thereof (accord∣ing to the best of my memory, having had a Copy thereof) in short is as followeth:


1. EVery County is to consist of forty square Plots, each containing twelve thousand Acres. Of these square Plots each of the Proprietors is to have one, which is to be call'd a 
Signiory.
 Eight more of these square Plots are to be divided amongst the three Noble-men of that County, 
viz.
 a 
Landgrave,
 who is to have four of them; and two 
Casiques,
 who are to have each of them two apiece; and these square Plots belonging to the Nobility, are to be call'd 
Baronies.
 The other twenty four square Plots, call'd 
Colonies,
 are to be the Possession of the People: And this Method is to be ob∣serv'd in the Planting and Setting out of the whole Countrey; so that one Fifth of the Land is to be in the Proprietors, one Fifth in the Nobility, and three Fifths in the People,


2. The 
Signories
 and 
Baronies,
 that is, the hereditary Lands belonging to the Proprietors and Nobi∣lity, are all entirely to descend to their Heirs, with the Dignity, without power of alienation, more than for three Lives, or one and twenty years, or two Thirds of their 
Signiories
 and 
Baronies,
 and the rest to be 
Demesne.


3. There will be also some Mannors in the Colonies, but none less than three thousand Acres in a Piece, which, like the rest of the Colony Lands, will be alienable, onely with this difference, that it cannot be parcell'd out, but if fold, it must be altogether.


4. There is to be a Biennial Parliament, consisting of the eight Proprietors, the 
Landgraves
 and 
Casiques,
 and one out of every Precinct, that is the six neighboring Colonies, for the People, chosen by the Freeholders; these are to sit and Vote altogether for the making of Laws, which shall be in force no longer than sixty years after their Enacting, the great mischief of most Governments, by which not onely the People are mightily entangled by multiplicity of Rules and Penalties, and thereby laid open to the Malice and Designs of troublesom Men and cunning Projectors; but, which is far worse, the whole frame of the Government in tract of time comes to be remov'd from its origi∣nal Foundation, and thereby becomes more weak and tottering.


5. There are eight supream Courts for the dispatch of all publick Affairs; the first consists of the 
Palatine,
 who is the eldest of the Proprietors, and hath power to call Parliaments, and dispose of publick Offices. The other seven supream Courts are, 1. The chief Justices for the determining of Controversies of 
Meunt
 and 
Tuum,
 and judging of Criminals. 2. The Chancellors, for passing of Char∣ters, and managing the State Matters of the Province. 3. The High-Constables, for Military Affairs. 4. The Admirals, for Maritime Affairs. 5. The High-Stewards, for Trade. 6. The Treasurers, for the publick Stock; and 7. The Chamberlains, for Ceremonies, Fashions, Marriages, Burials, 
&c.
 These are the seven supream Courts, to whom lies the ultimate Appeal in all Causes belonging to them. Each of these Courts consists of one Proprietor, and six other Councellors, whereof two are chosen by the Nobility, and two by the People. All the number of these eight Courts joyn'd together make the Grand Council, which are in the nature of a Council of State, and are entrusted with the ma∣nagement of Affairs of greatest concernment. There is also in every County a Court, and in every Precinct another; from the Precinct Court there lies an Appeal to the County Court, and from the County Court to the Proprietors Court, to which the Matter in question belongs, and there is the last decision and determination thereof, without any farther Appeal. And to keep the People from the Charges and vexation of long Suits, to the enriching of Men cunning in Words, care is taken, that no Cause shall be Try'd more than once in any one Court, and that profess'd Pleaders for Money shall not be allow'd.


Liberty of Conscience
 is here also allow'd in the greatest latitude, but yet so, that neither Atheists, or Men of no Religion, are permitted; Atheism, Irreligion, and vicious Lives being condemn'd, as disagreeable to humane Nature, inconsistent with Government and Societies, and destructive to all that is useful to, or becoming of Mankind; as on the other hand, rigorous Imposing of, and hot Contentions about the Ceremonies and Circumstances of Religion, is an occasion of perpetual Strife, Faction and Division, keeps Men from sedate and temperate Enquiries after Truth, eats out the great Cement of humane Conversation, 
Charity,
 and cannot be found in any one, who hath but modesty enough to think himself less than a 
Pope,
 and short of 
Infallibility.


There is also to be a Register of all Grants and Conveyances of Land, to prevent even the occasi∣ons of Controversies and Law-Suits.


There are several other less considerable Particulars in this Government, all contriv'd and de∣sign'd for the good and welfare of the People; all which are so well put together, and in such equal proportion ballance each other, that some judicious Men who have seen it, say, it is the best and fairest Frame, for the well-being of those who shall live under it, of any they have seen or read of.










CHAP. III. Florida.


SOuth-West of 
Virginia
 lieth the spacious Countrey of 
Florida,
 remarkable hi∣therto rather by the great pains which the 
Spaniards
 have taken, and the ill Successes they have met with in the discovery and search of this Province, than by any thing else they have discover'd in it answerable to their desires. On the East it hath the 
Atlantick Ocean,
 or 
Mare del Nordt;
 on the South, and South-West, the Gulph of 
Mexico
 and 
Mare Virginium;
 and full West, part of 
New Gallicia,
 and some other Countreys, not yet perfectly known.


This Countrey is also one of those, said to have been first of all discover'd by Sir 
Sebastian Cabot,
 at the Charges of the King of 
England,
 about the Year 1497. but afterwards more throughly search'd into by 
John some de Leon,
 a 
Spaniard,
 who in the Year 1511. set Sail with three Ships out of the Haven 
St. German
 in 
Porto Rico,
 North-West to the Isles 
Del Veio, Caycos, Yaguna, Amaguyao, Manegua,
 and 
Guanahani,
 first discover'd by 
Christopher Colonus,
 and call'd 
St. Salvador:
 After that Steer'd North-West by a Coast, which (because of its pleasant prospect) was call'd 
Florida,
 or (ac∣cording to the more common Opinion) because it was on 
Palm-Sunday,
 which the 
Spaniards
 call 
Pascha de Flores,
 or 
Pascha Florida
) that he Landed here: And to find out a Haven he kept sight of the Shore, which appear'd South-West from him. Here the Ships met with so strong a Tide, that notwithstanding they had a fresh Gale of Wind, yet could they not stem it; one of the Ships was driven to Sea out of sight; the other two casting Anchor, which raking, drove toward the Shore; whither, being beckned by the 
Indians,
 they immediately went; when no sooner he Landed, but they ran in great Companies to make themselves Masters of the Vessels, kill'd one 
Spaniard,
 wounded two more: the Night approaching put an end to the Fight. From hence Sailing to the River 
La Cruix
 for Wood and Water, they were resisted by sixty Natives, which they put to flight with their Guns, and took one Prisoner; after which they erected a Stone Cross. The Promontory, by which glides the strong Current, lies in twenty Degrees North-Latitude, and call'd 
Cabo de Corrientes,
 as the Row of Isles, before the Main Land 
Los Martyres,
 because the Cliffs at a distance appear like Men standing on Poles. Lastly, after some small Encounters with the 
Floridans, Ponce
 return'd home,
 being onely inform'd falsly by the 
Indians,
 that in 
Florida
 was a River, and on the Isle 
Bimini
 a Fountain, whose Waters made old People young.


But after this 
Florida
 remained not unvisited; for eight years after the foremen∣tion'd Voyage, 
Lucas Vasquez de Aylom
 weighed Anchor with two Ships from 
Hispa∣niola,
 to fetch Slaves from the adjacent Isles for the Gold-Mines, which Labor the Natives were not able to perform: therefore steering his Course Northwardly, he Sail'd along the Coast of 
Chicoa
 and 
Gualdape,
 by them call'd 
Cabo de St. Helena,
 and 
Rio Jordan,
 where the Natives look'd upon the Ships as Sea-Monsters, and seeing Bearded Men in them, fled: the 
Spaniards
 pursuing them, overtook one Man and a Woman; who being well Entertain'd, and Clad in 
Spanish
 Habits, made the Stran∣gers so acceptable to their Countrey-men, that their King sent fifty Men Aboard of them with Provisions, and to invite the Sea-men to his Dominions. The King sat





 with a great Cloth about him,
 made fast on his Shoulders, covering his Belly, Breast and Back with the Lappet thereof, and being long, was held up by one of his Servants; over one of his Shoulders hung a String of Pearl that came three times about, and reach'd down to his Thighs; on his Head he wore a Cap full of Ribbonds; his Arms and Legs were also surrounded with a double Chain of Pearl; in his right Hand he held a very rich Staff: But the Queen went almost naked, onely a piece of a wild Beasts Skin hung down before her from her left Shoulder to her mid-Leg, and a double String of Pearl about her Neck hung down between her Breast, and her Hair Comb'd behind reach'd down to the Calves of her Legs; about her Wrists and Ancles hung also Strings of Pearl.


On the King's Command, the 
Spaniards
 were permitted to make inspection into the Countrey, in which they were every where courteously Entertain'd, and not without Gold and Silver 
Presents.
 Returning Aboard, 
Vasquez
 invited the. 
Indians
 to go with him, under pretence of returning them thanks for the Favours which they had bestowed upon him; but no sooner had he gotten a considerable number in his Ships, but he set Sail, and losing one Ship, arriv'd with the other safe at 
Hispaniola
 with a few 
Indians,
 for most of them with grief and hunger died at Sea, and those that remain'd alive, liv'd on dead Carrion.


Some few years after, 
Vasquez
 receiving Letters Patent from the Court of 
Spain
 for the Government of 
Florida,
 fitted out a Ship thither in 1620. which brought a good Return of Gold, Silver, and Pearls; whereupon he himself went not long af∣ter, and coming into the River 
Jordan,
 lost one of his Ships, which prov'd not the worst Accident;
 for Landing two hundred Men, they were all of them either slain or wounded by the Inhabitants; so that 
Vasquez
 was forc'd to sound a Retreat: And after that the 
Spaniards
 were less willingly drawn to that Coast, and the rather, because the Inhabitants seem'd poor, and had little Gold but what they procur'd from the 
Otapales
 and 
Olugatono's,
 sixty Leagues Northward up in the Countrey.


Notwithstanding these unsuccessful Expeditions, 
Pamphilus Narvaez
 retain'd so much Courage, that obtaining Letters Patents from the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth,







map of coast between Florida and Virginia


VIRGINIAE partis australis et FLORIDAE partis orientalis, inten
 ce
ti
{que} region NOVA
 DESCR






he fitted but four Sail and a Brigantine, weigh'd Anchor from 
Cuba
 with six hun∣dred Men and eighty Horse, in the Year 1528. On 
Florida
 he Landed three hun∣dred Foot and forty two Horse; they found many empty Huts,
 but in a great House a golden Bell hid amongst the Nets, Chests full of Merchandise; and in each a dead Body cover'd with Beast Skins, and painted; Pieces of Linnen Cloth, and Wedges of Gold, which they had from the remote Countrey 
Apalache. Narvaez,
 though against the Opinion of 
Nunnez Cabeca,
 march'd up into the Countrey, whilst the Fleet was to stand along the Shore, and travelling fifteen days saw neither House nor Man, onely here and there some 
Palmito
-Trees: Crossing a River on Floats, they were Encountred by two hundred of the Natives; of which the 
Spaniards,
 having routed them, took six Prisoners, who furnish'd them plentifully with 
Indian
 Wheat. Af∣ter this they march'd fifteen days farther, without discerning the least foot-step of a Man; but at last they met an 
Indian
 Lord with a considerable Train, before whom march'd several Pipers: being told by 
Narvaez
 that his Journey was for 
Apalache,
 he conducted the 
Spaniards
 with a 
Canoo
 over a River, and Landing again, walk'd with them to his Village, where he Entertain'd them with great civility. 
Narv aez,
 after a long and troublesom Journey, came at last in sight of 
Apalache,
 a Village which contained two hundred and forty Straw Houses, built between the Moun∣tains on a Moorish Soyl, full of Nut, Pine, and Savine-Trees, Oaks, Laurel, and short 
Palmito's,
 besides the Trees, which blown down in several places by a strong Wind from between the Hills, and lying cross, cumber the High-ways: There are many deep Pools, and also Bears, Lyons, and other ravenous Creatures, which make the Ways very dangerous. 
Narvaez
 falling suddenly on the Village, took the 
Casique
 Prisoner, as also store of Wheat, Mortars to pound it, Hides, and Thred∣spun Cloaks. Here he rested twenty five days, during which time some of his Men Journey'd farther into the Countrey, yet found none but poor People, troublesom Ways, and an unfruitful Soyl: twice they were set upon by the Na∣tives, who kill'd some of the Horses and Men: They being a very strong People run stark naked, and as swift as a Deer, Diving under Water from the 
Spaniards
 Bullets; which not a little amazing 
Narvaez,
 he thought it convenient to set upon the Village 
Aute,
 lying on the Shore:
 Nine days he was in a miserable condition before he got any Wheat, Pease, or other Provisions from this Village; the getting whereof cost him very dear, for the Villagers behav'd themselves so valiantly, that they kill'd many 
Spaniards,
 and some of their Horses, which since they left the Haven of 
St. Cruce
 had travell'd two hundred and eighty Leagues; so that being tir'd and out of heart, they could not carry the Sick and Wounded, who not able to go, fell down dead in the Way: whereupon it was judg'd convenient to make five Barques, in which they made their Shirts serve for Sails, the Horses Tails and Mayns for Ropes, their Skins to hold fresh Water; with which putting out to Sea, they saw no Land in seven days; and running through the Straights of 
St. Miguell,
 Steer'd along the Coast of 
Rio del Palmes;
 where they suffer'd great Drought, inso∣much that some drinking salt Water, died thereof: at last Landing, they were in the Night set upon by a 
Casique,
 who having given 
Narvaez
 a great Wound in the Face, fled, leaving behind him a Sable Cloak, scented with Amber; three days they rang'd again along the Sea-shore, when the Barque of 
Nunnez Cabeca
 being behind, was by Storm driven on the Shore, where a hundred 
Indians
 waited to cut them off,
 but were pacifi'd with some Trifles: Thus being bereav'd of Arms, Provision, and all manner of Necessaries, they found themselves on an Isle, by the Inhabitants call'd 
Malhado,
 where they were lodg'd and maintain'd so long as they had any thing left; but Famine grew at last to such a heighth,
 that they devour'd

one another, and in a short time of eighty Men there remain'd onely four alive, 
viz. Nunnez Cabeca, Castillo, Orantes,
 and 
Estevanico,
 who at last by Land reach'd to 
New Gallicia,
 and soon after to 
Mexico,
 having escap'd a thousand Dangers. Of 
Pamphilus Narvaez
 never any tydings being heard, it is suppos'd he was drown'd.


After this miserable Adventure, the Business of 
Florida
 lay dead for eleven years, till 
Ferdinandus Sottus,
 chosen Governor of 
Cuba,
 obtain'd so much of the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, that he ventur'd one Expedition more for 
Florida:
 Besides Sea∣men he carried five hundred Foot, and three hundred and fity Horse; with which Landing in the Bay 
Del Espirito Santo,
 he march'd against the Casique 
Vitacucho,
 whom he took Prisoner, with a thousand of the Natives, whom he either put to the Sword, or caus'd them to be torn in pieces by Dogs; and staying all the Winter in 
Apalache,
 fortifi'd that place, and furnish'd himself with Provisions; he was inform'd, that thirteen days Journey from thence lay the Kingdom of 
Cofachiqui,
 abounding with Gold, Silver, and Pearls, which made every one of the 
Spaniards
 very desi∣rous to go thither, notwithstanding the Way was very dangerous; for the vali∣ant 
Floridans
 lying in Ambuscade in the Corn-Fields, wounded and kill'd many of them by Shooting from thence. 
Sottus,
 so soon as 
March
 approached, set forward on his Way. In the poor Province of 
Achalaqui
 he found a few young People, and the old most of them blind.
 From 
Cofachiqui
 he was follow'd by four thousand Natives, who carried the 
Spaniards
 Luggage, and serv'd them as Guides through Woods and Wilderhesses. The seventh day they stopp'd at a great River, whither 
Sottus
 sent four Companies to seek out a Passage over, whereof three return'd without any effect, but the fourth, Commanded by Captain 
Annasio,
 and a Colonel of a thousand 
Cofachiquians,
 came to a Village built along the River; in which they made a a miserable Rout, killing all they lighted on, and hanging the Sculls of the Dead by their sides: this done, they march'd back. 
Sottus
 at last espying a Village on the other side of the River, beckned to the Natives to come over to him; whereupon six came immediately; who understanding that he desir'd their friendly. Assistance and Trade,
 promis'd to acquaint their Governess, being a young Maiden: who soon after came over to 
Sottus,
 and presented him with a String of Pearl: he com∣plain'd to her for Provisions, which she promis'd in part to store him with. Cros∣sing the River he found a brave Countrey, where were Pearls as big as gray Pease, Copper of a golden colour,
 but no Gold. Out of the Tombs of their Princes the 
Spanish
 Officers, with the leave of the fore-mention'd Maid their Governess, got an incredible Treasure in Pearls. In the Village 
Tolomeco
 they did the like. But here their Provisions growing scarce, the Army was divided into two Bodies, 
Balthasar de Gallegos
 leading one, and 
Sottus
 the other; yet the Design of them both was on the Province of 
Chalaque;
 whither marching, they were surpris'd by such a violent Storm,
 that few would have been left to relate their Adventures, had not the Trees bore it off from them; for it not onely Thundred and Lightned as if Heaven and Earth would have met, but also Hail-stones fell down as big as Eggs, which beat down the Boughs of Trees. In the pleasant Valley 
Xualu,
 belonging to the King∣dom of 
Cofachiqui,
 they rested fifteen days, and then march'd through Countreys of 
Guaxale,
 
Acostes,
 and 
Coza,
 where above a thousand 
Indians,
 adorn'd with Plumes of Feathers and rich Furr Cloaks, came to meet and welcom them, and to desire them from the 
Casique
 to stay there all the Winter; but 
Sottus
 resolving to go to the Haven 
Achusi,
 refus'd the same. After this he view'd 
Talisse,
 fortifi'd with woodden and earthen Bulwarks; where the Casique 
Tascalusa,
 a Man as big again as an ordinary 
Spaniard,
 receiv'd 
Sottus
 with great civility, and conducted him to 
Mavilla,
 lying in a pleasant place. The City, surrounded with double Pallisado's, fill'd up with

Earth between, (where also at eighty Paces distant from one another, stands a Tower to contain eighty Soldiers) hath two Gates, eighty Houses, in every one of which dwell a thousand Men, and a large Market-place in the middle; where whilst the 
Spaniards
 were in the midst of their Mirth, they on a sudden heard a great cry of Arms; the first Assault was made by seven thousand, which still in∣creased by fresh Supplies; but the 
Spaniards
 at last setting the City on fire,
 broke through them, and left above eleven thousand slain, either by the Smoak and Flame, or by their Bullets, Swords, Horses Heels and Dogs; the 
Spaniards
 also lost eighty three Men and forty three Horses. Thence going to 
Chicora
 they were stopt by the Natives before a deep River with high Banks, which at last crossing, not without great trouble and blood-shedding, they Winter'd in the Village 
Chicora,
 where the Inhabitants let them rest very quietly for two Moneths; at the end of which, joyning together in the Night, they shot Fire into the Straw Roofs, and maintain'd a Fight of two hours long, in which the 
Spaniards
 lost forty Men, fifty Horses, and all their Hogs, which were burnt in the Houses. From thence going to 
Chicacolla
 they were resisted in most places, and in the Fort 
Alibamo
 Engag'd by four thousand 
Floridans,
 who waited for their coming; but those were so shrewdly hand∣led, that half of them were slain, and 
Sottus
 became Master of the Fort, as also of 
Chisca,
 which he Storm'd and took unawares. With no less trouble and danger did he get over the River 
El Grande,
 where he discover'd a Village that contain'd above four hundred Houses, and many delightful Fruit-Trees. The Casique 
Casquin,
 main∣tain'd the 
Spanish
 Army six days in this place, and taking five thousand of his Sub∣jects, march'd with them to 
Capaha,
 which hath a deep and broad Moat on three sides thereof: the fourth was fortifi'd with strong Pallisado's, through which the 
Spaniards
 breaking, made way for 
Casquin,
 who put all to the Sword, the Governor onely escaping in a 
Canoo
 to a neighboring Isle. The Entrance being thus taken by he 
Spaniards, Casquin
 return'd home. After which 
Sottus
 concluded a Peace with 
Capahaes,
 the Governor, and took up his Quarters in the Village 
Vitangue,
 where he receiv'd continual Sallies; but taking fifteen 
Casiques
 Prisoners, threatned to burn them alive, unless they would procure them some Gold; yet not being able to get any, they had only their Hands cut off and were sent away. Moreover, 
Sottus
 help'd the 
Guachacoya's,
 to ruine those of 
Anilco;
 which Design prov'd successful, yet not ac∣cording to 
Sottus's
 desire, for he found not the Gold-Mines which he expected, but spent in this five years Progress the great Treasure which he took out of 
Atibaliba
's Palace; and the Pearls which he got in 
Florida,
 for the Oysters being open'd against the Fire, and the Pearls drill'd through with a hot Iron, lost much of their lustre, neither would his People consent to build a City in the Haven 
Achusi.
 In the midst of these Transactions 
Sottus
 died of the Bloody-flux, and his Body was Interr'd in the River 
El Grande.
 After which his Successor 
Ludovicus de Alvarado
 had worse suc∣cess, for half of the Army being wasted by the excessive heat, the rest resolv'd to desert 
Florida,
 utterly despairing to be ever able to resist the valiant Natives. In the Province of 
Auche
 they procur'd a Guide, whom, because he mis-led them in their Way, they caus'd to be torn in pieces by their Dogs: after which they march'd without a Guide through such bad Ways, that they lost a hundred of their Men and eighty Horses, besides many 
Floridans
 that carried their Luggage: At last coming to the River 
El Grande
 they conquer'd two Villages; which fortifying, they took up their Winter Quarters in them. But this being the fourteenth year, in which the River us'd generally to overflow and drown all the adjacent Countreys, on a sudden, to their great amazement, the Wood which they had gather'd for the build∣ing of Barques to carry them home, was wash'd away, their Provisions spoil'd,

and their Habitations drown'd: and to this inconvenience was added another yet greater; for the Governors round about rais'd all the Forces they could possibly, to revenge themselves on the 
Spaniards
 for their great oppression. But 
Alvarado
 being inform'd of this Design by the Casique 
Anilco,
 caus'd thirty of the Abet∣tors of the Plot to have their Hands cut off. Not long after this the 
Spaniards
 set Sail, when a thousand 
Canoos
 that came to Engage them lay sixteen days amongst them,
 killing and wounding several of the Seamen, and sunk a Barque with forty eight Men, and also kill'd many Horses which were yet on the Shore; the Prisoners they took were strappado'd to death, and the Horses shot: yet some of them got safe from 
Panuco
 to 
Mexico.


These above-mention'd Expeditions to 
Florida,
 notwithstanding they fell out unfortunately, nevertheless by the permission of 
Philip
 the Second, King of 
Spain, Peter Ahumada
 and 
Julius Samano,
 with five 
Dominican
 Monks, made another Attempt, and Landed with several great Crosses, that thereby they might reduce the 
Flori∣dans,
 whose Language they understood not, to their Faith: But they fearing trea∣chery, resisted them, and kill'd the Monks with Clubs, flay'd them, and hung their Skins in their Temples.


Notwithstanding these and many worse Accidents that hapned, yet the 
Spanish
 King ventur'd once more, and sent 
Peter Menendez
 to 
Florida;
 whither he was fol∣low'd by three 
Jesuits
 from 
Rome,
 viz. 
Peter Martinius, Joan Roger,
 and 
Francis Villare∣gius:
 The Master of the Ship in which they went being ignorant where he was, judg'd it convenient to Land; whereupon nine 
Netherlanders
 and four 
Spaniards,
 amongst which was 
Martinius,
 went ashore on 
Florida,
 whilst a Storm arising drove the Ship to 
Cuba;
 by which means those that were Landed were left in a miserable condition, having no Food but wild Herbs, on which they fed twelve days: so that this Expedition also came to nothing.


At last the 
French
 following the foot-steps of the 
Spaniards, John Ribald
 and 
Ren
 Laudoniere
 having Sail'd several times to 
Florida,
 discover'd several Coasts; but their Men were often set upon by the 
Spaniards,
 and cut off.


Anno
 1567. 
Dominicus Gurgius
 set Sail thither with three Ships, which carried two hundred Soldiers and eighty Sea-men; with which entring the River 
Tacatucouru
 he Landed, and found a Youth call'd 
Peter du Bre,
 who escap'd when the 
Spaniards
 cru∣elly massacred the 
French
 in the Garrison 
Carolina;
 after which 
du Bre
 ranging up and down, at last serv'd 
Saturiona,
 Governor of 
Florida;
 whom deserting, and now meeting with the 
French
 his Countrey-men, he brought several 
Casiques
 to joyn with them against the 
Spaniards,
 whom they drove out of three Forts, which were all by the Command of 
Gurgius
 dismanteled.


Florida
 is call'd by the Natives, 
Irquasa.
 The 
Spaniards
 have built two Forts on the same, the one erected on the Promontory 
Helena,
 is Consecrated to the Apostle 
Matthew.
 The City and the Fort 
Angustine
 lies near the River 
May.
 Both City and Fort stand on a Hill, which is pleasant and well set with Trees. Between the 
Fore∣land
 is a deep and wide Channel, which washes the City and Fort; it is eight-square, at each corner there stands a round Tower, in which the Soldiers keep Guard; the Countrey is water'd by two Rivers, which gliding between the 
Main
 and the 
Fore∣land,
 are great Safeguards to the Fort. The City is almost square, onely against the Fort it is much closer built than in any other place, and divided into four Streets. The Church stands without of the City, and before it the 
Augustine
 Cloyster.


The Inhabitants of 
Florida
 are an Olive colour, tall, and without any defor∣mity; their Skins generally painted, and their Bodies naked, onely a Deer's Skin about their middle, their Hair long and black, hanging down to their Hams, but







view


PAGUS HISPANORUM 
in Florida










 most of them tie it in a Knot on the top of their Heads; two small Boards co∣ver their Breasts, and six lesser hang on their Arms, two Bells at each Ear, and a Cap on their Head, with a Feather: Their Quivers, which are always full of Ar∣rows, sharpned with Fish Bones, hang by their Sides; In their left-Hand they hold a great Bowe, with which they go to War, the King walking before with a Club. They Consult daily about warlike Affairs in the King's Palace,
 where he himself sits on a high Seat; the Grandees salute him first with their Hands lifted over their Head, crying 
Ha, He, Ya,
 at which the rest cry 
Ha, Ha;
 then every one sits down on a Stool round about the Room. If they have any Business of Consequence to debate, then the King sends for the ancientest Persons and Priests, call'd 
Jawas;
 this done, they give a Cup of 
Cassine
 (which is a hot Drink made of Herbs) to the King; after which every one drinks in order out of the same Cup. This Liquor occasions Sweat, quenches Thirst, and satisfies the Appetite for twenty four hours. When they March against their Enemies they live on 
Indian
 Wheat, Honey,
 smoak'd Fish, and divers sorts of wild Roots, amongst which they mix Sand and Cinders, to preserve them the longer. No sooner are the two Armies come within sight one of another, but the Kings of both Parties roll their Eyes about in their Heads, mutter something to themselves, and make strange Gestures and Exclamati∣ons; which is answer'd by a general Cry of the whole Army: then each King turn∣ing himself with great Reverence to the Sun, takes a woodden Platter with Water, which he throws over his Army so far as he is able, and begs of the Sun to grant him, that he may spill his Enemies Blood in like manner; then throws another Dish-full into the Fire, wishing that his Soldiers may thus Offer the Bodies of their Foes to the Flames; then step forth the Priests,
 who are always skill'd in the Art of Necromancy, and seating themselves on a Shield in the midst of the Army, draw a Circle, in which they make many strange Gestures, not without muttering to themselves, and seemingly say a Prayer of a quarter of an hour long; during which they deport themselves so strangely,
 that they rather seem to be Devils them∣selves, than Charmers of the Devil: They turn their Eyes quite round, and their

Bodies as if without Joynts; at length being wearied they leap out of the Circle, and inform the King of the numbe and condition of the Enemies Army. Those whom they take Prisoners they flay alive,
 and drying their Skins at the Fire, tie them to long Poles, and carry them home as Trophies of their Victory, and afterwards set them up in some Field or spacious place, putting both Men and Women to watch them, then comes the Priest with a woodden Image, and utters Execrations against the slain Enemies; at a corner of the Fields kneel three Men, one of which striking with great force on a Stone, gives as many Blows as the Priest pronounces Curses, whilst the other two shake their 
Calabashes
 fill'd with Stones, and Sing many strange Songs: No sooner is this ended, but the Women whose Husbands are slain in the Battel, walking to the King, cover their Faces with their Hands, make many strange Gestures, and desire liberty to take what revenge they can, and licence also to Marry at the limited time; all which the King permitting, they return thus com∣forted home crying.
 Not long after they go to the place where their Husbands lie buried, where they crop their Hair up to their Ears, and throw it on the Grave, as also the Arms and Drinking-Cups which the Deceased us'd in their life-time; after which they may not Marry before their Hair be grown again to their Shoulders. The same Custom is also observ'd when their King is buried; but then also all his Subjects Fast and Howl three days together, stick his Grave full of Arrows, and burn his House and all his Goods.


The 
Floridans
 differ amongst themselves very much, for those that inhabit the Province 
Panuca,
 which borders upon 
New Spain,
 are valiant and cruel People, Offering their Prisoners to their Idols, and eating them. The Men pluck up the Hair of their Beards by the Root, make holes through their Nose and Ears, and Marry not till their fortieth Year.


Next to these follow the Realms of 
Aranaris
 and 
Albardaosia,
 inhabited by a Peo∣ple, which exceed all others in subtilty.


The Natives of 
Jaquazia
 run faster than a Deer, and tire not though they travel a whole day.


The best Swimmers are found in 
Alpachia, Authia,
 and 
Someria,
 where the Wo∣men Swim through deep and great Rivers with their Children in their Arms. Here also are many Hermophrodites,
 which carry all the Luggage when an Army is upon a March.


We find mention'd also two other Provinces of note, 
viz. Colas
 (which lies near the Point call'd 
Cape Florida
) and 
Tegista,
 or 
Florida
 properly so call'd, being that long 
Peninsula,
 which pointing upon the Isle 
Cuba,
 by the Cape 
Los Martyres,
 stretcheth it self North and South about a hundred Leagues in length, but not above thirty in breadth where it is largest. In this Province is the 
Rio de lo Spirito Santo.
 The Soyl, though it produces 
Indian
 Wheat twice a year, yet it is never Dung'd, but when the Corn (which is planted in 
March
 and 
June
) is in, they burn the Weeds; the Ashes of which serves them in stead of Soil. The King divides the Corn accor∣ding to every Mans Family. In the Winter they dwell four Moneths in the Woods, where they build small Huts of Palm-boughs, feed on Venison, smoak'd Fish, and Crocodiles, which have pure white Flesh, and are caught after this man∣ner:
 On the Shore of the Rivers they build little Houses full of round Holes, in which they place a Watch, who is to give notice to ten or twelve Associates, co∣ver'd all over with Boughs full of little sharp Prickles, which they thrust into the Crocodiles Throat, who with open Mouth comes running at them, and so throw∣ing him on his Back, stick his Belly full of Arrows, and kill him with Clubs. But with more subtilty and art they take their Deer,
 
viz.
 They hide themselves unde

a Stags Skin, so cunningly, that it seems as if living, which they place near the Rivers where the Deer generally come to drink, when on a sudden they shoot them.


Their Priests serve in stead of Chirurgeons, wherefore they always carry a Bag full of Herbs about with them, which are chiefly good against venereal Di∣stempers; for these People are exceeding libidinous; nay, Sodomy and defiling of young Children is accounted no sin: Yet though they are much inclin'd to Wo∣men, they attain to a great Age.


Rene Laudoniere
 Landing not far from the City 
Augustine,
 situate on the Banks of the River 
May,
 met with the 
Floridan
 Governor 
Saturiona,
 who conducted him to the 
French
 King's Court of Arms, erected two years before, which 
Saturiona,
 as a testi∣mony of his zeal to the 
French,
 had Crown'd with Laurel and Flowers. 
Saturiona
 had with him also his Son 
Atoreus,
 who had begotten divers Children on his Mo∣ther; whom his Father after that time no more acknowledging, resign'd her up wholly to him: At which time also his great Grandfather being then living, was above a hundred and fifty years old, and saw his Childrens Children to the fifth Generation.


The Religion in 
Florida
 is abominable, wicked, and cruel:
 When they return Conquerors from a Battel, the old Women take off the dry'd Hair from the fore-mention'd Poles, hold it aloft, and thank the Sun for their Victory. But the Offerings of their first-born Sons are terrible, for they knock out their Brains with a Club in the presence of the King. Their annual worshipping of the Sun is also very ridiculous; for filling the Skin of a Stag full of sweet-smelling Herbs, they hang the Horns and Neck with Garlands, and carry it with the noise of their kind of Vocal and Instrumental Musick, to a high Trunk or hollow Body of a Tree, on which they place the stuff'd Stag, with his Head towards the Sun; which done, they falling down, desire that he would please to afford them plenty of all such Fruit as they Offer to him; after which taking their leave, they let the fore-mention'd Skin remain there till the following Year.


The 
Spaniards
 since their Defeat in the Fort 
Carolina,
 and their Engagement with Sir 
Francis Drake, Anno
 1585. have had little disturbance on 
Florida.


Drake
 having burnt and plunder'd 
Domingo
 and 
Carthagena,
 steer'd along the Coast of 
Florida,
 and discover'd a Beacon on the same; whereupon he sent out Spies, who sail'd a League up a River, on whose Banks they saw a Fort, and somewhat higher the Town 
Augustine,
 built full of woodden Houses; all which being related to him, he steer'd thither, fir'd his Guns twice against the Fort 
St. John;
 which the 
Spaniards
 answering onely with one Volley, fled, with their Commander 
Peter Me∣nendez;
 when the 
English
 prepar'd to Storm, a Prisoner, being a 
French
-man, came in a Boat from them to 
Drake,
 and inform'd him that the 
Spaniards
 had left the City 
Augustine
 and Fort 
St. John;
 to which 
Drake
 going, found there Pallisado's of pleited Boughs, cover'd with Earth, and a Chest with two thousand Pound, for the pay∣ment of the Soldiers, and fourteen Brass Guns, with which he set Sail from thence.


The Mountains of this Countrey are onely the 
Apalatei,
 suppos'd by the Na∣tives to have rich Mines of Gold in them, and which the 
Spaniards
 saw, but had not time, nor other accommodation to stay and search them, by reason they were so much wearied and wasted with a long March before they gat thither, and found the People so stout and obstinate thereabouts, that in stead of entertaining them with their Hens and Fowl, as other places had done, they were welcom'd with Blows, and made to return, leaving not a few of their best Soldiers behind.


Rivers there are many, and those very large and commodious, as 1
 
Rio Secco,


or 
The Dry River,
 so call'd by the 
Spaniards
 (as some think) because they could find no Gold in it. 2. 
Rio Grande,
 or 
The Great River.
 3. 
Ligeris.
 4. 
Garunna.
 5. 
Sequana, &c.
 These last, so nam'd by the 
French,
 who, after the 
Spaniards,
 for some time had, but never held any long possession of the Countrey. There are also 
Rio de Flores, Rio de Nieves,
 and 
Rio de Spirito Santo,
 lesser Streams, yet all of them, with the rest, falling at several places into the great Lake of 
Mexico;
 and some of them not a little haunted by the 
Caymans
 or 
West-Indian
 Crocodiles, a Creature, as hath been said be∣fore, dangerous both at Sea and Land.


The Natives, who as yet hold Possession and Command of it for the most part, are themselves generally sorted into certain Tribes or great Families; all which are Govern'd severally by Chiefs of their own, whom they call 
Paracoussi,
 and by rea∣son thereof are almost continually in Feud and War one with another.


The Towns and Places most known in this Province, are 1. 
St. Helens,
 seated on or near unto a Promontory of the same Name, where this Countrey bordereth on 
Virginia.
 2. 
Fort Charles,
 or 
Arx Carolina,
 built and so nam'd by the 
French
 King, but afterwards ruin'd by the 
Spaniards.
 3. 
Port Royal,
 a well frequented Haven, at the Mouth of a River which beareth the same Name. More within Land there is, 1. 
Apalache,
 an old Town of the Natives, formerly a Place of great resort, but now a poor thing of about forty or fifty Cottages; and yet as poor as it is, 
Pamphilius Narvaez,
 as before related, when he search'd the Countrey, found the Natives not willing to part with it: for though he took it from them, it was not without some resistance, and they quickly recover'd it again: and at the 2. nam'd 
Aute,
 an∣other old Town of theirs, nine days March from the other, they overtook him, and fell so resolutely upon him, that he left not a few of his best Soldiers dead upon the place, and was content himself to march quietly away with the rest. 3. 
Ochalis,
 a Town consisting of about five or six hundred Sheds and Cottages likewise of the Natives. 4 
Vittacuche,
 a Burrough of two hundred Houses.


There is also on the the Eastern Shore of this 
Peninsula, St. Matthews,
 a Place pos∣sess'd and well fortifi'd by the 
Spaniards;
 and 
St. Augustines
 on the same Shore, but lying somewhat more Southerly than the other, at the Mouth of a River of the same Name, taken and sack'd by Sir 
Francis Drake
 in the Year 1585.




SECT. II. Jucatan.


JUcatan
 is a 
Peninsula,
 or half-Island, being encompass'd with the Sea on all sides, save onely to the South-West, where it is joyn'd to 
Guaxata,
 its farther and more Easterly Point looking towards 
Cuba.
 The knowledge of, when, and by whom this Province was discover'd, is included in that of 
New Spain,
 of which some will have it to be a part. The whole Province contains in compass nine hun∣dred Miles or more, and lies between eighteen and twenty two Degrees of Nor∣thern Latitude, or thereabouts, the Air somewhat hot, and the Soil not altogether so fertile as some other parts of 
New Spain
 are; but in recompence thereof the People are so much the more industrious, living for the most part by Handicraft Trades. Neither is it altogether unstor'd with Corn and divers sorts of Fruits, be∣sides what it hath of Fowl and Beasts, as Geese, Hens, Deer, 
&c.
 particularly it yieldeth plenty of Wax and Honey, by reason of its frequent Swarms of Bees. They report some special things of this Province, as namely, that the People of the Countrey us'd generally, and long before the 
Spaniards
 came thither, a certain Ce∣remony







map of Central America


YUCATAN 
Conventus Iuridici Hispaniae Novae Pars Occid
talis, et
 GUATIMALA CONVENTUS IURIDICUS








view


S
t
. FRANCISCO DE CAMPECHE






emony of Religion, not much unlike to our Baptism, and which they call'd by a Name that in their Language sighifi'd 
Regeneration,
 or 
A Second-Birth;
 that they observ'd it so diligently, that few or none amongst them omitted to initiate them∣selves by it, believing, that thereby the Seeds and Ground-work of all Goodness was laid in them, and that they were fortifi'd by it against the assaults and tempta∣tions of ovil Spirits; that after they were three or four years old, till they came to twelve, they usually thus Wash'd and Baptiz'd themselves; and that none were permitted amongst them to Marry, that were not first initiated after this manner; that they chose likewise a solemn Day upon which to do this; and that the Friends and Relations (especially the Father and Mother) of the Parties to be initiated, as well as the Parties themselves, always Fasted three days before the said Initiation; and that a great many of the Natives had a Tradition, or general Report amongst them, that of ancient time this Province of 
Jucatan
 was possess'd and cultivated by a certain People which came thither from the East, after a tedious long wander∣ring, and many hardships endur'd at Sea, having escap'd the Hands of their Ene∣mies onely through the power of the Deity they worshipp'd; who help'd them, and made them to pass securely, even through the Waves of the Sea. All which, if true, seems not a little to confirm the Report which goeth for currant in the 
Welsh
 Chronicles, of one 
Madoc ap Owen,
 the Son of 
Guineth,
 a Prince of that Countrey, who is said to have fall'n upon a far Countrey this way in his Travels; which he lik'd so well, that having secur'd to his Companions their safe abode there during his absence, he return'd himself into 
Wales
 for more Men; and that he transported thither as many as he could carry in ten Barques full fraught. This he is said to have done about the Year of our Lord 1170. but neither he nor any of his Men were ever heard of since; and the success of the Expedition, it seems, little enquir'd after by the 
Welsh,
 However, the Relation seems not altogether incredible.


The chief Towns of the Province are, 1. 
Merida,
 in the Navel of the Countrey, and the Seat of the Governor, twelve Leagues distant from the Sea on either side. 2. 
Valladolidt,
 thirty Leagues distant from 
Nerida.
 3. 
Campeche,
 a great Town, con∣sisting of about three thousand Houses or more, when first conquer'd by the 
Spani∣ards;
 who found such Monuments of Art and Industry in it, as did clearly argue, that the Place had been once possess'd by some People that were not barbarous. It is now call'd 
St. Francisco,
 and was surpriz'd in the Year 1596. by Captain 
Parker,
 an 
English
-man, who took the Governor himself and some other Persons of Quality with him, together with a Ship richly laden with Gold and Silver, besides other Commodities of good value. 4. 
Tabasco,
 by the 
Spaniard
 now call'd 
Villa de Nuestra Sennora de Victoria,
 and commonly 
Victoria
 onely, in memory, as 'tis thought, of the first great Victory which 
Cortez
 otain'd over these People at the Battel of 
Potonchan,
 as hath been said. 5. 
Cintla.
 6. 
Potonchan.
 7. 
Salamanca.


All along the Coast of this Countrey there lie certain Islands, some within the Bay or Gulph call'd 
Honduras,
 pertaining to the next Province, as 1. 
La Zarza.
 2. 
La Desconescida.
 3. 
Vermeia.
 4. 
Los Negrillos;
 and some without it, as 1. 
Zaratan.
 2. 
Pantoia.
 3. 
De Mugeres,
 or 
The Island of Women;
 so nam'd by the 
Spaniards,
 who at their first Discovery of these Parts, for a long time together could meet with none but Women. The chief of them is call'd 
Acusamil,
 commonly 
Cozamul,
 and is fifteen Leagues in length, and about five in breadth, and was as it were the Thoro-wfare, or Common Road of the 
Spaniards,
 when they first discover'd the Countreys of 
New Spain:
 For first here Landed 
Ferdinando de Corduba;
 after him 
John de Grialva,
 and others; and last of all the fortunate 
Cortez.
 It is now call'd St. 
Crux.










CHAP. IV. Guatimala.


GUatimala
 stretcheth to the 
Isthmus,
 or Neck of Land, which, as we said, join∣eth the Northern and Southern parts of the 
New World
 together.


This Countrey is bounded Northward with the 
Peninsula
 of 
Jucatan
 abovesaid, and part of the Gulph or Bay of 
Honduras;
 on the South, with 
Mare del Zur;
 on the East and South-East, it hath 
Castella Aurea;
 and on the West, 
New Spain.
 The length of it lieth upon the Coast of 
Mare del Zur,
 and is said to be little less than three hundred Leagues; but the breadth not half so much, and in some places very narrow. It is generally a fertile and good Countrey in all respects, but especially abounding in Cattel and good Pastures; it is subdivided into seven inferior Pro∣vinces or Countreys, which are 1. 
Chiapa.
 2. 
Verapaz
 3. 
Honduras.
 4. 
Nicaragua.
 5. 
Veragua.
 6. 
Costa Rica;
 and 7. 
Guatimala,
 specially so call'd: all differing in Language and Customs one from another.


The Bishoprick (as it is now call'd) of 
Chiapa
 is border'd on the West with 
New Spain;
 on the East with 
Vera Paz;
 and on the South with 
Mare del Zur.
 It is a Countrey much shaded with Woods, and those replenish'd with many fair and goodly Trees, of divers sorts, and of the largest size, as Oaks, Pines, Cedar, Myrtle, and Cypress-Trees, besides others which yield them a good kind of Rozen, precious Gums, 
&c.
 also several sorts of Balsom, as white, red, green, and black, not onely pleasant to the Scent, but an excellent Remedy for all manner of green Wounds: the best of it drops out of the cut Bodies of the Trees; and the worst is press'd out of the Wood and Leaves.


There are also proper to this Countrey several other kinds of Trees and Plants, as that whose Fruit tastes like Pepper and Cloves, being of a great heighth; a Tree whose Leaves cure all ulcerated Sores, or the bitings of any poysonous Beast.


There is a sort of Cabbage call'd 
Ilantas,
 which grows to the heighth of a Tree, so that Birds make their Nests in them; they are eaten likewise like other com∣mon Cabbages.


There is also an Herb with narrow Leaves, which is no sooner touch'd, but it shrinks up to nothing; but at the going away of those which touch it, it obtains its former vigour.


Here are likewise Quails,
 Ducks, Geese, Pheasants, Parrots, Turtle-Doves, Pi∣geons, and the like, in great abundance.


Amongst the several sorts of Falcons which breed in this Countrey, there is one sort which hath one Foot proper to its kind, the other like that of a Goose; it feeds on Fish along the Rivers.


The Bird 
Toto-Queztall,
 which is somewhat smaller than a Pigeon, with green Feathers and a long Tail, is taken onely for its Tail, which when the 
Indians
 have pull'd out, they let the Bird fly again, there being a Law amongst them, that who∣soever kills one of them, is to suffer death.


The Cranes here are of a dark Gray; the biggest of them have a tuft of Fea∣thers like a Crown upon their Heads.








The Birds 
Guacamayes,
 which are red and blue, are like a 
Peruan
 Goose.


Moreover, the Countrey yields brave Horses, Goats, Sheep, Rabbets, and Foxes;
 also wild Dogs, Leopards, Lyons, and Tygers.


The wild Hogs which breed here have their Navels on their Backs, and have no Tails, they smell exceeding strong, and feed together in great Companies.


The 
Taquatrin,
 a certain Beast proper to those Parts, hath a Bag under its Belly, in which it generally carries seven or more young ones, and hath also a bald Tail; it creeps into Houses in the Night to steal Hens.


Here is also a certain Beast (whose Name we find not) about the bigness of a Rabbet, and like a Rat, and carries its young ones on its back whensoe're it comes abroad.


The Serpents, which are very numerous here, trouble the Inhabitants excee∣dingly, especially near the Village 
Ecatepeque,
 where there are such an abundance on two little Hills, that none dares approach them; some of them are very poy∣sonous, for if touch'd with a Stick, the Poyson runs up the same: and whoever are anointed with the Blood of a dead Serpent, die a lingring Death. 
John de Laet
 re∣lates, that the 
Indians
 took one which carried thirty young ones, which being a Finger long, crep up and down immediately; and the old one, being above twenty Foot long, serv'd the Natives for Venison.


Amongst other Beasts is also the 
Teuthlacokauhqui,
 or 
Fortress of the Serpents;
 it hath a Head like an Adder, thick Belly, glittering Scales, a black Back, sprinkled with white Crosses; at its Tail there grows yearly a Bone, with which it makes a noise when it stirs; its poysonous Teeth destroy those which are bit therewith in twenty four Hours, unless the part which is wounded be held in the Earth so long till the pain be over. Notwithstanding the noise, terrible aspect, and gestures of this Animal, the 
Indian
 Hunters make nothing to take the same by the Tail, and wrap it up in Linnen, and carrying it home make it tame. It is able to live a whole Year without either Meat or Drink; its Head when cut off grows to the bigness of a Man's Thigh in ten days time.




No less resolute are the 
Indians
 in taking the 
Ibitobaca,
 which is an Ell long, of a crimson Colour, full of black and white Specks, the Bones whereof they wear about their Necks in stead of Chains.


The 
Iquanna
 is a Serpent which doth no manner of hurt, though terrible to look upon to those which know it not, having a Bag under its Chin, a glittering Comb on its Head, and on its Back sharp Bones, which stand like a Saw, and a long Tail: It lays fifty Eggs at a time as big as Acorns, of a very good taste, and fit to eat when boyl'd: It also lives both in the Water and on the Land.


Here are also many Baboons,
 which are big and heavy, with ugly Heads, short Legs like a Man, and Tails standing upwards; they eat all sorts of Fruit, but chiefly covet after Wine and Bread; and are so lascivious, that they often set upon Women: The Females generally bring forth two, one Male, and the other Female. There is also another sort, whose Skins, being red, are full of little Spots.


The ancient Inhabitants of 
Chiapa
 (divided into the 
Chiapaneca's,
 the 
Zeques,
 the 
Zeltates,
 and the 
Quelenes
) are very Civil and Witty, also skilful in Painting, Singing, Breaking of Horses, and many other Trades.


The Places of more principal note in this Countrey, inhabited by the 
Spaniards,
 are 1. 
Ciudad Real,
 pleasantly seated in the midst of a round Vale or Plain, and al∣most encompass'd with Hills representing the form of an Amphitheatre; also at the Foot of one which stands in the midst of the rest, the City is built. It is a City specially Priviledg'd by the King of 
Spain,
 having a Court of Justice, Cathedral, and 
Dominican
 Cloyster; of a pure and temperate Air, and the Countrey round about plentifully abounding both in Corn and Fruit, onely somewhat too cold to produce Lemmons and Oranges; but for Pears, Apples, Peaches, Quinces, Cher∣ries, and the like, they grow here in great abundance.


2. 
Chiapa,
 which giveth Name to the Valley aforesaid; It is a Bishop's See, and famous, if but for one of its Prelates, 
viz. Bartholomeo de las Casas,
 of the Order of 
Predicants,
 who was Bishop of this City, and his Memory justly precious amongst the poor 
Americans
 at this day, for his Charity towards them, and for the stout and zealous opposition which he made against the 
Spaniards
 cruel and inhumane deal∣ings with the Natives at the beginning of their Conquests: by which at last, not∣withstanding much difficulty and resistance made by interested Persons of the other Side, he procur'd them liberty, and an Edict from the Emperor in favor of them; whereby they were declar'd to be a Free People, and not Slaves, and the 
Spaniards
 forbidden to use them any longer as such, or to force them to any kind of Labour against their wills, or otherwise than by agreement with them, which Liberty they enjoy to this day; and though the 
Spaniards
 are said to give them very small Wages in some places, and for their Work in their Sugar-Mills (which is no small Labor) not above five 
Reyals,
 or Two shillings six pence a Week, for the Maintenance of themselves, their Wives and Children, yet by reason it is with Consent, and in a Countrey where all things are plentiful and cheap, their Condition is much better than it was, and the favor which that good Bishop did them, never to be forgotten. It is at present a great and populous City, and lieth almost in the mid-way betwixt the Cities of 
Mexico
 and 
Guatimala.


3. 
St. Bartholomews,
 in the Countrey of the 
Quelenes.


4. 
Tecpatlan,
 the chief of twenty five Villages, said to belong to the 
Zoques.
 Here the 
Dominicans
 have another Cloyster.


The 
Zeltates
 possess a fruitful Countrey, have thirteen Villages planted with Trees that yield 
Cochenile,
 being under a Common-wealth Government.




The chief Place of the 
Quelenes
 is 
Copanavatzla,
 where there is good Cheese, and store of brave Cattel: The River 
Chiepa
 gliding through the midst thereof, loseth it self in the Northern Ocean. In this part of the Country are Beasts not unlike Apes, with long Tails, which they wind about the Legs of those whom they find swim∣ming and so pull them under Water; wherefore they that go to Swim take Axes along with them, to cut off their Tails.


The Water of the River 
Blanco
 is clear and wholsom, running for the most part through Rocky Grounds, which nevertheless are overspread with Trees.


In the highest Ground of 
Chiapa,
 a League and a half from the City 
Reall,
 spring clear Fountains, whose Water ebbs and flows every six hours.


Near the Village call'd 
Afixa
 is one which runs three years together, though in the driest Season, and is dry three years, though it Rain never so much.


Not far from the Village 
Cinacatan
 is another Spring, whose Water cures seve∣ral Sicknesses, but kills all Birds and Beasts which drink of the same.


Here are likewise divers Baths.


The Rivers which run out of the Valley 
Chiapa,
 fall into two great Pits.


Near the Village 
Bartholomew,
 in the Province 
Quelenes,
 is a strange Cavern, out of which by the throwing of a stone into the same, are heard mighty noises like claps of Thunder.


Not far from the Village 
Chicomucolo,
 appears a Cavern, in which is a great Plain on one side, and a standing Lake, whose Water is like Sand, on the other.


The 
Spaniards,
 if they wanted not Slaves, might dig good store of Gold, Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin, and Quicksilver, out of the Mynes on the Mountain 
Ecatepeck,
 which is in nine Leagues compass: The Wind blows so strong after Sun-rising, that no Man is able to travel for it, but in the Night.




SECT. II. Vera Paz.


VEra Paz,
 or 
The Countrey of True Peace,
 was so nam'd by the 
Spaniards,
 as they say, because it was never conquer'd by the Sword, but reduc'd to Obedi∣ence onely by the Preaching of the 
Dominican
 Fryers. It is bounded on the West and South-West with 
Chiapa;
 on the East with some part of 
Guatimala
 and 
Honduras;
 and on the North with 
Jucatan.
 It contains about thirty Leagues in length, and almost as much in breadth, being a woody and mountainous Countrey for the most part, yet well distinguish'd with Valleys and lower Ground. It is much subject to Rain, which 'tis said to have for nine Moneths of the Year almost continually; by reason whereof the Countrey, being otherwise hot, is much an∣noy'd with a kind of 
Mosquit,
 or great sort of Gnats, which spoil the Fruit very much, and are otherwise not a little trouble to the People. Moreover, there happen oftentimes terrible Earthquakes and Storms, with Thunder and Lightning.


The chief Commodities of this Countrey, are a kind of Amber, which some call 
Liquid Amber,
 which drops from divers of their Trees, and is said to be a Commo∣dity very precious, and of much use; 
Mastick, Sanguis Draconis, Gum Anime, Sarsapa∣rilla, China-Wood,
 and divers other Medicinal Drugs, which it affordeth in great plenty. The Woods afford a sweet smell, and the Trees in the same grow a won∣derful heighth.


The Canes which grow here, being a hundred Foot long, and proportionably thick, serve for Timber.




There is also a hard Wood call'd 
Iron-Wood,
 either from its hardness or colour, or both, which never rots.


The abundance of Flowers which grow here afford nutriment to innumerable swarms of Bees, which are about the bigness of small Flies. Their Honey, which is somewhat tart, they hide in the Roots of Trees, or in the Earth. Another sort, which is made by the Wasps, bereaves those that taste of their Senses.


The noted'st Beast in this Countrey is the 
Danta,
 which resembles a Mule, hath no Horns, but Ash▪ colour'd long Hair, short Neck, hanging Ears, thin Legs, with three Claws before and two behind, long Head, narrow Forehead, little Eyes, a Nose hanging over its Mouth, little Tail, sharp Teeth, and a Skin which is six Fingers thick, and scarce penetrable by any Weapon. This Beast is taken in Traps, Holes, or else with Dogs, which he often kills when hunted towards the Water. They say that this Beast taught Men first to Let-blood; for if it be too full of Blood, it pricks it self against a sharp Cane, and stops up the Orifice again very carefully. The Flesh thereof is good Meat, as also that of the 
Ross
-Lyons, which in the day-time sleep on a high Tree, where they are shot by the 
Indians.


The Tygers are much more dangerous to be taken; yet the 
Indians
 Hunting them, eat them in stead of Beef; and also through all 
New Spain.


The Bears, which make the Ways very dangerous to travel, have black frizled Hair, broad Tails, Feet like Mens Hands: but since the 
Indians
 have made use of Guns, which they learn'd from the 
Spaniards,
 they have much lessen'd the number both of Bears and Tygers.


There are likewise many Leopards, Apes, and wild Goats (whose Skins serve the Natives for Drums) Hogs, and 
Armadillo's.


Amongst their Fowls, are Eagles and Parrots.


The Countrey is so well stor'd with Water, that in three Leagues space are above thirty Rivulets, and as many Fountains.


On the Mountains grow great quantities of 
Sarsaparilla, Mechoacan,
 and the 
China-Root,
 which being yellowish hath several Saffron-colour'd Knobs on the top. The 
Sarsaparilla
 grows with many Stalks, creeping along over the Ground; the Body thereof is tough and full of Prickles, the Leaves broad and sharp at the ends, and are of a bluish colour on one side, and green on the other, and bear Clusters of Flowers, which close like Buds, and are first green, next vermilion-red, and lastly blackish: within are two hard Stones, which inclose a white Kernel, by the 
Indi∣ans
 call'd 
Juapecanga.


The Bay 
Golfo Dulce,
 which pours its muddy Water into the Sea, feeds the great Fish 
Monati,
 and a great number of Crocodiles.


Several Rivers abounding with Fish fall also into the same, having their Banks set all along with Trees, in whose Boughs, joyn'd together on the top, those sort of Birds make their Nests which prey on Fish.


The Women in this place are much shorter Liv'd than the Men, so that there are often thirty Widowers to one Widow. Women with Child are Deliver'd by themselves in the High-way; and from thence they go to the next River to wash themselves and the Child.


As for any Towns or Places of much Traffick or Note, inhabited by the 
Spani∣ards,
 we find not any nam'd, save onely 
St. Augustines;
 near unto which there is said to be a Cave and Fountain within Ground, which converts the Water that fal∣leth into it out of several lesser Springs, into a kind of Alabaster or Stone, per∣fectly white, and fashions it likewise into Pillars, Statues, and other artificial Forms of very curious Workmanship, as 
Laet
 reporteth.








SECT. III. Honduras.


HOnduras
 hath on the South, 
Guatimala
 abovesaid; on the West, a certain Bay, or Arm of the Sea, which they call 
Golfo Dulce,
 from the abundance of fresh Waters which run into it from all Parts; on the North and North-East, the 
Atlantick Ocean;
 and somewhat to the South-East, 
Nicaragua.
 It contains in length, 
viz.
 from East to West, Coasting along upon the Sea, about a hundred and fifty Leagues, and in breadth eighty. The Countrey is rich both in Corn and Pasturage, being said to be very much advantag'd that way by the constant over∣flowings of the Rivers, which are very many, about 
Michaelmass
-time, and which the People order so well, that they water their Gardens, and exceedingly fertilize the whole Champain, or lower part of the Grounds by them.


The fruitful Valleys of this Countrey were anciently very well inhabited, till vast multitudes of the Natives were destroy'd by the 
Spaniards
 Cruelties, of which the Bishop 
Bartholomeo de las Casas,
 in his Letter to the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, gives this Relation:


The young Children (saith he) they murder'd, beating out their Brains against the Stones; the Kings and Princes of the Countrey they either scorch'd to death, or threw them to the Dogs to be torn in pieces; the poor People they drove in∣to their Houses, and then set them on fire; those that remain'd were condemn'd to the greatest slavery imaginable, being us'd in stead of Mules and Horses, and having greater Burdens laid upon them than they were able to carry, insomuch that thousands of them fell down dead under them; some out of despair run∣ning into the Woods were famish'd, after they had kill'd and eat their Wives and Children for Hunger. In this one Province onely they massacred above twenty hundred thousand Men, and amongst others, Persons of Quality, which had ci∣villy Entertain'd them: nay, they tortur'd the poor innocent Natives all the ways they could possibly invent, onely to know of them where their Gold lay; particularly 
Diego de Valasco
 spar'd none that ever fell into his hands; insomuch that in a Moneths time above ten thousand were slain by him: He hang'd thir∣teen Noble-men, to twelve of whom he gave the Denomination of 
The twelve Apostles;
 and the chiefest of them he call'd in a derision, 
Jesus Christ.
 Some they suffer'd to starve to death, with their Heads compress'd between the cloven Barks of wild Vines; some also they buried alive, and leaving onely their Heads to appear above Ground, bowl'd Iron Bullets at them, and forc'd them to eat one another; besides infinite other hellish Cruelties, too horrid and dreadful to be recounted.


This Countrey produces much 
Maiz,
 Wheat, Honey, and great 
Calabashes,
 from whence the first Discoverers call'd that Sea 
Golfo de las Ybueras,
 because they met with abundance of 
Calabashes,
 floating on the Water, which at 
Santo Domingo
 bear the Name of 
Ybueras.


This Countrey is water'd by three Rivers, the first 
Chamalucom,
 which glides by the City 
San Pedro;
 the second 
Ulva,
 inhabited on both Shores; the third 
Ha∣guaro,
 the Grounds adjacent to which would prove very fruitful, were the Inhabi∣tants not too lazy. In stead of a Plough they use a long Pole, with two crooked Staves at the end, one bent downwards and the othes upwards, with which they cut and turn the Earth. The Natives feed on several Roots, Flesh, and Vermine.




At their Feast they make themselves Drunk with a Drink made of Honey, Noble-men heretofore onely drinking the Liquor of 
Cacao;
 but of late it is com∣mon, and made by all People, though never so mean. They speak several Langua∣ges, the chiefest whereof is that of the 
Chontales,
 a salvage People. They divide their Year, call'd 
Joalar,
 that is, 
Passing,
 into eighteen Moneths, and each Moneth into twenty Days. They formerly measur'd the Year by the Nights, and began the Year forty days sooner than the 
Europeans.


The Towns in this Province are 1. 
New Vallodolid,
 by the 
Indians
 nam'd 
Comayagua,
 lying in a pleasant Valley under a temperate Climate. The Cattel brought hither from 
Spain,
 increase exceedingly. The Silver-Mynes are also so well stor'd, that they keep the Melting-house in the Town always employ'd.


The Governor of this Place hath his Residence next to the Treasury-Chamber.


Anno
 1588. the Bishop's See was translated hither from 
Truxillo:
 Nineteen years before which 
Francisco de Monteio
 sent his Lieutenant 
Alphonso de Cacenes
 thither, to build a Village half way between the Southern and Northern Ocean; who accor∣dingly erected the Town 
Santa Maria de Camoyagua,
 near a River Navigable for 
Ca∣noos,
 which disembogues in 
Puerto de Cavallos.
 The remaining part of the Way to the Haven 
Fonseca
 being passable for Carrs (which was a means to prevent many Inconveniences which us'd to happen to Travellers on the Way between 
Panama
 and 
Nombre de Dios
) the 
Spanish
 King was so much concern'd at the first proposal hereof, that he sent the famous Surveyor 
Baptista Antonello
 thither, and the rather, because he received information, that the new Way, along which they carried the Mer∣chandise from 
Peru, Mexico,
 and other Countreys along the South Sea, lay very plea∣santly, by reason of the brave Vineyards, Corn-Fields, Fruit-Trees, Pastures, Streams abounding with Fish, Herds of Deer, and Cony-Warrens; yet 
Antonello
 meeting with many troubles, would not undertake the Business.


New Valladolid
 is adorn'd with a great Church, a Cloyster, belonging to the Monks 
De la Merced,
 and handsom Streets.


2. Thirty Leagues West ward from this City lies another call'd 
Gratias a Dios,
 be∣gun by Captain 
Gabriel de Royas, Anno
 1530, that so he might be near the Gold-Mines: But because the Natives kept the new Inhabitants in continual alarm, and daily Storm'd the unfinish'd Fortifications, 
Royas
 was necessitated to leave off building any farther, the rather, because none came to his assistance from the neighboring Garrison.


Six years after 
Gonzales de Alvarado
 undertook this Work, and built the City on a Rocky Mountain; which, though otherwise barren, produc'd lusty Horses and strong Mules.


3. 
San Pedro,
 though lying under a hot and unwholsom Climate, us'd formerly to be a brave City of Trade; but it is gone much to decay since 
Golfo Dolce
 hath been discover'd, because from that Bay the Commodities are carried in Barques up into the Countrey.


4. The Village 
Juan de Puerto de Cavallos,
 inhabited by Factors and Moors: It re∣ceiv'd that Denomination, because not far from it several Horses were forc'd to be thrown over-board in a Storm. Though it be but ill fortifi'd, yet it hath an ex∣ceeding large Haven. Captain 
Christopher Newport
 arriving here 
Anno
 1591. found two hundred Houses, and in them a considerable Booty left, notwithstanding four Ships richly laden had lately set Sail from thence.


Six years after 
Newport,
 Capt. 
Ant. Sherly
 re-took the Place, and leaving the Haven open for Pyrats, 
Alphonsus Coriado
 judg'd it convenient to remove the Trading Place to 
Amatique;
 he built the Village 
Thomas de Castilla,
 and fortifi'd the same against all manner of Assaults.








view


TRU
LLO.








Behind 
Cavallos
 lies the Valley 
Naco,
 which is exceeding fruitful, being situate between high Mountains, where formerly was found plenty of Silver.


5. Eastward from 
Cavallos
 appears the famous City 
Truxillo,
 near a large Bay;
 se∣cur'd from all Storms by two Cliffs, full of Trees; the Mouth of the Haven call'd 
Joan Gil,
 is above two Leagues broad, and receives two Rivers, one from each side of the City: The Stream 
Quaimarotte
 flows Eastward, and the River 
Antonio
 West∣ward, both abounding in Fish. The Countrey round about produces abundance of all sorts of Provisions, and chiefly abounds in Grapes, which are gather'd twice a year: Eight days after 
August
 they cut their Vines, which afford them ripe Grapes again in 
October;
 they have two Harvests of Corn; also Lemons and Oranges are very plentiful: The Cattel brought hither from 
Spain
 are exceeding∣ly increas'd to an incredible number.


Truxillo
 it self lying on a steep Mountain, is defended on that side which re∣spects the Sea, with a thick Wall of six Foot high; between which and the Haven are many brambly Bushes, which prevent the access to the Wall, onely a narrow and steep way leading up to the City, which hath a strong Gate, guarded with two Brass Guns, and sufficiently Fortifi'd to oppose an Enemy. The Eastern Cliff, which bends before the Haven is call'd 
Punta la Rye,
 on which stands a House with a high Beacon: Beyond the Wall Eastward, near the Haven, is a Ship-yard, before which stands a large Woodden Cross: The Castle in which the City Store is kept, joyns to the Wall, near unto which, within the Town appears St. 
Francis
 Church; but the Cathedral call'd 
Eglesia Major,
 is seen above all other Buildings: The Houses cover'd with 
Palmito
-Leaves, have Walls of Pleited Bushes, Plaister'd over within and without: Behind the City, where it lies open, are exceeding high Mountains.


Anno
 1576. the 
English
 falling on this strong Place, carry'd a rich Booty from thence; after which, Capt. 
Anth. Sherly
 and Capt. 
Will. Parker
 ventur'd once more on the same, but being discover'd by the Centinel, were forc'd to Retreat, not without a considerable loss: When not long after, Captain 
John Van Hoorn
 a 
Hollander,
 at∣tempting the same, had much better success; for he Weighing Anchor for 
Pernam∣buc,
 with four Frigats, three Ketches, and a Sloop, set Sail to 
Truxillo,
 where arriving, lay close before the City with his four Frigats, which fired very fiercely on the Town; the Inhabitants of which not being idle, kill'd three Men in one Ship, forc'd her to fall farther off from the Castle: Whilst the Ketches and Sloop went about a Gun shot Westward beyond the City, towards the River 
Antonio,
 where they Landed two hundred and fifty Soldiers, which march'd with all speed up the Hill, where the Castle lay which they Scal'd at Noon-day; the Besieged being provided with seven Guns, shot, and threw Stones continually amongst them, yet were forc'd to Retreat from the 
Dutch
 Hand-granado's: During the storm, the Admiral himself Landed, but before he came out of the Boat, the fore∣mention'd Soldiers had made themselves Masters of the Fort, with the loss of one∣ly eight Men, and were busie Pillaging all places they came at, and carrying their gotten Booty to a Watch-house near the Castle on the Shore; when on a sudden a Fire happen'd in the East part of 
Truxillo,
 which increas'd in such a manner, that in few hours two third parts of the City lay in Ashes; every one then had enough to do to save themselves, yet for all the haste they made, several 
Hollanders
 were kill'd at the blowing up of the Magazine, and most of the Booty lost by the Fire; insomuch that they carry'd but two hundred thirty nine Skins, six Bales of 
Indigo,
 eight hundred and twenty Pounds of 
Sarsaparilla,
 seven Brass, and three Iron Guns, four Clocks, and some few trifles with them; having before made an

agreement for twenty Pound of Silver, with the Governor 
Joan de Miranda,
 who inform'd them, that they had not the least knowledge of the 
Hollanders
 Fleet, till the Evening, when the Beacon on 
Punta La Rye
 was fir'd: Moreover, that the Ci∣ty was inhabited by two hundred 
Spaniards,
 and as many more 
Mulatoes
 and 
Moors;
 and that the Trade thereof was much gone to decay, because there had been no Gallies there in two years before.


Twenty seven Leagues from this City lies the Village 
Jorgo de Olancho,
 where four thousand 
Spaniards
 force Tribute from sixteen thousand 
Indians,
 who possess much Gold.






SECT. IV. Nicaragua.


NIcaragua
 is a County of this Province, border'd Northward with 
Honduras;
 on the East, with the 
Atlantick Ocean,
 and part of 
Veragua;
 on the South, with 
Mare del Zur;
 and on the West, with 
Guatimala,
 being call'd by 
Diego Lopez de Salzado, The New Kingdom of
 Leon, and comprizing several little Territo∣ries, as 
Nicoya, Nequecheri, Mabyth, Deria, Masaya, Mandigua, Cacoloaque, Cepeoco, Los Micos, Madira,
 and the 
Contales.
 It hath few Rivers in it, the want whereof is sup∣ply'd by the benefit of a great Lake, in the midst of the Countrey, call'd by the 
Spaniards, Laguna de Nicaragua,
 containing, as is suppos'd, above one hundred Leagues in compass. It empties it self by the Port of 
St. Juan
 into the 
Atlantick
 or North-Sea, but reacheth as far as the South or 
Mare del Zur,
 at least within a very few Leagues; and from whence some 
Spanish
 Captains are said to have made a pas∣sage, though with much difficulty, into the Lake, and from thence to the North-Sea. It is abundantly well stor'd with good Fish, but withal much haunted with Crocodiles; and the Countrey about it so plentiful in all things, especially Cattel, Cotten-Wool, Sugars, and all kind of Fruits: Amongst which, the chiefest is the 
Zeiba,
 which is of so great a thickness, that fifteen Men holding Hand in Hand, can scarce encompass the same. The 
Callabashes
 ripen here in fourteen days time: The Sea along the Coast, breeds Whales and other Sea-Monsters, which are often seen above Water.


The Inhabitants of this Countrey, (except the 
Chontales,
 which live on the Mountains, and maintain their old Salvage Customs) have for the most part learnt the 
Spanish
 Tongue and Manners, and exercise themselves in all sorts of Arts and Siences, especially in Working of Silver, making of Clothes, Wax-Work, and the like: From the Mountains they gather Balsom, Liquid-Amber, Turpen∣tine: They also drive a great Trade in Cotton, Skins, and several sorts of Provi∣sions, to 
Panama,
 and 
Nombre de Dios.


The Lake 
Laguna de Nicaragua,
 which hath a hundred and seventeen Leagues in Circumference, and round about inhabited, is by three Leagues of Land separa∣ted from the South-Sea; and discharges its Waters into the River 
Desaguadero,
 which falls into the Northern Ocean. 
Alphonsus Calera,
 and 
Diego Machuca de Zuaso,
 were the first that Sail'd out of the foremention'd Lake into the Sea, not without many dangers, by reason of the great Water-falls, call'd 
Rondales,
 which fall into the River 
Desaguadero,
 and forc'd them often times to draw their Barques over the Land.


The chief City is,
 1. 
Leon,
 which is surrounded with Woods, and lies close by the Lake; hath a great Church, five Cloysters belonging to the 
Monks, de la Mercede,
 several Houses for the King's Officers, and a hundred and twenty thousand Fami∣lies

of 
Indians
 which pay Tribute. Three Leagues beyond 
Leon
 appears a high spiry Mountain, from whose top, both Morning and Evening, rises a mighty smoke, and sometimes casts out great sulphurous Stones over the neighboring Fields, and on a sudden mighty Flames. A 
Dominican
 Monk, in hopes to get some melted Gold out of its burning Mouth, went up the same with four of his Fraternity, and carry'd an Iron Chain and a Kettle, which were no sooner let down into the hole, but they were immediately melted; yet not so discourag'd, they resolv'd to venture a second time with stronger Materials, which nevertheless had the same, or rather worse event; for the Fire flew out in such a manner, that the 
Dominicans
 sadly scorch'd, had enough to do to escape with Life, since which none durst presume to approach the same.


But besides the Episcopal City 
Leon,
 Erected by 
Franciscus Fernandez,
 2. 
Granada
 acknowledges the same Builder, and lying also on the shore of 
Laguna de Nicaragua,
 is adorn'd with a Castle, Church, and several Sugar-Mills: Not far from it lie the small Lakes 
Masaya
 and 
Lindiri;
 the first which is inclos'd between exceeding high Mountains, covers the Foot of the burning Mountain 
Masaya;
 the other falls into 
Laguna de Nicaragua,
 near which is the smoky Mountain 
Munbacho,
 surrounded with Fruit-Trees.


3. 
&
 4. The Towns 
Jean,
 and 
Neuva Segovia,
 which are not far from thence, are of little consequence.


5. 
Realeio,
 this is, as it were, the 
Chattam
 of 
America,
 being a place on the South-Sea, where the King of 
Spain
 hath all his Ships built that are made of 
American
 Tim∣ber, and inhabited by few or none but Shipwrights, Mariners, and Men of that kind of Profession.


6. 
&
 7. 
Nicoya, Avarines.


8. 
Cartage,
 forty Leagues distant from 
Nicoya,
 and lying almost in the midst of the 
Isthmus,
 or 
Streight
 of 
Darien,
 equally distant both from the North and South Sea; on both which it is said likewise to have a convenient Port or Haven for Shipping.


The 
Spaniards,
 when first they Landed here, call'd this Countrey 
Mahomets Pa∣radise,
 because of its exceeding Fruitfulness. The 
Cacao
 which they use here in stead of Money, is not unlike the Stone of an Almond. The Inhabitants, in stead of using a Steel and Flint to strike Fire withal, rub two pieces of Wood together so long, till one of them is kindled; and burn the Boughs of Pine-Trees in stead of Candles. Amongst the several Languages which they speak, the 
Mexican
 is the chief∣est: Amongst their Recreations, Dancing is principal,
 which is perform'd af∣ter a very strange manner, for they meet sometimes two or three thousand toge∣ther, according to the bigness of the Province, in a spacious Field, which is made clean before for that purpose: He that leads the Dance goes backward, and with many strange Gestures, turns himself about, which the rest, following four and four together in a row, imitate, whilst their 
Tambores
 beat on hollow Instruments, and sing Songs, which are first answer'd by the Ring-leader of the Dance, and then seconded by the whole Company, each of them waving a Fan or a 
Callabash,
 and being all adorn'd with Plumes of Feathers on their Heads, and Strings with Shells about their Arms and Legs; they also act several antick Tricks, the one, the blind Man, the other, the Cripple, one feigns himself to be deaf, the other makes a wry Mouth, one cries, and another laughs, whilest others drink healths in 
Chocolate,
 which continues till-Midnight.


A King of this Countrey in former times us'd to feed the Fish 
Manati
 with Bread, in the Lake 
Guainabo,
 where it would appear at its being call'd 
Matto, Matto,
 which

signifies 
Noble-minded,
 and oftentimes carry eight or ten Boys on its Back from one side of the Lake to the other; but being shot by a 
Spaniard
 with an Arrow, never appear'd again.


There is likewise a black Beast in this Countrey call'd 
Cascu,
 resembling in some things a Hog; it hath a hard Skin, little Eyes, open Ears, cloven Feet, short Nose, and makes such a terrible noise, that it affrights those which hear it.


No less strange and wonderful is the Fox-Ape, which hath two Bellies one under another; in the lowermost of which it carries its Young, which are never brought into the World till they are able to shift for their own Food. It hath the Body of a Fox, Feet like a Man's Hands, and Ears like a Batt.


It will not be amiss before we conclude with this Province, to give you a Rela∣tion of the Discourse which hapned 
Anno
 1527. between the 
Spanish
 Commander 
Francisco de Monteio
 and the 
Nicaraguan
 Casique 
Alquinotex,
 who being a hundred and ten years old, told him, 
That before the 
Spaniards
 arrival there, great numbers of his Soldiers perish'd after a strange manner; for after having vomited abun∣dance of Worms, they fell down dead on a sudden: those that escap'd the Con∣tagion differing amongst themselves, made two Parties, which twice Engaging with one another, each of them lost above a hundred and fifty thousand Men. Yet both these Plagues were no ways to be compar'd to the Slaughter which the 
Spaniards
 had made amongst them.


About the same time an 
Italian,
 call'd 
Hieronymo Bonzo,
 Lodging with a 
Nicara∣guan
 Noble-man that understood the 
Spanish
 Tongue, was thus set upon by him: 
What do not
 (
Oh
 Christ) 
the
 Christians 
do! they no sooner get their Foot into an
 Indian
's Hut, but they commandingly call for Maiz, Honey, Winter-Clothes, Gold, Silver, and a Woman to cool their lustful desires: Certainly there is nothing more vicious on Earth.
 To which 
Bonzo
 gave him this Answer: 
The wicked
 Spaniards 
commit oftentimes unseemly things.
 The 
Indian
 again suddenly retorted, saying, 
Where are any such Men to be found as good
 Spaniards? 
I have never known any but wicked Villains.
 To which 
Bonzo
 said, 
Why have you made place for them on
 Nicaragua? Which was thus reply'd to by the Noble∣man: 
All People round about took Oath on the first News of the 
Christians
 ar∣rival, to hazard all, and fight to the last Man, before they would be under the insupportable Yoke, with which they had heard other Countreys were oppress'd with by them. To which purpose they made ready Bowes, Arrows, Lances, Stones, Clubs, and other Weapons of War: But when it came to the trial, the 
Spanish
 Horse, of which they had never seen the like, struck such a terror into the 
Indians,
 that they fled, and sent two Agents to 
Monteio
 to desire Peace; but their Design was onely to gain time, that they might gather new Forces, to venture a second Encounter; which prov'd as fatal to them as the first. Then desiring Peace once more, they gather'd all that were able to bear Arms, and swore one to another not to stir a Foot; and withal made a Law, That whosoever did shrink should be kill'd immediately: But the Women being inform'd hereof, begg'd that they might rather suffer under the 
Spanish
 Yoke, than be torn in pieces by their Dogs, or kill'd by their Bullets and Swords, alledging, that they were not able to resist the 
Spaniards;
 and entreated them, that if they were resolv'd to go on with their first Design, they would first send their Wives and Chil∣dren to the other World, that so they might not fall into the hands of the merci∣less and bloody 
Christians:
 Whereupon most Voices judg'd it convenient to make use of the Opportunity, and to submit to 
Monteio.
 But his cruel deal∣ings made some to contradict that Determination, for which they paid dearly; for not onely they, but their little Infants, were put to the most cruel

Deaths imaginable; which made many of them also to lay violent hands on themselves.






SECT. V. Costarica.


COstarica
 borders on the East with 
Veragua;
 on the South and East, with the Sea; and on the North, with 
Nicaragua.
 The Countrey it self is barren and mountainous; whose Inhabitants were valiant enough to Encounter with the 
Spanish
 Forces, being unwilling to lose their former Priviledges.


This Coast was discover'd first by 
Christopher Columbus,
 who 
Anno
 1502. Sailing up the Rivers 
Belen
 and 
Veragua
 with Barques, took much Gold out of the Mynes 
Urira,
 but chiefly from between the Roots of Trees which were grown together.






SECT. VI. Veragua.


VEragua
 is bounded on the West with 
Costarica;
 on the East it hath the District, or Countrey of 
Panama,
 being otherwise wash'd on all sides by the Sea. It hath its Name from a River of great note in this Tract, by which it was first discover'd. The Countrey is for the most part mountainous, and the Soil out∣wardly barren, but recompencing all defects with the abundance of its more inward Wealth, that is to say, in the richness of its Mynes, of which it is said to afford many, and so inexhaustibly rich and good, that the 
Spaniards
 here know no end of their Wealth; although by the stoutness and untameableness of the Natives, it was a long time, and they met with many difficulties, before they could make them∣selves Masters of the Treasure.


The chief Towns they have here are 1. 
La Conception,
 lying at the Mouth of a Ri∣ver so nam'd, and the Seat of the Governor.


2. 
La Trinidad,
 upon the Banks of the same River likewise, but down towards 
Port Beleno,
 and about six Leagues Eastward of 
Conception.


3. 
St. Foy,
 twelve Leagues more to the South, where the 
Spaniards
 melt their Gold, and cast it into Bars or Ingots.


4. 
Carlos,
 a Town they have upon the Coast of 
Mare del Zur.


5. 
Philippina,
 another on the West of 
Carlos;
 both of these seated upon a large capacious Bay; before which there lie certain little Islands, to the number of thirty or more, which the 
Spaniards
 are said to have wholly dispeopled long since, by forcing the Natives over into the Continent to work in the Mynes, as usually they did before the Emperor's Prohibition: but now they use Slaves or 
Negro's,
 which they buy for that purpose from 
Guinee
 and other Parts.






SECT. VII. Guatimala, properly so call'd.


GUatimala,
 specially so call'd, hath on the West the River 
Xicalapa,
 which di∣vides it from 
Vera Paz;
 on the East it is bounded with the Countrey of 
Nicaragua;
 on the North, with 
Honduras;
 and on the South, with 
Mare del Zur.




This Countrey was conquer'd by 
Peter de Alvarado, Anno
 1525. It is, by reason of its neighborhood with 
Vera Paz,
 not altogether clear of Mountains, but otherwise well water'd with Rivers, and enrich'd with fair and fruitful Valleys, which afford not onely good Pasturage, and many great Herds of Cattel, but likewise good store of Wheat, 
Maiz,
 and other Fruits of the Earth. Great plenty of Cotton-Wool is general∣ly both here and in the other Provinces, 
viz. Vera Paz, Chiapa,
 &c. some Medicinal Woods likewise, and Liquors, and absolutely the best Sulphur in 
America.
 The Peo∣ple are generally tractable and well dispos'd, both in point of Religion and civil Government.


The Towns of chief note are 1. 
Guatimala,
 now call'd 
St. Jago de Guatimala
 since the re-building thereof; for about the Year 1586. it was almost buried in Ashes, which one of the neighboring Mountains, for the space of six Moneths together, conti∣nually belch'd out in such fearful quantities, that many People were slain, the old City deserted, and a new one built in another place. The day before this sad Accident hapned, the neighboring Mountains were observ'd to shiver, and a great noise was heard from under Ground; which amazing the 
Indians,
 the news thereof was carried to the Bishop, 
Franciscus Moroquin,
 who narrowly enquiring into the Causes of these Accidents, and what they might portend, found that a sad Event would suddenly follow, as accordingly it did; for about mid∣night on the eighth of 
August, Anno
 1541. such a mighty store of Rain fell, as if the Clouds had been all dissolv'd into Water, which came rowling from the Rocky Mountains with such violence, that it wash'd down great Stones, which carried on by the strength of the Water against the Houses, beat them down; and none could have seen how they were ruin'd, had not the mighty flashes of Light∣ning, follow'd by terrible claps of Thunder, lighted the Night. Some instantly deserting this miserable place, fled up into the Countrey, and there built a new 
Guatimala
 (as above-mention'd) sur-nam'd 
St. Jago,
 three Leagues farther towards the East, in a Valley through which flow two Rivers, between two 
Vulcans,
 or smoaking Mountains, which sometimes vomit forth terrible Flames, mix'd with dreadful Thunder-claps, Ashes, and great Stones, insomuch that the Ground all about it, which is exceeding fruitful, seems to move. There are many of these 
Vulcans
 in several parts of 
America,
 as namely at 
Arequipa
 in the Kingdom of 
Peru,
 at 
Puebla de los Angelos,
 in the Province of 
Tlascalla
 abovesaid, a Mountain of so great heighth, that they are fain to go little less than thirty Leagues turning and wind-before they can reach the top of it, and others in several other places. They are ge∣nerally Mountains of great heighth, and running sharp upwards, but at the top containing some quantity of plain and level Ground; in the midst whereof is a Pit or Hole, out of which abundance of Smoak and fiery Sparkles are vomited almost continually, and so deep, that they are suppos'd for the most part to reach to the very bottom of the Mountain. Some of these 
Vulcans
 cast forth neither Fire not Smoak, yet are clearly seen to burn at the bottom with a quick Fire, and which is so extreamly hot, that it instantly melteth Iron, or any other Metal that is cast into it, as by experience hath been found: for some conceiving that the Matter which maintains these Fires within the Bowels of the Earth so long together, can be no∣thing else but melted Gold, have endeavor'd several times to extract and draw it forth in certain Vessels of Iron and Brass, which they have caus'd to be let down into the bottom of the 
Vulcan
 or Pit, by long Iron Chains made on purpose: but, as we said, the extream heat and force of the Fire below always melted them before they could be drawn up again, and by that means hath rendred all such Attempts frustrate. In this Town, now call'd 
St. Jago,
 reside above six hundred 
Spanish
 Com∣manders,

and more than twenty five thousand 
Indians
 which pay Tribute. They have also a brave Church and two Cloysters, one belonging to the 
Dominicans,
 and another to the Order 
La Merced,
 and likewise a noble Hospital. Not far from thence is a place call'd 
Yzaleos,
 where there are Orchards of 
Cacoa
 two Leagues in square, each of them producing yearly as much as fifty thousand Men are able to carry. They reckon the 
Cacao
 by 
Contels,
 which is the number of four hundred; by 
Xequipiles,
 of eight thousand; and by 
Carga's,
 of twenty four thousand. In this County is a Mountain, whose top smoaking continually consumes by degrees, and oftentimes covers the neighboring Countrey with Ashes. The Water which flows from the same differs very much, for some of it is wholsom and fit to drink; some foul and stinking, and some turns Wood, if laid in the same▪ to Stone. Here is also the Beast whose Head is highly esteem'd for the 
Bezoar
-Stone, which it car∣ries in the same. Here is likewise a little Bear, which in stead of a Mouth, hath a long Nose with a round Hole in it, and a hollow Tongue, with which it sucks Honey, and disturbs the Nests of Pismires. The Women in this Place make curi∣ous Earthen Ware, colour'd either red or black with the Mud of two several Brooks. The 
Indians
 call'd the boyling Fountains in this County 
Hell,
 because they bubble up a Bowes-shot high, and make the River 
Caliente,
 which, notwithstand∣ing it hath pass'd half a League through a wide Channel, retains its exceeding heat. Not far from it lies a Stone, which having a Crack in the middle, sends forth a thick Damp, and against bad Weather a thundering noise. On the Moun∣tains grow exceeding large Trees especially Oak. Here Pismires which are of an extraordinary bigness, are brought to Market amongst other Provisions.


2. 
St. Salvador,
 forty Leagues distant from 
Guatimala
 Eastward, and seated upon the River 
Guacapa,
 and having about it a small Territory, which by some is ac∣counted a distinct Countrey or Province.


3. 
Acaputla,
 a Town of the Natives, situated at the Mouth of the River, and be∣ing as it were, the Port-Town to 
St. Salvador.


4. 
Trinidad,
 a Town of great resort, being the greatest Empory and Place of Traffick for all sorts of Commodities, betwixt the People of 
New Spain
 and those of 
Peru.


5. 
St. Michaels,
 two or three Leagues distant from the Bay 
Fonseca,
 upon the South Sea.


6. 
Xeres de la Frontera,
 on the Confines of this Province, towards the Borders of 
Nicaragua,
 besides several Villages which we shall have occasion to mention.


In the middle of a Lake within this Territory is an Island, on which the 
Indians
 had a Tradition, That a Man no sooner set his Foot but he died immediately: which Opinion of theirs was chang'd when the 
Spaniards
 went thither in Boat-fulls and return'd safe again, with Relation that they had seen a large Stone Image, re∣sembling a Woman; before which lay the Ashes and Bones of slain People.


Round about the Village 
Guaymoco
 grow great Balsom-Trees, which afford Timber of fifty five Foot long. From this Village leads a Way to the City 
Salva∣dor,
 near which the fore-mention'd River 
Guachapa
 runs with so many windings, that the Traveller is forc'd to cross the same several times before he can come to the Foot of a Mountain which formerly cast out terrible Flames; but now the combustible Matter being consum'd, there appears onely a great Hole on the top, with Ashes in a large compass round about it. At the Foot of the same are two Pits, one of which smoaks continually in such a manner, that it stifles all those that ap∣proach it; yet the Mountain is well overspread with Cedars and Pine-Trees.


Three Leagues farther lies the Village 
Nixapa;
 and not far from thence the

Hill 
Elmal Pais,
 which consists of great Stones and Ashes, wonderfully mixt toge∣ther: No less wonderful is a Brook which flows in the Night till Morning, and then sinks into the Ground: And in the Countrey 
Choluteca
 is another, which hides it self at Noon, and appears again towards Night. The Cavern which formerly produc'd Fire and Smoke, now affords good Water to the Village 
Curcatan,
 and City 
Salvador:
 Near the Village 
Yztepegve
 are five Springs, which cast up Allom and Sulphur. The Natives 
Chontales
 which speak several Languages, flock to the Village 
Mimilla,
 to make Offerings; not far from hence are two Pits, one of which is full of boyling Water, and the other as cold as Ice: Moreover, 
Cocori
 lies near a high Mountain, on the top of which is a very turbulent Lake.


The chiefest Haven of this Countrey,
 which lies along the South-Sea, is 
Bahia de Fonseca,
 Discover'd by 
Gonsalves Davila, Anno
 1522. and so nam'd from 
Joan Ro∣drigas de Fonseca,
 Bishop of 
Burgos;
 In the middle thereof appears the Island 
Petro∣nella,
 with nine others, of which four are inhabited by 
Indians.


The good conveniency of the Haven 
Fonseca,
 induc'd some of the 
Spaniards
 to make a new Passage from the side of the Southern Ocean, to the Northern, 
viz.
 from 
Panama
 to 
Nombre de Dios,
 designing it to reach from the said Haven 
Fonseca,
 unto 
Puerto de Carellos,
 which are distant one from the other forty five Leagues; most of it good way, except some over-grown Mountains, which might be made passable with little trouble; to which purpose they built the Town 
Buena Esperan∣ca,
 yet nevertheless the Work remain'd unprosecuted.


There are moreover reckon'd as appertaining to 
Guatimala,
 the small Provinces 
Soconusco, Suchitepec,
 and 
Chilulteca,
 the chief of them being 
Soconusco,
 to which be∣longs the Town of 
Gevetlan,
 where the 
Spanish
 Governor hath his Residence; the rest seem to be onely small Territories about Towns of the same Name, in like manner as St. 
Salvador,
 and St. 
Miguel
 before-mention'd.








CHAP. V. The Kingdom of Mexico, or New-Spain.


NEw Spain,
 the chiefest part of the Northern 
America,
 reckons in length from the East-Point of 
Yucatan,
 to the place where 
Mechoacon
 juts against 
Gua∣dalajara
 three hundred and sixty Leagues; and in breadth from the Northern parts of 
Panucos,
 to the Southern Ocean, a hundred and eighty Leagues; besides a great part which lies to the Northward, behind inaccessable Mountains and Wildernesses; inhabited by the 
Tepecuaenes, Guachucules, Cacatequas, Tecaxquines,
 and others; and was, before the 
Spaniards
 Conquer'd and Dismember'd it, much larger than now it is; for as much as it comprehended the whole Province of 
New-Gallicia,
 and reach'd from the furthest Point of the 
Peninsula
 of 
Jucatan
 South∣ward as far as 
New-Biscay,
 and the Confines of 
California
 Northward; containing in length seven hundred Leagues and more, and about half as much in breadth: But since the Conquest by 
Hernando Cortez
 and his Followers, the whole Countrey of 
New-Gallicia
 is taken from it, and made a distinct Government or 
Audiencia,
 as the 
Spaniards
 call it, of it self.








map of Central America


VA HISPANI 
OVA GALICIA GVATIMALA.








The Natives of the Countrey are of the Race of the 
Chichimecae,
 a Salvage and Wilde sort of People, of the Province of 
New-Gallicia,
 especially in the Parts of 
New-Biscay,
 living in Forests and in deep Caves under Ground; whose Posterity do still at this day much trouble and annoy the Countrey thereabouts; notwithstand∣ing all the endeavors of the 
Spaniards,
 and the Garrisons which they keep in those parts on purpose to destroy them. About five hundred years ago, or more, according to the account of the 
Mexican Annals,
 divers Hoards, as they are call'd, of these 
Chichi∣mecae,
 weary, it seems, of their Woods and subterraneous dwellings, issu'd out into the more open Air, and fell down in huge multitudes into these Southerly parts of 
America,
 which are now call'd 
Mexico
 and 
New-Spain;
 not all at once, but at se∣veral times, and under several names, 
viz.
 of the 
Suchimilci, Chalcae, Tepanecae, Tlascal∣tecae,
 and others, who subduing or driving out the People they found in those parts, Seated themselves in their room: And though at first every Nation or Company of them, as they came, seiz'd upon some Province apart by themselves, and held it, as it were, in Soveraignty to themselves, without acknowledgement of any de∣pendance or subjection to their Neighbors, or those that were there before them; yet in Tract of time, and by fortune of the Wars, which they made one upon an∣other, they fell under the Government of one King, 
viz.
 the King of 
Mexico,
 which was the chief City of the Province.


This Kingdom, at the time that the 
Spaniards
 first Discover'd the Countrey, was Govern'd by a Prince, nam'd 
Motezuma;
 one, who by his Valor and good success in the Wars, had in a few years of his Reign, before the 
Spaniards
 came thither, sub∣du'd the better part of a hundred Cities and great Towns to his Dominion; and held in actual submission to his Government, and Tributary to him, no less than thirty several 
Casiques
 or petty Princes; every one of which paid him Tribute, and were able upon occasion to bring into the Field an hundred thousand Men: He is said to have been, for his Person, a wise and good Prince, just, affable, and tender of his Subjects good: but by reason of some heavy exactions, which his own pow∣er, and the Practise of his Ancestors before him, gave him the confidence to Impose upon the Conquer'd People, a great part of his Subjects liv'd but unwillingly un∣der his Obedience, and rather by constraint than otherwise: being also further ex∣asperated against him by one barbarous Custom, which the 
Mexicans
 frequently us'd, 
viz.
 the Sacrificing of Men. Their manner was, whensoever they had any solemn occasion of doing Honor to their Devil-god 
Vitzilopuchtli,
 as they call him, to send out an Army of Men from 
Mexico,
 into some of the subdu'd Provinces, (in case they had no Enemies nearer Hand) and to fetch in as many Men as they thought good, to be Sacrific'd; whose flesh likewise afterwards they did eat in a solemn Banquet. This being a business of their Satanical Religion, and 
Motezuma
 a Prince extremely Superstitious and Devoted to the Service of his gods, it is said, that he Sacrific'd commonly, one year with another, twenty thousand Men, and some years, upon extraordinary occasions, not less than fifty thousand: So great and grievous a Tyranny, by the just Judgement and Permission of Almighty God, for their great and unnatural sins, did the Enemy of Mankind exercise upon them. He was likewise much given to Women, but it was onely to such as were counted his Wives; of which he is said to have had no less than a hundred and fifty with Child by him at one time.


The Bounds of this Kingdom at present are thus; on the East it hath a large Arm of the Sea, which they call 
The Bay of New-Spain,
 or 
The Gulf of Mexico;
 On the West, it hath some parts of 
New-Gallicia,
 and 
Mare del Zur;
 on the North, the rest of 
New-Gallicia,
 and part of 
Florida;
 and on the South, 
Mare del Zur
 again, and

part of 
Guatimala.
 It extendeth it self in length from 
Jucatan
 South-East, to the Bor∣ders of 
New Gallicia
 Northward, above eight hundred 
Italian
 Miles, and in breadth, from 
Panuco
 to the South Sea, about half so much. It lieth wholly under the 
Tor∣rid Zone:
 nor is it a Countrey generally so mountainous or high seated, as some others of 
America
 are, but for the most part level or low; yet is it so fann'd, (for three parts at least of four, by the cooling Blasts of the Sea, and the Heats other∣wise so moderated with frequent Rains, which it hath constantly three Moneths in the Year, 
viz. June, July,
 and 
August
) that the Air is rendred thereby exceeding tem∣perate, and the Climate not unhealthful, especially to temperate Bodies, and such as are never so little us'd to it.
 A goodly Countrey it is, of inexhaustible Wealth and Riches, whether we regard the Mynes of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, 
&c.
 of all which it hath many, and very good; or the Fruits of the Earth, abundance of Cattel, plenty of Corn and Grain, of which they have two Harvests; or any other Commodities and Endowments of Nature, which serve for the enriching of the World. Amongst other things, it affords 
Cassia,
 the Fruit whereof is a thing well known, and much commended by the Apothecaries for its use in Physick, especially in Purgations, and removing of all Obstructions of Phlegm, Choler, 
&c.
 Such store of Balm, Amber, all sorts of Gums and precious Liquors, as no Countrey in the World is better furnish'd with excellent Perfumes and Physick, than the King∣dom of 
New Spain.


Among the many other sorts of Trees which this Countrey produces, the most remarkable is their 
Tunas,
 of which, there being five kinds, one is call'd 
Cumbeba,
 from whence proceeds that admirable Tincture, commonly known by the Name of 
Cochinele,
 which is thus made: On the top of this Tree is found a Worm, which hath the bigness and shape of a great Louse, which so increases, that in one years time a hundred Trees shall be stock'd from the seed of one of these Animals. The Worm it self being white, after the Skin is carefully pull'd off, put in cold Water or Ashes, and so dry'd, becomes 
Cochinele.
 The best sort of it is to be had in 
Tlascala,
 and that in so great a quantity, that no less than five or six hundred 
Arrobes
 of 
Spa∣nish
 Measure (each 
Arrobe
 is as much as five 
English
 Bushels) is yearly Transported thence. The other sort, which grows on the Mountains, and that which is not so carefully gather'd, call'd 
Chichimecas,
 Dyes not so well as the right 
Cochinele.
 The 
Tunas
 also bears a Fruit long and whitish, with a smooth Shell, and full of lit∣tle Seeds like Figs: The red, which are inferior in taste to the white, colours the Urine red.


The Pine-Apples which grow here differ from the 
Spanish,
 for the Pulp is not inclos'd in a Shell: They have a pleasant smell, and a Pulp, which if eaten much of, causes an Appetite, it being of a tartish taste; they keep good a long time when Salted.


But much more beneficial is the 
Cacao,
 with which Fruit 
New Spain
 drives a great Trade; nay, serves for Coin'd Money. When they deliver a Parcel of 
Cacao,
 they tell them by five, thirty, and a hundred. Their Charity to the Poor never exceeds above one 
Cacao
-Nut. The chief reason for which this Fruit is so highly esteem'd, is for the 
Chocolate,
 which is made of the same, without which the Inhabitants (be∣ing so us'd to it) are not able to live, notwithstanding it causes Phlegm and Vo∣miting to those that are strangers thereto. When the 
English
 Commander 
Thomas Candish
 coming into the Haven 
Guatulco,
 burnt two hundred thousand Tun of 
Cacao,
 it prov'd no small loss to all 
New Spain,
 the Provinces 
Guatimala
 and 
Nicaragua
 not producing so much in a whole year. The Trees on which this Fruit grows are di∣vided into four sorts, differing in bigness and shape: all of them are very tender,





 for they will not onely grow in no place but on their usual Ground, but cannot en∣dure the cold Nights Storms, or excesses of Heat; wherefore the 
Cacao
-Trees which grow out of the Fruit that falls off, come to no perfection, except in shady and warm Valleys; which is also the reason why the Planters of 
New Spain
 plant the great Leafy Tree 
Cacaoquanthly
 (that is, 
The Mother of the Cacao's
) near the 
Cacao
-Tree, that it may the better grow under the Shadow thereof; in which manner whole Woods are planted: In the second year it bears Fruit, which is first ripe in 
January,
 and again in the midst of Summer. Amongst the four sorts the chiefest is 
Quathuitl,
 of an indiffent heighth, and full of sharp-pointed Leaves, which are fast to the Boughs without Stalks, and bears a great Flower of a yellowish colour, which fal∣ling off, leaves long, tough, and hairy Threds behind them, out of which grows the 
Cacavently,
 a Fruit which is oval, heavy like a Melon, of a Saffron-colour, of a fat and thick Juice, a bitterish, yet pleasant taste, and very cooling; being dry'd in the Sun it is thereby made fit to keep; it is likewise highly esteem'd, because the 
Cho∣colate
 is made of the same. Before the 
Spaniards
 made themselves Masters of 
Mexico,
 no other Drink was esteem'd but that of the 
Cacao;
 none caring for Wine, not∣withstanding the Soil produces Vines every where in great abundance of it self. But besides the 
Quathuil, New Spain
 hath three other sorts of 
Cacao
-Trees, 
viz. Meca∣nal,
 pleasant to behold for its heighth, large Leaves and Fruit; the next is the 
Xo∣chucaual,
 which is less than the former; and lastly the least sort, which is call'd 
Halcacahual.
 The Fruit of these four sorts of Trees, though differing in shape, yet is all one in power and operation.


The 
Spaniards
 to make 
Chocolate
 mix 
Maiz
 (by the 
Mexicans
 call'd 
Tlaolli
) either whole or Ground, or boyl'd before with Chalk. Moreover, they put the red Ker∣nels also in the Drink, which grow in the Fruit of the 
Achiote
-Tree. Of the Kernels, which are dry and cooling, boyl'd in Water, and stirr'd till it comes to a Pap, they make Cakes, which mix'd with the 
Chocolate,
 gives it a cleansing power, and takes away all tastes that cause vomiting.


The Pepper 
Mecaxochite,
 which grows creeping along the Earth, with long and

fragrant Leaves, round Stalks, hairy Roots, and three long Cods which shoot up∣wards. This Pepper tempers the over-cooling property of the 
Chocolate.
 Lastly, it consists also of 
Xochinacatlis, Tlilxochitle,
 and the Rozenish Gum, 
Holli.
 The 
Xocina∣catli
 is a Tree with small Leaves, and great Flowers hanging on long Stalks that bend downwards, within of a purple, and without of a dark-green colour, of a sweet smell, and resembling an Ear; and this Flower also gives a pleasant taste and wholsom operation to the 
Chocolate.
 The 
Tlilxochitle
 runs up to the tops of Trees like Ivy; the Flowers, of a darkish brown colour, cleanse the Nerves, strengthen the Brain, and take away the rawness of the Stomach. The 
Holli
 drops out of the 
Holquabuytle,
 a smooth barky Tree full of Moisture, which at first appearance is white, then yellowish, and lastly black, which kneaded into round Balls and Roasted, is a remedy against a Loosness and soreness of the Bowels.


The Natives of the Countrey are very ingenious in divers mechanical Arts, especially in making of Feather-Pictures, a piece of Curiosity wherein they are held to be incomparably, or rather inimitably excellent; and so industrious at it, that al∣though the 
Americans
 generally are not a People over-much addicted to any kind of Labor or Study, yet at this they will sit a whole day together, without either Meat or Drink, onely out of a natural affection they have to the Work, and a desire to be excellent in it; The Countrey indeed affords them great variety of Birds and other Fowl, of most rare and exquisite Colours, which is a great advantage to their Skill, and helps much to the accomplishment of their Work. They Paint likewise very curiously upon their Cottons; and are held to be generally the best Goldsmiths in the World; of most perfect skill in the purging and refining of all sorts of Metals, but especially of Gold and Silver: And yet in other things so strangely stupid and ignorant, that when the 
Spaniards
 first appeared amongst them, not a few of them (as 'tis reported) took the Horse and Man both for one Crea∣ture; and when the Horse Neighed, they would enquire very seriously what he said.


There are likewise many fair Lakes in this Province, but the principal are those of 
Chapala
 and 
Mexico:
 the former of which is in the more Northern parts of the Kingdom, towards the Borders of 
New Gallicia,
 and is chiefly famous for the abun∣dance of good Salt that is yearly made and Transported thence. The other of 
Mexico
 is one of the largest and goodliest in the World, of circular form (as some say) little less than nine hundred Miles in compass, environ'd with the main Land, the 
Peninsula,
 or Cape of 
Florida, Jucatan,
 and the Island 
Cuba,
 having two onely Passages in and out, and both of them well fortifi'd: the one betwixt the Point of 
Jucatan
 and the Isle 
Cuba,
 where the Tyde violently enters; and the other betwixt the said Island and the Cape of 
Florida,
 where it goeth as violently out: up∣on which Gulf the King of 
Spain
 hath always some good Ships in readiness for all occasions; and by them, 'tis suppos'd, he doth more assure his Estates in those parts of 
America,
 than by all the Garrisons besides.


The whole Kingdom of 
Mexico,
 or 
New-Spain,
 is subdivided into these Inferior Provinces:


1. The Arch-bishoprick of 
Mexico.
 2. The Bishoprick, 
Mechoacon.
 3. 
Los Angelos,
 or 
Tlascale.
 4. 
Guaxaca.
 5. The Lordship 
Panuco:
 And 6. the Province 
Tabasco.


Mexico,
 the chief Province of 
New-Spain,
 so denominated from 
Mexico
 the chief City, not only of the Province, but of all 
America;
 lying between 
Tlascale
 and 
Me∣choacan,
 extends in length from North to South, a hundred and seventeen Leagues; and in breadth along the Southern Ocean, seventeen, but up in the Countrey, fifty







view


NOVA MEXICO






four Leagues: In which circumference lie to the North-East, 
Lateotlalpa, Mexti∣tlan, Xilotepeque,
 and 
Panuco;
 Westward, 
Matalzingo,
 and 
Cultepeque;
 Eastward, 
Tuz∣coco;
 South-East, 
Chalco;
 Southward, 
Suchmilco, Tlaluc, Coyxca,
 and 
Acapulco.


It is bounded on the East, with the East, with the Gulf of 
Mexico;
 on the West, with 
Mechoa∣can;
 on the North, with 
Panuco,
 and some parts of 
New-Gallicia;
 and on the South, with 
Tlascalla.


This Countrey is both large and rich, containing not much less than one hun∣dred and thirty Leagues, both in length and breadth; and if it yields any thing to 
Peru
 in the plenty of Gold and Silver, 'tis certain it much excels it in many other Commodities; as namely, in all sorts of Fruits, abundance of Cattel, plenty of Corn and Grain; in all which, the advantage this Countrey hath, not only of 
Pe∣ru,
 but of all the other Provinces of 
America
 beside, is well known: Not to speak any thing of the great plenty and variety of good Fish, which both the Rivers and Lakes of this Countrey afford, which is very great; insomuch, that the very Tri∣bute of the one Lake of 
Mexico
 is said to yield an Income of above twenty thousand Crowns yearly, one with another.


The People of the Countrey are generally Industrious and Active, especially since the 
Spaniards
 came among them; rich Merchants, if they apply themselves to it; and they say likewise good Soldiers, when they are train'd and imploy'd that way.


The chief Towns and places of the Province are, 1. 
Mexico,
 both anciently and at present, the Metropolis and Capital City; being the Seat of an Archbishop, and the ordinary Residence of the Vice-Roy, and chief Governors of 
New-Spain.


This City, by the 
Indians
 was formerly call'd 
Tenustatan,
 lies in nineteen Degrees and a half to the Northward of the 
Equinoctial-Line,
 rais'd out of a brackish Lake, full of muddy Water; whose circumference along the Mountains is seventy Leagues: This Lake swarms continually with Boats, which carry the People to and again from one inhabited Island to another; four Stone-bridges, no less cost∣ly than artificial, with Arches and Gates in several places, lead from the City to the Main Continent.


The fresh Water which they have in the City 
Mexico,
 is led into the same through Pipes that lie in the bottom of the Lake; but none are to enjoy the benefit thereof, before they have paid a certain Sum of Money to the King's Collectors.


Moreover, the City divided into Islands, contains above sixty thousand Houses, which being built on several Isles, have large Bridges, which reach from one to ano∣ther; some that lie in the middle of the Lake, they approach in little Boats; round about the Lake, especially where the way leads from the Continent into the City, lie several Suburbs, all inclos'd with Walls; between which stand strong Towers, cover'd on the top: To keep off the force of the Water, the 
Tenustatans
 have with great labor and charge, made a Bank through the Lake, half way along the City: But the Lake 
Laguna,
 from whose bottom 
Mexico
 is rais'd, is divided in two parts, the 
Sweet Lake,
 which is higher than the 
Salt,
 falls in to the same through Sluces, with Bridges built on the Bank that leads from the City to the main Land: The 
Salt-Lake,
 which hath brackish and bitter Water, ebbs and flows according as the Wind blows; no Fish is able to live in the same, because the Water which in the sight of 
Mexico
 falls into the same out of the Mountains, hath a sulphury Ground: All along the shore, much Salt is made, with which the Citizens drive a great Trade: There are continually above a hundred thousand Boats (by the 
Indians
 call'd 
Acales,
 and by the 
Spaniards, Canoos
) going off and on from one shore to another: The fresh Water Lake, which is bigger than the salt, and feeds small Fishes, hath above fif∣ty

Suburbs about the same, of which, some boast five thousand, and others ten thousand Houses: Nay, the Suburb 
Tescuco,
 in former times was no way inferior to 
Mexico
 in bigness; since the 
Spaniards
 have been Masters of this City, they stopt up many Moats, to inlarge their narrow Streets.


Besides three publick Markets, every open place affords all sorts of Provisions daily; the 
Indians
 call the Markets 
Tianguystly,
 and the 
Spaniards, Tianguez;
 the first and chiefest stands in 
Tatelulco,
 adorn'd with Galleries on three sides; in the mid∣dle of this Square, which is accounted the biggest in the World, stands next to the place of Execution, a stately Fountain; the Tents which are every Week pitch'd up here for Trade, amount to above thirty thousand. The second Market call'd St. 
John's,
 is in 
Mexico,
 and swarms continually with People. The third is call'd 
Hipolito,
 from the 
Guardian-Saint
 of the City, whither every Wednesday and Thurs∣day comes such a multitude of People, that this spacious Market is too little for them; for the sale of every Commodity, a peculiar corner is allotted; but great Packs are left to be dispos'd of in Boats, which lie near the shore.


At the four corners of the City, at present call'd St. 
John, St. Maria la Rotonda, St. Pablo,
 and 
St. Sebastian,
 are above four thousand 
Spanish
 Families, and thirty thousand 
Indians,
 besides what inhabit 
Tatelulco,
 now 
St. Jago.


The Air in this place is very strange; in the day time, the Sky is generally Se∣rene; the North Wind against the Evening brings Rain, of which the Mountain 
Tepeaquilla
 lying a little League beyond the City, gives certain Testimonies; for when a black Cloud appears on the top thereof, it is certain to be blown from thence over 
Mexico
 with Rain: After a moist Evening follows a Star-light Night, and a pleasant Morning: From 
September
 till 
May,
 it is generally dry Weather here, but if it chances to Rain▪ the Rain is attended with a Storm, which occasions a sulphurous Fogg, very unwholsom, and so dark, that one Man cannot di∣scern another, and causes a pain through all the Limbs, nay sometimes Death it self; wherefore, when soe're it approaches, every one keeps close in his House, or goes into the Countrey.


Moreover, it is worthy of observation, how strangely this City is alter'd since its being Conquer'd by the 
Spaniards,
 and especially when 
Anno
 1629. it was over∣flow'd by a mighty Deluge; which alteration by 
Barnabe Cabo,
 in a Letter to the 
Jesuite Hernande Leon,
 is thus set forth:


Mexico,
 says he, lying in a Valley between high Mountains, hath seventy Leagues in circumference: The Valley being Oval, is for the most part inter∣spers'd with Lakes, which the 
Indians,
 and after them the 
Spaniards
 have digg'd, only the Lake which washes 
Mexico
 is natural; and to stop the Water-falls, there are Banks and Sluces every where: The Flood before 
Mexicalcingo
 flows a Fathom and a half higher than before 
Mexico.
 The four other Lakes to the Northward have much more Water than the 
Mexicalcingo,
 of which, some have scarce four, others but three Leagues in circumference; when as 
Mexicalcingo's
 Lake reckons fifteen, and 
Mexico's
 sixteen. On the breaking of the Banks, 
Mexico
 hath often suffer'd great damage, wherefore the Vice-Roy 
de Valesco
 took special care to make a vent for the Water through the lowest Mountains; whereupon the Countrey being Sur∣vey'd, the Northern Coast near the Village 
Gueguenoca,
 was found to be the most convenient. But about the manner of letting the Water out, the Surveyors could no ways agree; most of them were of opinion to dig Channels, into which the Lakes might discharge their Waters; others, thought best to make a Gutter under Ground, which last 
Velasca
 put in hand with unhappy success, because the Labo∣rers who under-min'd the Ground, were choak'd with the falling in of the Sand,

or stifled with the sulphurous Vapors rising out of the Earth: Nevertheless, they gave not over the Work, though they began it quite another way, for a 
French
-Man, call'd 
Henry Martin,
 advis'd to deepen the River 
Quaiotitlan,
 which falls into the 
Laguna,
 and by that means make it a Bay, into which the 
Laguna
 might pour her over-charg'd Waters: Which design, though contradicted by the Jesuit 
John Sanchez,
 was put in practice; by which means the Water fell in a short time so much, that they could walk dry to the Cliff 
El Ponnel,
 lying a League from the City; where∣fore they continually labour'd on this Work, till such time as 
Conde de Getues
 came over for Vice-Roy, who judg'd the Charge to be unnecessary, nay Commanded the Ditches to be broken down, which stopt the Water along the Silver Mines of 
Pachuca,
 that he might see exactly how much it would over-flow 
Mexico:
 After which the Flood rose yearly higher and higher; till at last, 
Anno
 1629. a mighty Rain falling, swole the 
Laguna
 in such a manner, that it over-whelm'd all 
Mexico,
 wash'd down the Houses, all Merchandizes which could not endure the Water, were spoil'd, and had not they had innumerable Boats to help them, thousands of People might have perish'd in this Deluge: But at last, 
Henry Martin
 restor'd again the fore-mention'd Channel to its former Perfection, and brought the Flood which fell down out of the Mountains within the Banks of the River.


Quantitlan
 digg'd also a Channel of eight thousand Fathom long, and made an Arch'd Sewer under Ground of the same length, which Sewer hath at every two hundred Fathoms distance, Vent-holes, and a hole of sixty Fathom deep, and by this means, diverting abundance of Water, they dry'd 
Mexico
 in a short time: When the Banks and Streets began no sooner to appear, but they fell to work to raise the Ground, and to lay Bridges, and also to build more Boats. The Citizens like∣wise found it convenient to make another deep Sewer for the carrying away of more Water, notwithstanding it requir'd twenty years labor. The River, which in a manner runs through the middle of the City, is curb'd by a Wall; a crooked Bridge, with many Arches, and of a long extent, leads to the City,
 in which stand many brave Palaces, with pleasant Walks of Trees about them; the Cloysters of several Orders of Fryers, appear with high Spires and Turrets, above all other Buildings.


The 
Franciscans
 have here four very sumptuous Buildings: The first, Consecrated to St. 
Francis,
 stands in the uppermost part of 
Mexico,
 within a large square Court, and on each a pleasant Walk of Trees: The Cloyster it self is very high, and treb∣ble Wall'd, with Towers and Galleries about it: In the middle of the City stands another Tower'd-Cloyster, call'd St. 
Jago.
 The third lies a little distance from it, which being built long, hath a stately Turret, and is call'd 
Maria de Rodon∣da.
 The fourth, not far from the first, but much smaller, is nam'd 
San Diego;
 these belong to the 
Franciscans.
 The 
Augustin
 Monks are also no way inferior to the 
Fran∣ciscans,
 for magnificent Structures, with spacious Halls, high Towers, and rich Balconies: The first is denominated from St. 
Augustine,
 just behind which appears 
San Pabla,
 less stately than the rest. St. 
Sebastian,
 near the 
Laguna,
 is built in manner like a Church, whose Tower ends like a Pyramid. The Cloyster 
San Cruz,
 belong∣ing also to the 
Augustines,
 built square, stands near the Market, in the middle of which stands a stately Fountain: The Court within inviron'd with thick Walls, amazes the beholders by the pleasantness of its situation.


Moreover, the 
Dominicans
 inhabit two brave Cloysters; the chiefest Dedicated to St. 
Dominic,
 is eight square; to which is adjoyning a pretty large Church, with a Steeple: The second, which stands on one side of 
St. Jago,
 and consists of three se∣veral Structures, is call'd 
Collegio de Porta Coeli,
 Opposite to 
St. Jago,
 near the great

Market the 
Jesuits
 have a stately Colledge, or High-School, where many are brought up in the Latin and Greek Tongues, whence it is call'd, 
Casa Professa Les Estudios.


There is also another Habitation of Religious Men, call'd 
Illefonse Sanna Noviciad,
 which for State, may vie with any Royal Palace.


The 
Monks
 of 
La Merced
 dwell in two Cloysters, both Consecrated to the Vir∣gin 
Mary,
 yet Sirnam'd 
Montseratte,
 and 
Carmel:
 The first lying not far from the River, is a mean Structure, in comparison to the last; the uppermost Tower of whose Temple appears above all other Buildings, in the upper part of 
Mexico
 near the Cloyster of St. 
Francis.


The Women have also fourteen Cloysters here, the chiefest whereof is Dedica∣ted to 
Catharine
 of 
Siena;
 but much more splendid is that of 
Santa Teresa,
 built like an Imperial Palace; famous for its stately Gardens, and round Fountain, which continually spouts Water. The rest, which we shall onely name, are 
La Encar∣nacio, Santa Ines, Jesus-Maria, Laurenso, Las Des-calcas, Santa Clara, Juan de la Pe∣nitentia, Regina Coeli, Santa Monica, las Rocogidas, Jeronymo,
 and 
Conceptione;
 besides the Almshouses, 
Real de los Indios,
 and 
Nostra Senora del Amor:
 There are likewise eight Hospitals, 
viz. de Dios, del Spiritu Santo, Juan de Doys, de la Misericordia, de san Hippoli∣to,
 and 
de san Lazaro.
 The three chief Churches bear the Name of 
Catharine, Mar∣tin,
 and 
Vera Cruz;
 and the Clergy-men thereto belonging, enjoy many stately Pa∣laces, amongst which are 
Juan de Lateran, de Christo,
 and 
las Nivas.


The Residence of the Vice-Roy which lies near the 
Dominican
 Cloyster, 
Porto Coe∣li,
 is so sumptuous a Structure, that it may stand in competition with any of those Edifices which were so much cry'd up by the Ancients; nevertheless, it is not to be compar'd to the Arch-bishop's Seat, built round like a Theatre, whose Luster ex∣presses the Quality of him that inhabits the same, he being Governor of the Bi∣shopricks of 
Fascala, Guaxaca, Mechaocan, New Galicia, Chiapa, Yucatan, Guatimala, Ve∣rapaz,
 and the 
Philippinas.
 This marvellous Structure was begun by 
Ferdinand Corte∣sius,
 but was finish'd by 
Sebastian Ramires de Fuenleal;
 and not much inferior there∣unto is the 
Casa de Cabildo Alameda.


At present, 
Mexico
 is thought to be one of the richest Cities of the World, abounding (if reports be true) in all kind of voluptuous gallantry and bravery, even to excess: It is suppos'd to contain about six or seven Miles in compass, and to consist of above an hundred thousand Houses or Families, whereof not the tenth part 
Spaniards,
 but those that are, all Gentlemen, at least as to their garb and manner of living; for they live most splendidly in all respects, both for Diet and Apparel.


For the first, we have spoken so much already of the general plenty of all things in the Kingdom of 
New-Spain,
 that pertain to this part of pleasure, that it is not to be doubted: And for the second this may be some instance, 
viz.
 that it is no ex∣traordinary matter to see an Hat-band or Role all of Diamonds, in some ordinary Gentlemans Hat; and of Pearl among the common Citizens and Tradesmen. The Coaches (which most Gentlemen keep) almost cover'd with Gold and Silver, richly beset with Precious Stones, and within ordinarily lin'd with Cloth of Gold, or the best 
China
 Silk that can be gotten; of which Coaches, in time of year, at the 
Alameda,
 as they call it, which is, as it were, 
The Hide-Park of Mexico,
 and a place made of purpose for recreation and delight, a Man shall observe not seldom, above a thousand or two thousand Coaches, full of Ladies and Gallants coming thither onely to take the Air, and their Pleasure, both the one and the other attended with a numerous Train of Servants and 
Mulattoes
 of both Sexes. In 
la Plateria,
 which is

but onely one Street in 
Mexico,
 nigh to the Vice-Roy's Palace, in less than half an hours space: with the turn of an Eye, you may see Millions of Wealth in Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, in the Goldsmiths and Jewellers Shops thereabouts. In a word, there is nothing hinders 
Mexico
 from being the most absolute City in the World for delight and bravery, but onely two Inconveniences to which it is subject: The one is the danger of the Lake, with the Infalls whereof it may seem to be almost continually threatned, and in the Year 1629. did actually suffer a very great calamity, the Waters breaking through the Banks, and drowning a great part of the City, with the destruction of much People, and the loss of all their Goods intirely, through the avarice (as is suppos'd) of the Vice-Roy that then was, and some other of the King's Officers, who diverted the Money that should have been employ'd for the fortifying and repairing of the Banks, to their own proper uses: The other is from the nature of the Soil and Ground it self on which it standeth; which is found to have a tincture of 
Sal
 Nitre in it, somewhat strong; and the Winds partly from the Lake it self, and partly from the Hills about it, rai∣sing the Dust of this Earth constantly every Evening, for many Moneths of the Year together, so violently, that the Air is even darkned therewith for some time: The Inhabitants are much annoy'd by it, and made subject to divers Hypocondria∣cal Pains and Infirmities, and sometimes kill'd with it, especially such as either cannot, or care not much to avoid it.


The City lieth about sixty Leagues, or a hundred and fifty Miles distant from the 
Atlantick
 or North Sea, from whence by the Port of 
St. John d' Ullua,
 or 
Vera Crux,
 (which are the usual Landing-places) there is a fair and easie March to 
Mexico,
 by the Cities of 
Xalabar, Perotta, Puebla de los Angelos,
 and 
Tlascalla,
 all of them open and unfortifi'd Places, (as likewise 
Mexico
 it self) arid the Countrey round about very rich and well accommodated with all things.


The next City of note in ancient times was 
Chulula,
 which being built in a fruit∣ful Plain, had above twenty thousand Dwelling-houses, and as many more Ban∣quetting-houses. The number of the Temples and Turrets were equal with that of the days in the Year: The Government thereof belong'd to a Mayor and six Aldermen, and one chief Priest; for they never went upon the least Design before they had been at their Devotion; in which the Priest's Office was onely to perfume the Idols four times in twenty four hours, 
viz.
 in the Morning, at Noon, after Sun-set, and at Midnight; at which times none durst be absent, but they us'd also a cruel Exercise on themselves, and one much more cruel on others, for on usual Feast-days they abstain'd from Meat, Drink, and Sleep, scourg'd their Bodies with knotted Cords after a miserable manner, evacuated their Seed, that so they might curb all fleshly Desires, and met every Night in a spacious place, where sit∣ting down they wounded themselves with Lances in their Legs and Arms, so long till the Blood gush'd out of the same; which gathering in a Cup, they anointed their Temples therewith, and dipt the Lances in the same, and then hung them up before the Temple in Bundles of Straw. Of these were a great number, and the more, because they never us'd their Lances but once. But on these Days, which were Consecrated to the Idol 
Tezcatlipuca,
 every one besides the Priests wore a new Rope made of the Hemp 
Mangey,
 of a Fathom long, and a thick Knot at the end, with which they beat themselves so miserably on their Backs, as if they intended to have broken them: After which the Priests stay'd five days in the Temple, in which they us'd the like cruelty, eating scarce once in twenty four hours.


Their Prisoners they us'd after a most horrid manner, 
viz.
 in their Temples stood a round Stage of Stone; to the top of which they ascended by a Square Scaf∣fold,

supported by twenty eight Pillars; behind which appear'd thousands of Mens Heads, and amongst them the Prisoners that were to be Offer'd sat stark naked, and guarded by several Armed Men; three Foot from the Steps which led up to the top of the Scaffold, stood a pyramidical Stone, (by the 
Indians
 call'd 
Quauxi∣calli
) and behind it two round Chappels, cover'd on the top like Mitres, each had four Holes in a large Gate, in which sat a horrid Representation, worshipp'd by six Priests call'd 
Chackalmua,
 whereof one call'd 
Papas,
 or 
Topilzin,
 whose Office was to pluck out the Hearts of the Prisoners, being in greatest esteem, wore a red Man∣tle about his Body, not unlike a long Coat, with broad Fringe, which trail'd af∣ter him upon the Ground, and also a Crown of green and yellow Plumes on his Head; his Ears and under Lip were likewise adorn'd with Precious Stones: The other five appear'd in like manner with their Hands and Faces painted red, but ha∣ving Leathern 
Fascia's
 about their Heads, and white Coats stitch'd with Black on their Bodies, they might easily be distinguish'd from the 
Topilzin;
 who on a sudden ran down the Stairs to the Prisoners, and shew'd each of them an Image, (saying, 
This is your God
) made of 
Bledo
 Paste, 
Maiz
 and Honey, green Beads for Eyes, and Grains of 
Maiz
 for Teeth: whereupon the Prisoners were led up, and laid with their Backs on the sharp Stone 
Quauxicalli;
 then the five Priests took hold of their Leggs, Arms and Head, put woodden Collars about the Sufferer's Necks, whilst the 
Topilzin
 shew'd Reverence to the Idol; which done, with a sharp Stone he cut open the Breasts of the Prisoners, who in a deplorable condition lay on the pyra∣midical Stone, and pulling their Hearts out of their Bodies, shew'd the same reek∣ing to the Sun, and at last threw them toward the Idol, and the dead Bodies down the Stairs, where some appointed for that purpose carried the same away; but eve∣ry one taking his own Prisoner, and roasting and boyling him, serv'd him up to his Friends as a great Dainty.


This kind of Murdering was not onely us'd amongst the 
Mexicans,
 but also by all the other neighboring 
Indians,
 and especially in the City 
Chulula,
 which (as we have said before) signifies 
The Sanctity of all the Gods:
 for in this Town six thousand Children were yearly Offer'd.


The Citizens hereof us'd to drive a great Trade, especially in 
Cochinele.


Their Habits were several; for Persons of Note wore Cotton Coats, about the Edges of which hung Feathers and pieces of Cony-skins: the meaner sort went in 
Nequons,
 or a sort of Linnen Coats made of the hairy Leaves of the Tree 
Maguey.


3. The City 
Tezuco,
 full of handsom Streets and fair Houses, is built near the salt 
Mexican
 Lake, yet hath no want of fresh Water, with which it is supply'd by Gutters from the Mountains under Ground, according to 
Anthony Herrera,
 it twice exceedeth in bigness the famous City 
Sivill
 in 
Spain.


4. 
Quitlavaca,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Venezuela,
 (because it is, like 
Venice,
 sur∣rounded with Water, and divided into several Isles,) boasted formerly above two thousand Families: From the Town a Cawsey of twenty Foot broad, and half a League long, leads through the Lake to the Main Continent.


5. 
Yztacpalapa,
 a very populous Place, and lying part of it in the salt Lake, and partly on the Main Land; where several fresh-water Pools afford store of Fish, two Leagues distant from 
Mexico,
 to which leads a broad Way; in the middle of which stands a Fountain, surrounded with high Trees, which produces excellent Water.


6. 
Mexicaltzingo,
 situate upon the Lake 
Laguna,
 a Town consisting of four thou∣sand stately Houses.


7. 
Cayocan,
 in a fruitful Plain, containing six thousand, being but a League and

a half from 
Yztacpalapa:
 to which the neighboring Village 
Houcilopucho
 was not much inferior.


These three Places, before they were subdu'd by the 
Spaniards,
 boasted many brave Temples and high Towers, whose lustre appear'd at a great distance, but now being turn'd into Cloysters, they are inhabited by Monks and Nuns.


The Salt made here of Earth, though not white, and onely fit to make Pickle of, is Transported to many Places.


About 
Mexico
 there are also several Villages, the chiefest of which are 1. 
Ma∣stitlan,
 a Town pleasantly seated upon the top of an huge Mountain, in the midst of most delicate Groves and shady Woods, and reckon'd to contain no less than thirty thousand Inhabitants in all, dwelling either in the City, or upon the sides of the Mountain.


2. 
Antepecque;
 this is a Town belonging to the Marquess 
de Valle,
 who is of the Posterity of 
Cortez,
 and said to be seated in the most delicious place of all 
New Spain.


3.
Acapulco,
 a Town seated upon the South-Sea, or 
Mare del Zur,
 yet belong∣ing to this Province. It is a haven-Town, and one of the most frequented upon the South-Sea, situate upon a large and capacious Bay of about a League broad at the Entrance, and affording many convenient Stations and Docks for Shipping. At the bottom of the Bay Westward lieth the Town, with a strong Castle very op∣portunely built, both for the command and security of the Port, well wall'd and fortifi'd with Bulwarks, and having a constant Garrison of four hundred Soldiers in it, or thereabouts. The reason whereof, I suppos
, may be chiefly this, 
viz.
 that from this Port there is the greatest Traffick and Entercourse held betwixt the 
East
 and 
West-Indies,
 together with the 
Philippine
 Islands.


The Countrey hath many rich Mynes of Silver in it, and some of Gold; the chief of which are by 
Herera
 reported to be these, 
viz.
 1. Those of 
Puchuca,
 four∣teen Leagues distant from 
Mexico.
 2. Of 
Tasco.
 3. 
Talpuiana.
 4. 
Cultepeque.
 5. 
Zacu∣alpa.
 6. 
Zupanguo,
 and divers others.


The rest of the Villages are 
Guatitlan, Tenyauca, Escapusalco, Tacuba,
 and 
Su∣chimilco.


The neighboring Province 
Xilotepeck,
 which is exceeding fruitful, is alfo famous for two Fountains, whereof one near the Village 
Queretaro
 produces boyling Water, which when cool'd, is a wholsom Drink for Cattel: The other for four years is full of Water, and for four years after it is empty; in great rainy Seasons it is quite dry, and in droughty Weather it overflows.


Between the Villages 
Queretaro
 and 
San Juan,
 is a Plain which extends it self seven Leagues in breadth, and seven in length, besides two Leagues farther beyond 
Quar∣tero,
 where a hundred thousand Head of Cattel, and ten thousand Horses, find plentiful Pasture.


The Mountain 
Nevada,
 near the City 
De los Angelos,
 deserves no small admira∣tion; for it begins at thirty Leagues end to rise exceeding high, and being flat on the top, hath a wide gaping Mouth, whose bottom is fathomless; from which at Sun-rising and setting rises a Smoak up directly towards the Skie, but immediately after spreading like a Plume of Feathers, it is dispers'd by the Wind, and no more seen till it appears in a dusky Cloud. With the Smoak are also Ashes vomited up; yet the Mountain is very pleasantly planted with lofty Cypress, Cedar, Oak, and Pine-Trees. The neighboring Fields abound likewise with Wheat, Cotton, and 
Maiz.
 There seldom appears any Rain here.


At the Foot of this Mountain lies the Village 
Tepecco,
 famous for the Crystal

and Allom gotten there. The Village 
Ocotlan
 is also maintain'd by the same: But 
Tuculala
 by Gold-Mines, and fruitful Lands, which are twice a year shaken by Earthquakes; wherefore the Inhabitants live not in Stone Houses, but in little Straw Huts.


South-Eastward from 
Nerada
 is excellent Sugar to be had, and on the Mountain it self the famous Gum 
Anime,
 which drops out of a Tree call'd 
Jetaiba,
 which is al∣ways green, with hard white Wood, a pale yellow speckled Bark, three long soft Leaves hanging one over another on one Stalk, and the Fruit on the middle of the Body. After the rainy Season is past in 
October,
 then they cut a Hole in the Body of the Tree, out of which the Gum drops: it hath a pleasant smell, and is exceed∣ing good against the Head-ache occasion'd by Colds.


Not far from hence appears the Valleys 
Matalzingo
 and 
Atzompam,
 which have excellent Pastures, in which 
Diego Nunnez de Camargo
 bred forty thousand Sheep out of two in ten years time.


And these are the chiefest Towns, Villages, and Countreys, which surround the famous City 
Mexico.


Concerning the erecting of this City, the 
Indians
 relate thus: That the seventh Family of the 
Navatlaca's,
 Extracted out of the Countrey 
Aztlan,
 rang'd up and down not without thousands of Inconveniences, from one Countrey to another, according to the Information which their Sages had given their Spirit 
Viztliputli,
 till at last some of the Priests straying from the Army, or rather Multitude, got into a Wilderness, full of Brambles and Thorns, and came at length to a Place where was a Spring of clear Water, in which the Fishes glitter'd like Silver; where ta∣king up their repose that Night, their Spirit inform'd the oldest of them in a Dream, that they should find thereabouts a 
Tunal
 Tree (whose Leaves grow out of one another) under which, on a Stone, lay the Heart of the famous Sorcerer 
Copil:
 This 
Tunal
 Tree should be discover'd by a Crane on the top of it, which in one Foot should hold a Bird, and in the other a Bough of the Tree, near which they were to build a City: The old Priest waking, and relating his Dream, every one endeavor'd to find out the fore-mention'd Tree; at last they found it, by discover∣ing on the top a Crane, with spread-out Wings looking up towards the Sun, and holding in his Claws a small Bird, invested with curious Feathers: Whereupon they with all speed built a Chappel of Turf and Clods of Earth, and cover'd the same with Canes, to keep their Idol from the Weather, resolving, so soon as they could, to build him a better Temple.


The Lake on whose Isles they setled, abounded with Fish and Fowls, which they exchang'd with the neighboring People for Stone and Mortar for the building of a Temple for 
Viztliputzli,
 and a new City; to which they made a Cawsey in the Lake 
Laguna,
 and divided it into four great Wards or Divisions, and subdivided them again into lesser; over which they plac'd peculiar Idols, and order'd a Crane like that which they had seen on the 
Tunal
 Tree to be their City Arms. The dividing of the Wards occasion'd great dislike amongst the Grandees, judging those to whose lot they fell, not to be worthy of them; wherefore deserting the same, and tra∣velling along the Lake 
Laguna,
 they setled themselves at last in a sandy Soil, which they call'd 
Tlattellulco,
 and entertain'd a bitter hatred against their Countrey-men who kept the four Wards of the new 
Tenustitan,
 doing them all the mischief they could; wherefore the Assaulted were necessitated to chuse a King, that they might be the better able to oppose their Enemies: But that they might not raise a Dis∣content amongst themselves about electing a Governor, they judg'd it fittest to take a Foreigner; amongst whom they found none so capable of so great an Office as

Acamapixtli,
 Grand-son to the King of 
Culhuacan,
 whereupon sending Ambassadors thither, they obtain'd their desires.


The new King was no sooner Crown'd, but he settled all things in order with great Prudence, insomuch, that 
Mexico
 grew daily to be more famous and fear'd: But this sudden growth rais'd a jealousie amongst the Neighbors, who dreaded their growing Power and Valor.


The 
Tapunecans
 who were also a valiant People, being the nearest to them, and having 
Azcapuzalco
 for their chief City, made it their main design, utterly to root out the 
Mexicans,
 before they grew to be more Populous and Potent; notwith∣standing they had hitherto receiv'd Tribute from them, for delivering the Lake 
Laguna
 to them, which was a quantity of Timber and Plants; yet they demanded not only more Tribute than formerly, but also in such a manner, as was thought impossible to have been perform'd, which was, that those Plants which were for∣merly brought to them, as growing on the Land, should be set in the Water, so as to come floating to them, as they grew, to 
Ascapuzalco,
 which if they did not pay, they should expect to be all put to the Sword. The 
Mexicans
 much amaz'd hereat, and not knowing how to produce the demanded Plants, 
Viztliputzli
 inform'd the oldest Priest, that the demands might be satisfi'd, and commanded him to throw Earth on the Water, and to Sow Seed on the same, which at the usual time produc'd 
Maiz, Azi, Chias, Tomates,
 and the like, with which the 
Tapunecans
 being satisfi'd, de∣mand next a Goose, and a Hen which laid Eggs, out of which the young ones should appear, when on the floating Clods of Earth, the Nests came opposite to 
Azcapuzalco,
 which by the advice of 
Viztliputzli,
 they perform'd fifty years one after another. Mean while, 
Acamapixtli
 (who had inlarg'd 
Mexico
 with Streets, Palaces, Temples, and Markets) dying, would not name any one to succeed him, but left the choice of the Election to the Commonalty, who Crown'd his Son 
Vitzilovitli,
 and Marry'd him to the King of 
Tapunecans
 Daughter, that by that means they might gain his friendship, and be eas'd of their strange Annual Tribute: Where∣upon 
Ayauchigual,
 the King of 
Tapunecans
 Daughter being Marry'd to 
Vitzilovitli,
 was within twelve Moneths deliver'd of a Son, which the Grand-father call'd 
Chi∣malpopoca,
 which signifies 
A Gun which gives Smoke,
 and afterwards was satisfi'd with two Geese, and some Fish yearly from the 
Mexicans,
 onely as an Acknowledgment that they inhabited his Countrey. 
Chimalpopoca
 loosing his Parents, in his tenth year was Crown'd King, with a Bowe and Arrows in his left Hand, and a Wood∣den Sword in the right: Soon after he oblig'd his Mothers Father to be kind to the 
Mexicans,
 for they being in great want for fresh Water, he had leave by Channels to bring the same out of the Mountain 
Chapultepec,
 a League distant from 
Mexico;
 to which purpose they made a Pipe of Planks, and hollow Trees joyn'd toge∣ther with Clay, quite through the Lake; but this Pipe not being teight and dura∣ble, and the fresh Water by that means mixing with the Salt, they sent Agents to 
Az∣capuzalco,
 to request Stones, Mortar, and Work-men to make a substantial Sewer: This message was ill resented by the Council of 
Azcapuzalco; What,
 (said they) 
do the
 Mexicans 
think, shall a rambling company of People, which on Charity live in anothers Countrey, Command those that Govern them to be their Servants?
 This grudge went so far, that at last they took a Resolution without the King's knowledge, (for he was sus∣pected, because of his Grand-chil'd 
Chimalpopoca
) to forbid all manner of Trade with the 
Mexicans;
 nay, to endeavor utterly to root them out; yet some judg'd, that they ought to spare 
Chimalpopoca,
 while others on the contrary said, 
That he ought to be destroy'd, because his Father being a
 Mexican, 
he would to the utmost of his Power defend his People;
 which last being approv'd of, so troubled the King of the 
Tapune∣cans,


that he dy'd of grief; for the Design being soon after put into execution, and the 
Tapuneca's
 breaking in the Night into 
Chimalpopoca
's Palace, Murder'd him; which Murder made the 
Mexicans
 thirst for revenge; whereupon, setting them∣selves wholly against the 
Tapunecans,
 they enter'd into a League with 
Vezcuco,
 and 
Culhuacan,
 and chose 
Izcoalt,
 for his great Valor, for their King; notwithstanding 
Acamapixtli
 had begotten him on a Slave.


Izcoalt
 was no sooner Crown'd, but he made great preparation for a War, though against every ones Opinion, because of the Populousness of the 
Tapunecans;
 yet it was concluded on, that they should request Peace, and a place to inhabit on the main Continent, that so they might remove from the Isles: This Request they thought could not be deny'd them in 
Azcapuzalco,
 provided the 
Mexicans
 brought their Gods thither, and wholly conform'd themselves to the manners of the 
Tapu∣necans,
 for otherwise they could expect nothing but utter Ruine: Yet though eve∣ry one else imbrac'd the Proposal, 
Tlacaellel,
 the King's Nephew, stiffly oppos'd it, alleging, that it did not agree with the 
Mexicans
 quality, to make so mean and sla∣vish a Proffer; and that they had best consider, first if there were no other means to be found: and that he would willingly venture his Life in going to 
Azcapuzalco,
 as a Spie, to pry into their whole Designs and Intentions, which was perform'd ac∣cordingly; and soon after returning, he brought information, that the 
Tapunecans
 were making great preparations for War, and made no mention at all of Peace; which news struck a general fear into all Peoples Hearts; many desiring that they might save themselves by flight; but 
Izcoalt
 putting fresh courage into them, made an agreement with the People, that if he was beaten by the 
Tapunecans,
 they should eat him up; but if he prov'd Conqueror, they should all be at his Command; to which all consenting, they boldly march'd with their King to the City 
Azcapuzalco.
 The Front of the Army consisting of the prime Nobility, was led by 
Tlacaellel,
 and the Rear 
Izcoalt
 brought up, who was also to give the sign on a Drum, when they should fall upon the Enemies; who having ten Men to the 
Mexicans
 one, suddenly Sally'd out of the Gates, where they were so briskly entertain'd by 
Tlacaellel,
 that in a confus'd manner they soon ran back into the City, whither the Conqueror pursuing them, got within the Gates, where he put all to the Sword which he could meet with; some fled to a steep neighboring Mountain, whither being also follow'd, they threw down their Arms, and begg'd Quarter, to serve the 
Mexicans
 as Slaves, which was granted them, whilst 
Izcoalt
 found an unvaluable Mass of Treasure in 
Azcapuzalco,
 and distributed the Conquer'd Countrey amongst those who had behav'd themselves best.


This Conquest made the neighboring People jealous of the 
Mexicans,
 whose Suc∣cess and growing Power they dreaded.


The Towns 
Tacuba
 and 
Cuyoacan,
 though they had Governors of their own, yet were subject to the 
Tapunecans,
 whose General advising those of 
Azcapuzalco
 to try an∣other Encounter, they took up Arms again; but before it came to a Battel, the 
Cuyoacans
 play'd a subtile trick with the 
Mexicans,
 for inviting them to an Idolatrous Feast, after they had Eat, Drunk, and Danc'd, they forc'd them to put on Wo∣mens Apparel, to their no small disgrace and ignomy; which remain'd not unre∣veng'd, for the 
Mexicans
 made a Poysonous Fume in the Gates of 
Cuyoacan,
 which made Women with Child to Miscarry, and many to fall dangerously sick; yet last∣ly, both Parties march'd into the Fields, where whilst 
Izcoalt
 was elsewhere in∣gag'd, 
Tlacaellel
 marching about, came upon the backs of the 
Cuyoacans
 with such eagerness, that they fled to a strong Temple, which soon after was set on fire by 
Tlacaellel,
 who pursu'd the Enemy ten Leagues.








portrait of Montezuma II


MUTECZUMA
 Rex ultimus Mexicanorum






This Conquest stir'd up the 
Suchimilcos,
 the first Family of the 
Navatlaca
's, to stop the proceedings of the 
Mexicans,
 that they might not, as they had already done to others, fall upon them; to which purpose they thought to surprize the Conquer∣ing Army; but 
Tlacaellel
 who led the Van, march'd in good Order to meet the 
Su∣chimilcos,
 fell resolutely upon their whole Army, and after a short conflict, put them to flight, and took the City 
Suchimilco
 for 
Izcoalt,
 who being Crown'd King there, Commanded the Conquer'd to make a direct Road betwixt 
Suchimilco
 and 
Mexico,
 of four Leagues long, both, that a Trade might the easier be drove between these two Cities, and to keep them the better in awe: Notwithstanding these exam∣ples, 
Cuytlavacan,
 a City built at the Lake 
Laguna,
 trusting to the abundance of Boats, which the Citizens knew how to use with great dexterity, daily molested 
Mexi∣co
 with them by Water, whereupon 
Izcoalt
 resolv'd to send his Victorious Army thi∣ther, but 
Tlacaellel
 opposing the same, promis'd to subdue the Rebelling City w
 a considerable number of Boys, which had skill in the managing of a 
Canoo,
 which being permitted him, he accordingly made himself Master of 
Cuytlavacan,
 from whence the Boys brought a great Booty, and divers Prisoners, whom they sent as an Offering to 
Vitzlipultzli.


These unheard of Victories being spread far and near, mov'd 
Tezcuco
 after seve∣ral Skirmishes and Conflicts with 
Tlacaellel,
 to submit to the 
Mexican
 King, who chose the Governor thereof for his Prime Councellor. 
Izcoalt
 Deceasing, after having Reign'd twelve years, his Son 
Muteczuma
 was chosen his Successor; the Ele∣ction and Coronation being perform'd after the following manner.


The new King mantled in Tygers Skins, was led into the chief Temple before a Hearth, on which burnt Fire both Night and Day; not far from which stood the Throne, where sitting down, he Offer'd Blood
 which was taken from his Cheeks; Ears, and Legs; after which, an Orator: Congratulated him, in the name of the Nobility; which done, they ended the Solemnity in a great Dinner, Fire-Works, and Dancing: At the same time it was establish'd, that all Future Coronations should be kept with an Offering of Provision, fetch'd by the King out of the Ene∣mies Countrey: wherefore 
Muteczuma
 going to the Countrey 
Chalco,
 took several of the Natives, whose reaking Hearts he Offer'd to 
Viztlipuztli:
 Which done, the Coronation follow'd, to which an innumerable company of People came flocking from all the neighboring Provinces: Those which were Tributaries, brought Presents with them, before which the Heralds carry'd the Coats of Arms belong∣ing to the Nobility of 
Mexico,
 in a good order.


Soon after the King's Coronation, he march'd and fell upon 
Chalco,
 the Inhabi∣tants of which defended, themselves very Valiantly, took 
Muteczuma
's Brother, among several other Prisoners▪ to whom the Conquerors proffer'd the Govern∣ment; which at first he refus'd, but at last accepted of on this condition, that a high Mast should be erected with a Scaffold on the top, which made every one suppose, that 
Muteczuma
's Brother did in that manner aim at a high Election, but he at the appointed time, getting on the top of the Mast, call'd with a loud voice, and spake to the taken 
Mexicans
 which were there present to this effect: 
Chalco seeks to set me on the Throne, the Heavens will not permit it; learn by me rather to die, than to live and be guilty of Treason to your Countrey:
 which he had no sooner said, but with some Flowers which he held in his Hand, threw himself down from the Scaffold, which so inrag'd the 
Chalcoans,
 that they immediately slew all the other 
Mexicans
 that were there present; which not long after was reveng'd by 
Muteczuma,
 who not onely subdu'd 
Chalco,
 but several other Provinces, leaving onely 
Tlascala
 un∣attempted, that the 
Mexicans
 might have a neighboring Enemy to fetch Prisoners





 from for their Offerings, and also by Skirmishing with them, train up their Youth in Martial Discipline.


Thus his Predecessors and he, having Conquer'd divers Provinces, insomuch that he was now become absolute Emperor over a vast Tract of Land, he resolv'd to settle the same in good order; to which purpose he erected Courts of Judica∣ture, with good Laws; built a stately Palace and Temple; ordain'd several Cu∣stoms to be observ'd in Religion; which done, and having Reign'd twenty eight years, he Deceasing, left 
Ticocic
 for his Successor.


The foremention'd Temple was call'd 
Cu,
 being built of Stone, in form like a Serpent, of an exceeding bigness, in the middle thereof there was a spacious open place, and round about it Habitations, two Stories high, the lowermost for the Inferior Priests, and the uppermost for the High Priests; in this place also above ten thousand People Danc'd in a Circle, on all high Feasts; four great Gates fac'd the like number of broad Streets, each two Leagues long: On the outmost Gate stood large Images, the Front of black Stones, Painted between each Lay with red and yellow Colours, no less Beautiful than Artificial: On each corner of the Tem∣ple were plac'd two Marble Statues of 
Indians,
 sitting with their Arms stretch'd out, and holding a Candle, and on their Heads Plumes of Feathers: Thirty high steps led up to a round place, set about with Deaths-Heads, which was a Stage ap∣pointed for the slaughter of those, whose Hearts were to be Offer'd to the Diabolical gods, and whose Heads, their Bodies being eaten, were brought back to the Priests, who hung them under the Stage, where every Head hanging till it dropp'd off, the vacant place was immediately supply'd with a fresh Head. At the end of the Stage stood two Chappels, cover'd like a 
Cardinal
's-Cap, in one of which sate the Image of 
Tiztlputzli,
 and in the other 
Tlaloc,
 to which led a hundred and twenty Stone steps.


But besides this stately Temple 
Cu, Mexico
 boasted nine more, standing not far asunder in a large Plain, all adorn'd with curious Imagery, and set out with large Pillars, each being Dedicated to a peculiar Idol, and built with magnificent Apart∣ments,

for the Priests to lodge in; the chiefest of them Dedicated to an Idol call'd 
Tezeatlipuca,
 or 
Lord of the Humble.
 This Temple was ascended to by eighty steps, and had before it a spacious Court; within a low and broad Gate appear'd a high Vail, which open'd into a spacious square Hall, hung with Tapestry, at the end whereof stood large Images, and beyond which were several Rooms, in which Assemblies met, Scholars were taught, Judges sate, and Priests Re∣sided.


But to return again to 
Muteczuma,
 his Funeral was no sooner finish'd, but the four Prime Councellors were attended by the Commissioners of 
Tezcuco
 and 
Tacu∣ba,
 in order to the Election of a new King: 
Tlacaellel
 being the chief amongst the Dukes, was by a general Vote Saluted King, as being most worthy thereof, for his special Services shown in behalf of the Empire of 
Mexico:
 But he humbly re∣fusing the same, was desir'd to Nominate another, whereupon he making choice of 
Ticocic, Muteczuma
's eldest Son; the Council immediately bor'd a hole through his Nose, and hung an Emrauld in the same. But before he receiv'd the Crown, he was forc'd, according to the Custom, to fetch in some of his Enemies for an Of∣fering, which though he perform'd, yet he lost more 
Mexicans
 than he took Priso∣ners, not without sufficient testimony of Cowardise; which being ill resented by the People, he was Poyson'd in the fourth year of his Reign, and succeeded by his Brother 
Axayaca,
 by the appointment of 
Tlacaellel;
 who having attain'd to a great Age, and left the Charge of his Children to the new King, departed this Life, to the great sorrow and grief of the whole Empire; by the States whereof he was Bu∣ry'd with great Solemnity.


In the mean time, 
Axayaca
 went with a considerable Army to the remote Pro∣vince 
Teguantepek,
 to fetch Prisoners to be Offer'd at his Coronation; and march∣ing before alone, Challeng'd his Antagonist, the King, to a single Combat, which he refus'd, and chose rather to fall upon 
Axayaca
 with all his Forces; whereupon, the 
Mexicans
 cunningly feign'd flight, ambuscaded themselves till the Enemies pur∣suing them, gave them their desir'd advantage, for rushing out of their Ambuscade, they set upon the 
Teguantepecks,
 so disorder'd, that they easily put them to flight, and had the pursuit of them as far as 
Guatulco,
 a noted Haven upon the South-Sea; from whence 
Axayaca
 returning Victor, receiv'd a Crown for a Reward; yet notwithstanding these Proofs of his Valor, the Lord of 
Tlatellulco
 Challeng'd him; whereupon he sent Agents thither, with proffers, that since the Citizens of 
Tla∣tellulco
 were of one Blood with the 
Mexicans,
 whom they deserted upon the divi∣ding of the Wards and Towns, just before the Election of the first King 
Acamapixtli,
 they should, if they pleas'd, be receiv'd anew into fellowship and alliance with the 
Mexicans,
 acknowledging one and the same King for their Supreme Head and Go∣vernor: But the Ambassadors being scorn'd and laugh'd at for their proffers, re∣turning, related the same to 
Axayaca,
 who immediately marching thither to take revenge, sent part of his Army to fall on the Enemy by Water; whilst himself falling upon them by Land, put the Lord of 
Tlatellulco,
 with his whole Army, to flight, which was so closely pursu'd, that they forc'd their way into the City with them, put the Governor to Death, and laid the Town in Ashes; those which went by Water, having had no less success.


Axayaca,
 after eleven years Reign, Deceasing, bequeath'd his Crown to 
Autzol,
 who sought to promote his Election by ingaging with the mighty Province 
Qua∣xutatlan,
 whose Inhabitants, though but a little before, they had been so bold as to demand Tribute of the 
Mexicans,
 yet terrifi'd at the approach of 
Autzol
's Army, fled over an Arm of the Sea, where they had been secure, had not 
Autzol
 invented a

floating Isle of Planks, by which he got over his whole Army; upon which the amaz'd 
Quaxututlans
 immediately submitted themselves to the 
Mexicans,
 who pur∣suing their Victory, extended their Dominions to 
Guatimala,
 over a Tract of three hundred Leagues.


The new King having now subdu'd all his Enemies, and made himself glorious by his Victories, was also ambitious to be as much extoll'd for his Generosity and Magnificence; to which purpose he distributed all the Wealth which was brought unto him from the neighboring Countreys, amongst the Poor and the No∣bility; to the first he gave Clothes and Provisions; to the last, Plumes of Feathers and Arms. Moreover he caus'd all mean Houses to be pull'd down and new ones to be built in their places. Lastly, he consulted how to bring fresh Water into 
Mexico,
 which was plac'd in a brackish Soil: Upon this Design he was so bent, that when one of his Sages disswaded him from it, alledging, 
That the Water would drown the City,
 he, in stead of following his Advice, banish'd him his Presence, and upon his flying to 
Cuyaocun,
 caus'd him to be fetch'd from thence and Executed. Then prosecuting his Design, he cut the Ditch before 
Cuyaocun,
 by which means great store of fresh Water came flowing into the Lake 
Laguna,
 which the Priests welcom'd with strange Ceremonies; for some perfum'd the Water, others Offer'd Quails Blood, whilst others play'd on several Musical Instruments, with many other Ceremonies, which are at large describ'd in the ancient 
Mexican
 Chronicles, kept in the 
Vatican
 Library at 
Rome.
 But the Prophecy of the Executed Sorcerer was in a manner fulfill'd; for the Water overwhelm'd a great part of 
Mexico,
 and divided the City into Isles: But to prevent farther Mischief, 
Autzoll
 caus'd Banks to be rais'd, and Channels digg'd; and not long after, in the eleventh Year of his Reign, he deceas'd: After which the 
Mexican
 Kingdom tended towards its period, as the ensuing Story will declare.


Amongst the 
Mexican
 Nobility, 
Mutexuma,
 a melancholy Man, yet very prudent, who resided in a stately Apartment near the great Temple 
Cu,
 that there he might the better converse with 
Viztlipuztli,
 was elected King; which he no sooner heard, but fled from hence: but being found out, he was against his will led to the Grand Assembly, and from thence to the holy Hearth, where for an Offering he drew Blood out of his Cheeks, Ears, and Legs; and, according to an ancient Custom, the 
Coun∣cil of State
 boring a Hole in his Nose, hung an Emerauld in the same; after which the Lord of 
Tescuco
 saluted him with a Speech; which (since it is mention'd by 
Joseph d' Acosta,
 together with several other Speeches of Congratulation to their Kings, which were taught to Schollars, to make them expert in their Language) it will not be amiss to be annexed here, that of many this one may serve for a pat∣tern of the 
Mexicans
 Eloquence, which is as followeth:


 THe great happiness, most noble 
Muteczuma,
 which is befall'n this Realm by your Election, may easily be conjectur'd from the general joy, none be∣sides your self being able to undergo an Office, in the management whereof so much Prudence is requir'd: It is a most certain testimony that God loves 
Mexico,
 that he hath given its Inhabitants understanding to make such a Choice. Who can doubt, but that you who have expatiated through the Heavens, and con∣vers'd with 
Viztlipuztli,
 may easily Govern us Mortals on Earth? Who can de∣spair, but that the Vertue inclos'd within your Breast, will extend to the Widows and Orphans? Therefore rejoyce, O 
Mexico;
 the Heavens have granted us a Prince without Vice; Merciful, and not a Violator of the Laws; Affable, not despising common Conversation. And you, O King, let not this great Pre∣ferment

occasion any alteration in your so long known Vertues: The Crown breeds care for the publick good; the troubles thereof must extend over the whole Realm, and every one in the Realm.


Muteczuma
 having heard out the Speech, would willingly have answer'd the same, but could not utter a word for Tears, which gush'd from his Eyes. Before he went out to fetch Prisoners for Offerings at his Coronation, he first setled his Houshold Affairs. And whereas till this time the Kings had been serv'd in their Palaces by ordinary Citizens, he took Knights, and the chiefest of the Nobility, intending thereby to make a distinction between the Nobility and the common People, and add more Majesty to the Royal Dignity. This done, 
Muteczuma
 marching against a certain rebellious Province, fetch'd a considerable number of People to be Offer'd to 
Viztupuztli.
 At his Return the Coronation. Day was ap∣pointed, against which thousands of People came to 
Mexico;
 even their very Ene∣mies of 
Tlascala, Mechoacan,
 and 
Tepeaca,
 which were never conquer'd by the 
Mexi∣cans,
 flock'd thither in great numbers. All those Countreys which were under Tribute bringing unvaluable Treasures, came in vast Multitudes, which so throng'd the City, that the very tops of the Houses were fill'd with Spectators, no King in 
Mexico
 ever going to the Throne in such splendor;
 nor was ever any King so much fear'd by his Subjects, none of the common People daring to look in his Face; neither did he ever set Foot on the Ground, but was always carried in a Chair on the Shoulders of his prime Nobility; he never wore a Suit of Clothes but once, nor ever us'd a Cup or Dish after it was once foul'd; he strictly main∣tain'd the Laws which he had made, and often went himself in a Disguise, to make a strict enquiry after all Affairs whatsoever; by which means the 
Mexican
 Power was now arriv'd to the highest top: but, as other Realms, grown top-heavy with good Fortune, turn at last topsie-turvy, just such a Misfortune befell 
Mexico;
 but not without several fore-running signs of its destruction:
 for in the City 
Cholola
 their God 
Quezalcoalt
 inform'd them, that a strange People were coming to take possession of the 
Mexican
 Dominions; and their Soothsayers prognosticated the same, for which 
Muteczuma
 committed them all to Prison, and doubtless had put them all to death, had not they escap'd with the help of the Master of their diabolical Art; and though they escap'd themselves, yet their Wives and Children were all put to death upon the King's Command: Soon after which appear'd a mighty Comet, or blazing Starfor a whole year together; the great Temple 
Cu
 was set on Fire, and burnt to the Ground none knew how; the Water which was thrown on the same to quench it, burnt like Brimstone; in the Skie appear'd three fiery Heads at noon-day, and out of a long Tail shot Sparks on the Earth; the 
Laguna,
 between 
Mexico
 and 
Texcuco,
 began to swell into a Tide, which turn'd some Houses topsie∣turvy; a shrill Voice was heard in the Night crying on the Water, 
Children, your ruine is at hand; whither shall I carry you that you may not be lost?


No less strange is what 
d' Acosta
 relates of a Bird presented to 
Muteczuma,
 not unlike a Crane, which the Fishermen had taken on the 
Laguna;
 on the shining Forehead of which there appear'd the resemblance of two Armies Engag'd, and one defeated by the other, and that whilst the Sages, call'd to interpret the meaning hereof, sat in Consultation, the Bird vanish'd.


Moreover, there goes a Tradition, That a Countrey-man being at his Labor, was taken up by an Eagle, and carried through the Air into a gloomy Cave, where a Man lay fast asleep snoaring, when on a sudden he heard a Voice afar off, saying, 
Do you know that Man?
 whereupon the Countrey-man taking special notice of the

dormant Man, knew him, by the Royal Apparel, to be 
Mutexuma;
 after which the Voice was heard again, saying, 
How soundly doth he sleep: the time is coming which provides Punishments for many Crimes; burn the Snoarer with the Torch which he holds in his Hands, he will feel no pain:
 Not long after he being inform'd hereof, and look∣ing on his Thigh, found the same burnt, to his no small amazement.


Having now possess'd the Throne fourteen years, he receiv'd news of a Fleet, and therewith a Draught of the Men and Vessels painted on Cloth. This startling him, he immediately advis'd with his Council, who judg'd it convenient to secure the Coast along the Southern Ocean with strong Watches; yet neverthe∣less 
Ferdinand Cortesius
 Landed with five hundred Foot and sixty Horse, took the City 
Potanchanum,
 march'd through the Countrey 
Sicuchimalar
 to 
Tascalleca,
 where they had a sharp Conflict, in which the 
Spaniards
 were in great danger; and had not they had six Field-Pieces with them, which did as much affright as hurt the 
Indians,
 they had without doubt been cut off there. In 
Chiurutecal
 they were in as much danger; for certainly the 
Spanish
 Army had been set upon in the Night, had not a Woman inform'd them of it.


Mean while 
Muteczuma
 consulted with his Sorcerers to destroy 
Cortesius
 by Charms, who then was marching through 
Chalco,
 whereupon a considerable number of Sorce∣rers went thither to the top of a high Mountain, where, as they were beginning their Incantations and Charms, their Idol 
Tezcalipuca
 appear'd to them: and in an angry manner told them, That 
Monteczuma
 should lose his Crown and Life; and to con∣firm his words, he shew'd them a dreadful spectacle; for looking about, they saw the City in a light flame. This being told to 
Muteczuma,
 he resolv'd to make him∣self as secure as he could, and went to meet 
Cortesius
 with costly Presents, delivering him the Crown in the presence of all his Council; to which purpose he took one 
Marina,
 experienc'd in the 
Castilian
 Tongue, with him for his Interpreter; all things then seeming to end in Friendship. But they continu'd not long in that state; for 
Cortesius,
 whose whole Design was to bring 
Mexico
 under the 
Spaniards
 Sub∣jection, not long after accus'd 
Muteczuma,
 that 
Coalcopoca
 had on his Commands storm'd the new 
Spanish
 City 
Vera Crux,
 which he could no way excuse; and not∣withstanding 
Muteczuma
 deliver'd him 
Coalcopoca,
 with fifteen of his Nobles Priso∣ners, who were all burnt with green Wood; yet he was committed Prisoner, to the great discontent of the 
Mexicans,
 who said, 
That they were now come to a fine pass, to be thus fool'd by a few Strangers, who had imprison'd their King, trampled upon their ancient Images, endeavor'd to murther them all, and in de∣spite of them brought their mortal Enemies, the 
Tascaltecans
 and 
Guazuzingans,
 in∣to 
Mexico.


About this time there were certain Ships come to 
Vera Crux,
 which was a new Port-Town of this Countrey, that the 
Spaniards
 had built since their coming thi∣ther, and had Landed near upon a thousand Men; which was an Accident that had like to have spoil'd the Design of 
Cortesius
 and all his Company at 
Mexico,
 these Men being sent by 
James Velasquez,
 Governor of 
Cuba,
 expressly against 
Cortesius
 and his Men, upon pretence that they had acted not conformably to the Commission which they had receiv'd from him, and gave him no account of their proceedings; which in a great measure was true: for it must be confess'd, that 
Cortesius
 and his Men finding themselves to have fall'n upon an Adventure that was certainly rich and good, and having got such footing and interest in the Countrey already, by their Success and Victories, and chiefly by their Confederacy with so many of the Natives and People of the Countrey, revolted to them, did almost at first, by a ge∣neral consent, renounce their Commission, and dependency upon 
Velasquez,
 and

profess'd to act immediately from and for the King of 
Spain.
 What pretences they had for such a Resolution, seemingly at least irregular, is not so well known. What∣ever they were, they proceed in it, and the whole Company (excepting onely some few, who yet went along with the rest) chuse 
Cortesius
 anew for their Commander in chief, and appoint likewise by common consent, all other Officers of Justice, both Civil and Military, among themselves: and to give the better colour at Court to their Proceedings, they send 
Portocorrero
 and 
Monteio,
 two of their Principals, in∣to 
Spain,
 with a rich and noble Present to the Emperor, both to make report of the State of the Countrey, and to procure immediate Commission from his Majesty, to proceed; after which they advance towards 
Mexico,
 as hath been said. 
Velasquez,
 being at 
Cuba,
 and understanding their Proceedings, labor'd to intercept both their Messengers and Present, but could not; and therefore sent 
Pamphilius Narvaez
 with eleven Ships, and about nine hundred or a thousand Men to apprehend 
Cortesius,
 and oppose his Proceedings. This hapned about the time that the Differences were but newly calm'd betwixt the 
Spaniards
 and the People of 
Mexico;
 and though it ob∣lig'd 
Cortesius
 to leave the City in a wavering and unsetled condition, yet he took such order, that 
Muteczuma
 still remain'd under the Guard of the 
Spaniards
 as before, assisted with thousands of their Friends of 
Tlascalla,
 and he himself taking the rest, and some few 
Spaniards
 along with him, with undaunted courage and resolution marches against 
Narvaez:
 and such was his good fortune, that not onely 
Narvaez
 be∣came his Prisoner without much blood-shed, but likewise all his Men joyn'd with him in his Design, through the favour of the Chancery or supream Court of 
St. Do∣mingo,
 and by the procurement of the Licentiat 
Vasquez de Ayllon,
 a Judge of it, who was sent with 
Narvaez
 to accommodate the Differences. With this Recruit 
Corte∣sius
 marches back again to 
Mexico;
 but at his coming finds things in a very bad con∣dition; for the Citizens, gather'd together under the Command of one 
Quicuxte∣moc,
 had recourse to Arms, and for three days and three Nights vex'd the 
Spaniards
 with continual Stormings, notwithstanding what-ever Commands they had to the contrary from their imprison'd King, who at last, looking out of a Window, endeavoring to appease them, was hurt with a Stone, of which he soon after died, as they say, who would not have the 
Spaniards
 thought to have murder'd him, as the 
Mexicans
 say they did, with divers other Noble-men, and some of his Children, the very Night they fled. However it were, not long after his Death, out of extream necessity, and chiefly for want of Victuals, the 
Spaniards
 were forc'd to leave the Ci∣ty in the night-time, and with the loss of four hundred and fifty of their Men, who were either slain or taken Prisoners at the passing of a Draw-bridge, the rest ma∣king a heavy Retreat to their Friends at 
Tlascalla.
 There is standing at this day in 
Mexico,
 upon the place where so many of them were kill'd, a certain Hermitage, which they call 
Los Martyres,
 or 
The Hermitage of the Martyrs,
 though but improperly, if upon that occasion, as one of their own Writers confesses, though he alledges no other reason.


This Retreat of the 
Spaniards
 out of 
Mexico
 hapned to be upon the tenth of 
July
 after mid-night, in the Year 1520. which the 
Spaniards
 at 
Mexico
 call 
The Doleful Night.
 Nevertheless the undaunted 
Cortesius
 being got, though with much diffi∣culty and trouble, by reason of the pursuit of the 
Mexicans
 for a good part of the Way, to his sure Friends of 
Tlascalla,
 neither lost his Courage, nor gave over his Re∣solution of yet gaining 
Mexico,
 especially the way being now laid open, and suf∣ficient occasion given by the Death of 
Muteczuma,
 and the provocations of the 
Mexicans
 themselves, to make himself absolute and sole Lord of the Place: where∣fore having sent for, and procur'd a competent Supply of fresh Soldiers from

Santo Domingo,
 or 
Hispaniola, Almeria, Cuba,
 and other places, being in all nine hun∣dred Foot, eight hundred Horse, and seventeen Pieces of Ordnance; he joyns him∣self with the Auxiliary Forces of 
Tlascalla,
 which were no less than a hundred thou∣sand Men, Arm'd with Bowes and Arrows: and with this Army marches again towards 
Mexico,
 and Besieges it both by Land and Water, 
viz.
 with the help of thirteen 
Brigantines
 or 
Galliots,
 which he had built upon the Lake, and six thousand 
Canoos,
 or little Boats, which his Friends and Confederates had procur'd him. By which means, and by his Army on Land, in a short time he cut off all Provision from the City, and after a Siege of full three Months or more, and a most stout and obstinate resistance made by the People within, in which they are said to have lost above a hundred thousand Men, beside those which perish'd by Famine, Sickness, or otherwise,
 he took it by Storm upon 
Tuesday
 the thirteenth of 
August
 1521. Sackt it first, and then burnt it to the Ground; yet afterwards he caus'd it to be Re-built again, far more Beautiful than at first it was; as in due place we shall further see. They speak not of above fifty 
Spaniards
 slain during the whole Siege, six Horses, and not many 
Tlascaltecans.


In this manner, and with so little Charges to the Conqueror, there fell to the Crown of 
Spain
 the richest and goodliest Kingdom (one of them) of the whole World, 
viz.
 the Kingdom of 
Mexico,
 which the Conquerors presently nam'd 
New Spain;
 and in reference to which name, the 
Catholick King
 hath ever since stil'd him∣self in the plural number 
Hispaniarum Rex,
 or 
King of both Spains;
 and all by the Va∣lor, Prudence,
 admirable Resolution, and happy Conduct of 
Cortez;
 who was at first but a private Adventurer in the 
American
 Plantations and Discoveries, though other∣wise a Gentleman of a good Family in 
Spain,
 born at 
Medellin
 in the Country of 
Estramedura.
 The Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, who was also then King of 
Spain,
 for his great Services, endow'd him deservedly with many great and rich Territories in the Provinces of 
Tlascalla, Mechoacan,
 and other parts thereabouts, made him Marquess of the Valley, 
viz.
 of 
Guaxata,
 (which is his chief Title) a rich and flou∣rishing Province of that Countrey, Captain General, or Commander in Chief, of all the Military Forces of 
New-Spain,
 and General Discoverer of all the Maritime parts and Coasts of 
America
 towards the South-Sea, assigning him in propriety the twelfth part of whatsoever should be discover'd, to him and his Heirs for ever; but deny'd him the Government of 
Mexico
 out of reason of State, though 'tis said, he much desir'd it.


Among the famous Havens which lie along the South Sea and Northern Ocean, the chiefest is 
Acapulco
 before-mention'd,
 whither all Merchandize is sent to be transported to 
China,
 which is above two thousand Leagues distant from thence; in which Voyage they generally spend fourteen Months; four Sail, each of eight hun∣dred Tun, appointed for this Trade; generally two of them set Sail to 
China
 in 
March,
 and returning in Summer, have no sooner drop'd their Anchors, but the other two set out from 
Acapulco,
 from whence the way by Land to 
Mexico,
 is seventy two Leagues over steep Mountains, dangerous Rocks, and several Rivers; the chiefest whereof are, first, 
Del Papagayo,
 or 
De las Balsas,
 which runs exceeding strong, which the 
Indians
 cross on bundles of Canes ty'd upon 
Callabashes:
 Next 
San Francisco,
 which though the biggest, yet hath many shallow places to wade over. The 
Mu∣stichoes
 are no small Plagues to those that travel this way, for their Poysonous Stings are the occasions of many Ulcerated Wounds, and oft-times Death it self.


In this way lies also the Countrey 
del Valle,
 from which 
Ferdinand Cortesius
 re∣ceiv'd the Title of Earl.








view of Acapulco


PORTUS ACAPULCO








The Mouth of the Haven 
Acapulco
 gapes a full League North and South, and within exceeding large, hath a nook call'd 
Boca Grande,
 where the Ships Ride safe at an Anchor: More Easterly appears a Land Inlet, (by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Puerto del Marques
) secur'd against all Winds; near which is the City of 
San Diego,
 to which belongs a Fort, with six Bulwarks, lying on a Promontory; the main of the City is one large Street, consisting of fair and stately Houses, and leading di∣rectly to the Haven; the Church which is of an oblong square, hath a high Steeple in the middle.


A 
Dutch
 Admiral, one 
Joris Spilbergen,
 after he had done the 
Spaniards
 all the mis∣chief he could along the South Sea, ran with five Sail under the Fort 
Acapulco,
 which fir'd ten Guns at him; whereupon, the 
Dutch
 Admiral Manning a Boat, with a white Flag, they agreed upon a Cessation, and the 
Spaniards
 went aboard of the Admiral, to whom 
Pedro Alvares,
 and 
Francisco Menendus,
 having been a considerable time in 
Holland,
 and speaking the Language of that Countrey very perfect, promis'd that all his Demands should be satisfi'd; yet 
Spilbergen
 was sus∣picious that the 
Spaniards
 had a design upon him, wherefore he came and lay close under the Castle with his five Sail, and made ready his Guns: But this suspicion was soon clear'd, when 
Alvares
 and 
Menendus
 proffer'd to stay as Hostages, till the Governor of the Town sent the Admiral thirty Oxen, fifty Sheep, some hundreds of Poultry, Coals, Oranges, Cittrons, and the like fresh Provisions; as also Wood and Water; during which time, the Prisoners being set at liberty, several Persons of Quality came to visit the Admiral, amongst whom was Captain 
Castilio,
 one that had serv'd twenty years in the 
Low-Countrey
 Wars; and 
Melchior Hernando,
 Ne∣phew to the Vice-Roy of 
New-Spain,
 who desirous to see the Ships that durst set twice upon 
Rodrigo de Mendose,
 Admiral of the King of 
Spain
's mighty Fleet, stood amaz'd that such little Frigats durst Ingage with so many great 
Spanish
 Ships; and carry'd the Admiral's Son to the Governor of the City, call'd 
Georgius Perro,
 who ci∣villy entertain'd him: Eight days 
Spilbergen
 spent here at 
Acapulco,
 admiring the courteous Entertainment of the 
Spaniards,
 and the more, because that having News but eight Moneths before of the 
Dutch
 Fleet setting out, they had in that short time made all things ready for resistance, the Fort having seventeen Brass Guns, and four hundred Soldiers, besides many Noblemen and Reformades, whereas at other times there us'd not to be above forty Men, and four Guns in the same.




SECT. II. Mechoacan.


THe next Province of 
New Spain
 is the Bishoprick of 
Mechoacan,
 which hath on the North-East, 
Panuco;
 on the East, 
Mexicana,
 properly so call'd; on the South part, 
Tlascalla;
 on the West, the Main Ocean, or 
Mare del Zur;
 and last of all, more directly Northward, 
Xalisco,
 which is a Province of 
New Gal∣licia:
 The Name signifieth in the 
American
 Language, as much as 
A Fish Countrey;
 and so it is, having many fair Lakes and Rivers in it, abundantly well stor'd with Fish. The Countrey so exceedingly pleasant and healthful, that 'tis usual for sick Persons of other Provinces to come hither to recover their health, only by the be∣nefit of a good Air. The Soil so abundantly fertile of all sorts of Grain, that of four measures of Seed, it hath been often observ'd, they have reap'd the next Har∣vest, more than so many hundred measures of the same Grain. Very well Wooded; and by reason of its many Rivers and fresh Springs, equally rich in good Pasture:

and besides great plenty of Medicinal Herbs and Plants, it affordeth good store of Amber nigh the Sea Coasts, Mulberry-trees, and consequently Silks; much Ho∣ney, Wax, and divers other Commodities, both for necessity and pleasure. The People of the Countrey are generally tall, of a strong active Body, and a good Wit, especially in comparison of other Natives; not unskilful in divers curious Manufactures, the most excellent Feather-Pictures, afore-mention'd, being said to be found in this Province. They seem more generally inclin'd to the Humors and Customs of the 
Spaniards,
 than any other 
Americans;
 and receiv'd the Preaching of 
Christian Religion,
 when time was, with much willingness; so that the Countrey is now entirely 
Christian,
 and divided into several Parishes.


The Languages which are spoken in 
Mechoacan
 are several, as the 
Otomian, Chihci∣mian,
 and the 
Mexicans,
 which is common through all 
New Spain,
 and the 
Tarascan,
 a neat and brief Language, which properly belongs to this Countrey.


The Lions and Wilde Dogs of this Countrey devour great numbers of Cattel yearly,
 yet the greatest mischiefs happen from the Tygers, which often fetch Peo∣ple out of their Houses, notwithstanding the Doors are lock'd, for they break in thorow the Walls and Roofs, with much eagerness and strength: Of the great∣ness whereof, 
Jacob Bontius
 tells us this story, That the Governor 
Peter Carpentier
 set a Trap without the Walls of 
Batavia,
 of great Timber, Pleited with Iron, Baiting it with a Goat; which taking effect, the Tyger that was caught therein, impatient of such close Imprisonment, rent the Timber, and getting out, left the Goat un∣touch'd.


Hugo Linschot
 relates, That the Tygers in the 
West-Indies
 hurt no 
Spaniards,
 exer∣cising their cruelty onely on 
Indians;
 and that finding a 
Black
 and a 
White
 Man sleep∣ing together, they devour the 
Black
 and not the 
White:
 How far these assertions deserve to be credited, may appear by an evident contradiction of the first, for it is well known, many 
Spaniards
 in the 
West-Indies
 have been eaten by the Tygers.


General 
Fedreman
 marching in this Countrey at the Head of his Army, was as∣saulted by a Tyger, which in despight of them all killing a 
Spaniard,
 and three 
In∣dians,
 escap'd from them; no Trees serve for a refuge against their fury, for they climb up to the top thereof, and fetch down their Prey; their Claws are so exceeding Venomous, that whoever is scratch'd with the same, is never to be cur'd; there is no Beast but they will venture upon, wherefore they lie in the Bushes, from whence they rush out upon them; but this disadvantage they have, that most other Beasts are too nimble. Footed for them, for they are a very heavy Creature, whatever hath been deliver'd by the Ancients concerning the Tygers swiftness.


As to the difference which they make in Humane Flesh, it is thus far true: That they find more sweetness in Womens Breasts than other parts, and chose a 
Black
 Man before a 
White:
 Concerning the first, 
France
 gives a sufficient testimony, when two Tygers, in the time of King 
Lewis
 the Twelfth, breaking loose, left a great number of Women lying Breastless in the Road. The second is con∣firm'd by 
John Johnston
's Relation of a strange accident that happen'd in 
Bengale, viz.
 A 
Moor
 dreaming that a Tyger fetch'd him out of the Ship, hid himself the next Night between Decks, of which the Master asking the reason, was in∣form'd concerning his Dream, which prov'd prophetick, for about Mid-night a Tyger leapt into the Ship, and devouring the 
Moor,
 went away without touch∣ing any one of the 
Hollanders,
 of which there were thirty: But a Sea-man walking on the shore escap'd more wonderfully, for a Tyger setting upon him behind, and a Crocrodile before, he leaping from betwixt them, discover'd to the Tyger the Crocodile, to whom the Tyger directly running, and ingaging with the Crocodile,

spar'd the Sea-mans life: Notwithstanding the cruelty and mischief of these Ty∣gers, the 
Indians
 are led by their sottish Superstition to worship them; because, as they say, the Devil often appears to them in that shape.


Besides the Tygers,
 the Inhabitants of 
Mechaocan
 are exceedingly molested with Squerrils, which not only carry much Fruit into their Holes, but also under-mine the Houses, so that they often sink or fall on one side, the mischief being the worse, because they increase daily. Most of them bear four young at a time, which on the third day run about for Prey, and can scarce be taken, because of their exceeding swiftness, leaping a great distance from one Tree to another; their Tails serve them on divers occasions; for leaping they use it like a Wing, and at their crossing over a River, for a Sail; in tempestuous Weather, they stop their holes therewith, to keep out the Wind.


There are six several sorts of these Squerrils; the first call'd 
Tlilic,
 cover them∣selves with their Tails; the second 
Quapatchli,
 is as big again, and can never be made tame; the third 
Techallotl,
 with a bald Tail and great Eyes; the fourth 
Tal∣mototly,
 hath a thick Head, and a Tail full of black and white streaks; the fifth 
Qui∣mitchpatlan,
 hath a little Head and long Legs, and leaping from one Tree to an∣other, seems to flie; the last sort call'd 
Yztactechalotl,
 is whitish.


The Foxes do also great mischief here, their Urine smells so horribly,
 that forty days after, none are able to abide near the place where they have urin'd, and on whatsoever Stuff or Cloth a drop thereof chanceth to light, the stink can never be wash'd away.


Here breeds also a sort of Birds, call'd 
Auras,
 which are not unlike Moore-Hens; they flie exceeding high in the Air, feed on nought but stinking Carrion, which they scent at a great distance; they have a hairy Head and Neck, and ugly Face: Some of the Fowls of this Countrey stay here all the year long, others go away, and return at certain times.


The Natives, since the 
Spaniards
 coming thither, have gotten their Habits and Language, learn'd all sorts of Trades; their Tables, Chests, and Cupboards made of 
Brasile
-Wood, are no way inferior to the best that are made in 
Europe.
 Painting is also in great esteem amongst them: They make handsom Clothes, Shooes, and strange Copper Locks. They have a peculiar Art in Tilling their Ground: They teach the 
Spanish
 Dogs several tricks, but not feeding them well, they cause them to run from them, and turn wilde, whence they are call'd 
Cimarrones,
 because they do much hurt to the Cattel.


The Inhabitants, when a Feaver or Ague is upon them at the highest, leap into cold Water: against other Sicknesses they use Herbs, whose soveraign Power Expe∣rience hath long since taught them.


Since the 
Spaniards
 made 
Mechoacan
 a Bishoprick, they have built ninety four Schools, fifty Churches, several Hospitals and Cloysters, inhabited by 
Franciscan
 and 
Augustin
 Monks.


There are said to be in this Bishoprick a hundred and fifty Towns or Burroughs (besides many scatter'd Villages) most of which have Free-Schools erected in them, for the Training up of Youth in the 
Christian
 Religion, good Literature and Arts; and few of them without an Hospital for the Sick: of which Towns the principal are as followeth:


 1. 
Zinzoutza,
 the Seat of the ancient Kings of 
Mechoacan.
 2. 
Pascuar,
 a City forty seven Leagues distant from 
Mexico,
 once a Bishop's See. 3. 
Valladolid,
 the Me∣tropolis or chief City of the Province, since the Episcopal Chair was remov'd from 
Pascuar
 thither. It lieth upon a great Lake, equal amost for bigness to that of

Mexico,
 and is about seven Leagues distant from 
Pascuar,
 towards the East. 4. 
St. Mi∣chaels,
 a good Town, forty Leagues Westward of 
Mexico,
 and in the Way to the 
Zacatecas,
 but lying in a Road that is somewhat dangerous, being not a little in∣fested with Salvages on both sides of it. 5. 
St. Philips.
 6. 
La Conception de Salaya,
 seventeen Leagues distant from 
Valladolid,
 and a convenient Stage for Travellers, being indeed, with the two last mention'd, built chiefly for the defence and secu∣ring of the Countrey against the Salvages. 7. 
Guaxanata,
 a Town on the Bor∣ders of 
Panuco,
 where there are very rich Mynes of Silver. 8. 
Leon,
 another Town likewise of very rich Mynes, twenty four Leagues distant from 
Valladolid,
 and three∣score from 
Mexico.
 9. 
Zamorra.
 10. 
Villa de los Lagos,
 and others.


Towards the Sea there is 1. 
Acatlan,
 but two Miles distant from the Sea-Coast, and a small Town, yet by reason of a safe and very good Harbor which it hath for Shipping, a Place of no little Trading. 2. 
Natividad,
 another well known and convenient Haven upon 
Mare del Zur,
 pertaining to this Province, and from whence they usually set Sail for the 
Philippine
 Islands. 3. 
St. Jago de buena Speranza,
 so call'd by the 
Spaniards,
 perhaps from the abundance of good Pearls they found upon this Coast. 4. 
Colyma.
 5. 
Zacatula,
 and some others.


This Province, as we said, was at first a distinct Kingdom of it self, yet subordi∣nate and Tributary to that of 
Mexico;
 the King whereof nam'd 
Tamgaiva,
 or 
Bimbicha,
 (as 
Laet
 reporteth) at the first coming of the 
Spaniards
 thither, after the Conquest of 
Mexico,
 voluntarily submitted himself to them, and was Baptiz'd. Nevertheless af∣terwards, upon a pretence of I know not what Treason intended by him against them, and which the 
Spanish
 Writers themselves professedly think to have been feigned, by command of 
Nunnez de Gusman,
 President of the 
Chancery
 of 
Mexico,
 he was most inhumanely burnt alive, and his Kingdom seiz'd upon by the 
Spaniards.






SECT. III. Tlascalla.


THe Bishoprick of 
Tlascalla,
 formerly call'd 
Tlascalteca, Tlaxcala,
 and 
Tlasca∣lan,
 is a Province of 
New Spain,
 which extendeth it self entirely from one Sea to another, from the 
Atlantick
 to 
Mare del Zur,
 with which it is bounded on the East and West Parts, lying otherwise, and for the most part be∣twixt the Provinces of 
Mexicana,
 last spoken of, and that of 
Guaxata,
 which follow∣eth, containing in length from one Sea to the other, not much less than an hun∣dred Leagues, and in some places fourscore in breadth; but towards the South Sea growing much narrower. It is a Countrey exceedingly plentiful both in Corn and Cattel, full of rich Pasturage, and so plentifully stor'd with 
Maiz,
 Wheat, and other Grain, that it is accounted as it were the Granary of 
America;
 besides Deer, all manner of Venison, and great store of Fowl. There is likewise Copperess, Al∣lom, Silver-Mynes, 
Manna, Anime,
 and Liquid Amber, with a sweet smelling Gum which drops out of a Tree. The Rivers feed no Fish, because they fall with ex∣ceeding force from the Mountains; onely near 
Topoyanco,
 is a deep Lake of fresh Water, inhabited round about by 
Indians,
 enjoying the pleasure and profit of the many 
Cumbeba
-Trees, which yield 
Cochinele,
 producing yearly above two hundred thousand Dupkets worth of that Commodity. In this Lake swim black Hedge∣hogs, whose Flesh is good and wholsom to eat.


The People of this Countrey, when the 
Spaniards
 came first amongst them, liv'd in the form of a Common-wealth, or Free-State, refusing to be subject to the King of

Mexico,
 with whom they had almost continual War; and upon that account, as hath been said, assisted 
Cortesius
 in the Conquest of the Kingdom, without whose help 'tis most certain he had never been able to do any thing. They enjoy therefore ma∣ny special Priviledges and Immunities more than other 
Americans
 do. They pay no Tribute, but onely a handful of Wheat yearly for every Person, by way of ac∣knowledgment, otherwise living, under the Protection of the 
Spaniards,
 wholly in the Form of their ancient Government. In former times they were great Man∣eaters, and not onely eat the Flesh of their Enemies, but also of one anotther, inso∣much that Man's-flesh hung in publick to be sold.


The River 
Zahuatl,
 which rushes out of the Mountain 
Xicoleucalt,
 oftentimes overflows all the Countrey near it, and washes away divers Houses. 
Zahuatl
 signi∣fies 
Scabby Water,
 because all those, especially Children, that wash in the same, are sure to be Scabby. On its Banks the 
Spaniards
 have built many Houses, the fashion whereof is now also imitated by the 
Indians
 of this Province, who formerly built quite after another manner; for they made low Houses of Earth, Wood and Stone, with large and strange Chambers; some a Stones-cast one from another, others close together, had narrow crooked Streets that ran betwixt them.


In this Province are two sorts of Languages spoken, 
viz.
 the 
Mexican,
 and that of the 
Ottomons,
 who formerly deserting 
Mexico,
 chose the 
Tlascallans
 for their Protectors: They are a toilsom and painful People.


To the Northward of 
Tlascalla
 are Mountains, which all the year long, except three Moneths, are cover'd with Mist; and the Woods on the tops of them are a great shelter to Lyons, Tygers, Wolves, and wild Dogs, call'd 
Adives,
 and other wild Beasts, which do much hurt to the small Cattel. Here are also many Serpents and Adders.


The whole Province is said to contain two hundred good Towns and Bur∣roughs, and more than one thousand Villages, all of them exceedingly populous, and suppos'd to contain in the whole above a Million and half of Natives, besides 
Spaniards,
 who have some few Colonies in the Countrey for securing of it.


The chief Towns of the Province are 1. 
Tlascalla
 it self, which denominates the whole Countrey as the Metropolis, and where the Bishop's See was at first, till in the Year 1550. it was remov'd to 
Puebla de los Angelos.
 It is a fair Town, and com∣modiously seated in the midst of a large and fertile Champain of threescore Miles in compass. It consisteth of four large and beautiful Streets or Quarters, and in the midst of them where they all meet, hath a 
Piazza,
 or Market-place, equal to that of 
Mexico,
 and able to receive twenty or thirty thousand Persons conveniently, to Buy and Sell in it; and whose Shambles seldom shew less than fifteen thousand Sheep, four thousand Oxen, and two thousand Hogs.


2. 
Puebla de los Angelos,
 or 
The City of Angels,
 a Town built by 
Sebastian Ramirez,
 a Church-man, and he that was the first President, or chief Governor of 
Mexico,
 un∣der the Crown of 
Castile.
 It was built in the Year 1531. almost in the Road-way from 
Vera Crux
 to 
Mexico,
 and seated in a very delicate and fertile Countrey, and of a good Air. It is a Bishop's See, and valu'd at twenty thousand 
Ducats
 of yearly Rent, the City it self suppos'd to contain about fifteen hundred Families; where there is abundance of excellent Cloth made, and for fineness not yielding to the best of 
Spain.
 Its chief Edifices are, the Cathedral and four stately Cloysters, be∣longing to the 
Dominicans, Franciscans, Augustines,
 and 
Capuchins;
 as also a Free-School for five hundred 
Indian
 Children, endow'd by 
Ramirez
 with a yearly Revenue.


3. 
Zempoallan,
 seated upon a River of the same Name.


4. 
Napalaca,
 in the Valley 
Ocumba,
 ows its original to an 
Indian
 call'd 
Juan,
 who

at first had onely one House, and a Herd of Hogs there, till upon his invitation, all the neighboring People came from the tops of the Hills; insomuch, that in a short time, the place was Peopled by thousands of Families.


5. 
Guaxacingo,
 all hitherto great and ancient Towns of the Natives.


6. 
Segura de la Frontera,
 a 
Spanish
 Town, built by 
Cortez
 presently upon the Con∣quest of 
Mexico,
 for the securing of the Confines, as the Name importeth.


7. 
Vera Crux,
 a Town built by 
Cortez
 and his Companions, at their first Land∣ing, and where afterwards, by a Stratagem, and out of a resolution either to Con∣quer or Die in the Countrey, he caus'd all his Ships to be burnt, that his Soldi∣ers might not so much as think of returning back from whence they came. The Town was at first built five or six Leagues up within Land; but the place being found not to be so healthful, the Inhabitants in a short time deserted it, and seated themselves upon a Bay of the Sea, right over against 
St. John D' Ullua.


8. 
Medellin,
 another 
Spanish
 Town, built likewise by 
Cortez,
 in memory of his own Birth-place, which was 
Medellin,
 a small Town of 
Estramadura,
 a Province of 
Spain,
 but was afterwards destroy'd by some 
Spanish
 Commanders, out of malice to 
Cortez.


Lastly, 
St. John D' Ullua,
 a noted, and the most usual Port to all this Province, and likewise to the City of 
Mexico
 it self, from the North Sea: but of difficult en∣trance, especially to such as are not well acquainted with the Passage, or want Guides, by reason of certain Rocks and Quicksands, wherewith the Mouth of the Haven is said to be bar'd; but within, the station is more safe. It hath likewise two strong Bulwarks or Forts rais'd, on either side of the Entrance one, to defend the Passage; besides a strong Castle, built since Captain 
John Hawkins
 surpris'd twelve Ships richly Laden within the Haven, and thirteen others that arriv'd with a new Vice-Roy from 
Spain,
 valu'd at near sixty Tun of Gold, of which he might easily have made Prize, had he not trusted to the Vice-Roys Promise, to give him all sa∣tisfaction he should require, by which being deceiv'd, he lost all his Fleet but two Ships.


Between 
Tlascala
 and 
Los Angelos
 are the Fountains, out of which the River hath its Original, which gliding by 
Machaocan
 and 
Zacatula,
 falls into the South Sea: This River is so exceeding full of Crocodiles,
 that they have made several places which formerly were Inhabited on its Banks, utterly desolate; for the Females lay∣ing generally Eggs as big as those of a Goose, increase prodigiously; and were it not that the 
Indian
 Mice, call'd 
Ichneumones,
 destroy'd them, they would grow still to greater numbers: But this Animal creeping in at the Crocodiles Mouth, eats his way out of the Belly again; Water-Serpents, Hawks, 
Buffeloes,
 and especially Tygers, are also their mortal Enemies, for they throwing the Crocodiles on their Backs, rend open their Bellies: They are more desirous of Mans flesh here than in any other place, because the River of 
Tlascala
 hath but small store of Fish; in the day time they lie cover'd in the Mud, from whence they rush forth, and set upon those that happen to pass by them; they pursue the 
Canoos
 in the Water, and strike down the Rowers with their Tails.


Eight Leagues beyond 
Tlascala,
 appears the Mountain 
Popatepeck,
 which for ten years ceas'd smoaking, till 
Anno
 1540. it broke forth in such a manner, that the Countrey all about was terrifi'd therewith; for it vomited not onely a black Smoak, but also horrible Flames, which sometimes being blow'd downward, burnt the Corn in the Fields, and the Ashes thereof flying as far as 
Guaxocingo
 and 
Chulula,
 burnt a great deal of the Town to the Ground; every one endeavor'd by flight to secure themselves, with intention never to return thither again; but the

Flame and Smoak abating, Captain 
Diego de Ordas
 went up to view the place; whence the Fire was cast forth; which curiosity and presumption of his, had like to have cost him his Life, for the sulphury Smoak breaking forth on a sudden, had almost stifled him.


Moreover, the Bishoprick of 
Tlascala,
 is on the North Coast wash'd by the River 
Papoloava,
 since call'd 
Alvarado,
 from a 
Spanish
 Commander, who first Steer'd his Course thither: The next Stream nam'd 
Banderas,
 is so call'd, because the Natives held white Clothes on Poles, to invite the 
Spaniards
 ashore. The third is 
Almeria,
 on which, 
Cortesius,
 a year after the taking of 
Mexico,
 built the Town 
Medellin,
 as afore∣mention'd.


Along the 
Tlascallan
 shore, wash'd by the Northern Ocean, lie the Isles 
Blanca, Verde,
 and 
Sacrificios:
 The first receiv'd its denomination from 
White Land,
 the other from 
Green Trees;
 and the third, because 
Joan de Greyalve,
 who first Discover'd 
New Spain,
 Landing on this Island, found a Bloody Altar there, with Sacrific'd People with open'd Brests, chopt off Arms and Legs.


The River 
Almeria
 falling into the Ocean opposite to the 
Sacrificios,
 the 
Spanish
 Ships came often to an Anchor there; but in these latter times, they have forsaken the same, because the Northern Winds us'd to blow very hard against the shore, and spoil'd many Vessels: But 
Henry Hawks
 gives this reason, That a dreadful ap∣parition of Spirits frighted the 
Spaniards
 from thence.


In the Bishoprick 
Tlascala,
 is also compriz'd the Province 
Tepeaca,
 whose Metro∣polis was built by 
Cortez,
 when with great Loss he was sent from 
Almeria.
 The Soil thereabouts is barren and stony; the Water which they have in the City, is brought in Pipes from a River which flows out of the Mountains into the Market place. The plain Countrey hath many good Pastures. The Inhabitants thereof speak four sorts of Languages; of which, the commonest is the 
Mexican;
 others use the 
Popolucan
 or 
Otoman
 Tongues.


The Village 
Alyoxucan
 appears afar off on a high Mountain,
 on whose top is a Lake of a hundred and fifty Fathom in circumference; the Water whereof is very cold, and of a bluish Colour, and neither Ebbs nor Flows, to which the Villagers climb along a narrow Path.


Not far from thence, in the Plain, are two other very deep Lakes: The first call'd 
Tlacae,
 is a League in circumference, and breeds delicate white Fish, not above a Fingers length: The second nam'd 
Alchichican,
 about the same bigness, which in stormy Weather is very turbulent.


Amongst the Fowls of this Countrey, the most noted is a little Summer Bird, with a long crooked Tail, speckled Feathers; feeds on nothing but Flowers and the Dew; about Harvest time, when the Rain ceases, it hangs fast with its Bill on a Tree, and as soon as the first Rain falls, it revives again.


In this Countrey 
Tepeaca
 are five Villages, in each of which is a 
Franciscan
 Cloy∣ster and convenient Hospital.


In this Countrey they gather the Water in the time of the Rainy Moneths, in a digg'd Pool, which every Morning produces little Toads with long Tails, which in few days fall off; but these little ones growing to be great, make a most dreadful noise in the Night: From 
October
 till 
March,
 not one drop of Rain falls in this Countrey; during which time, the Northern Winds make a dry and wholsome Air, yet oftentimes a tempestuous Sea, to the loss of many Ships.


Farther up into the Countrey, between 
Vera Crux
 and 
Los Angelos,
 lies the Vil∣lage 
Rinconanda;
 and also 
Xalapa
 and 
Perota
 built of Straw Houses in the middle of a Wood of Cedar and Pirte-Trees, inhabited by the 
Spaniards,
 for the accommoda∣ting

of Travellers: To which purpose there are likewise Inns built near the Spring 
Fuente de Otzumba,
 which gushes out of a high Rock.


Not far from hence is the Populous Village 
Chetula,
 where a small number of 
Spaniards
 dwell amongst thousands of 
Indians,
 who chiefly make use of Mules to car∣ry their Loads.






SECT IV. Guaxata.


BEtween 
Los Angelos
 and 
Guatemala,
 lies the Bishoprick of 
Antiquera
 or 
Guaxata
 largely taken; it hath on the North, the Bay of 
Mexico;
 on the South, 
Mare del Zur;
 on the East, 
Jucatan
 and 
Chiapa
 which is one of the Provinces of 
Guatimala;
 on the West, 
Tlascalla.


The Countrey extendeth it self upon the South Sea about an hundred Leagues in length, but from the Sea to the Borders of 
Tlascalla,
 one hundred and twenty; Eastward not above half so much; having a good Air, and a Soil no less fruitful, especially in Mulberry-Trees, and abundance of Silks, which the Countrey affordeth, more than any other Province of 
America
 besides; nor is it less rich in Mines of Gold and Silver, there being scarce a River in the whole Countrey, but the Sands of it are said to be Tinctur'd more or less with that yellow Metal; also Crystal and Copperess. It yieldeth likewise great plenty of 
Cassia
 and 
Cochinele,
 two rich Commodities; and the People generally, if they would take pains, might be the wealthiest, 'tis thought, of any other in 
America:
 But whether it be through any voluntary contempt of Riches, or through any natural sloathfulness, as yet they seem to Pine in the midst of plenty, living, for the most part of them, little better than from Hand to Mouth; nevertheless, exceeding liberal of what they have, especially to such as bear the Habit of Religion, and attend the service of their Souls; maintaining in a plentiful and good manner, as 'tis said, no less than one hundred and twenty Convents of Religious Men, of several Orders, in this onely Province; besides Hospitals, Schools for the training up of Youth, and o∣ther places of publick Charity; it is said also to have three hundred and fifty Vil∣lages, and near as many brave Countrey Houses.
 It is sub-divided into many parti∣cular Provinces; which, because they are many and but small, in comparison of some other, we may call 
Wapentakes,
 or Hundreds, rather than Provinces: The principal whereof are these that follow, 
viz. Misteca.
 2. 
Tutepecque.
 3. 
Zapoteca.
 4. 
Guazacoalco.
 5. 
Gueztaxatla:
 and 6. the 
Valley of Guaxata,
 from whence 
Cortez,
 af∣ter the Conquest of 
Mexico,
 had his Title given him by the Emperor, 
Marquess of the Valley.
 It is the richest and most pleasant part of the whole Province, extended in a continu'd Tract together, full sixteen Leagues or more, lying about fourscore Southward of 
Mexico,
 and wanting neither Mines of Gold and Silver, nor any other of the prime and best Commodities of the 
New-World.


In this Countrey they speak thirteen sorts of Languages,
 of which the 
Mexican
 is most us'd.


Amongst the Plants which grow here, is an exceeding Poysonous Herb, which kills those whosoe're pluck it, though a long time after, that is to say, if it be of a Years growth, it kills not before the Years end; if a Moneth old, at the Moneths end; if a Day, on the same.


This Countrey formerly suffer'd also many inconveniencies by Earthquakes, but of late they are somewhat abated, which the 
Spaniards
 ascribe to 
Martialis,
 Pro∣tector of the Cathedral at 
Antequera.




Misteca
 is divided into 
Alta
 and 
Baxa,
 both of which have Rivers and Brooks that afford Gold, whither the 
Indian
 Women taking Provisions, go for several days, and gather Gold in Troughs, which they exchange at the 
Spanish
 Markets for Provisions.


Not far from the Village 
Cuertlavaca,
 lies a high Mountain, remarkable for a strange Cave, whose Entrance is very narrow, at the end whereof appears a square Place of fifty Foot; upon one side whereof stand Pits with Steps; near which be∣gins a crooked Way of a League long; at the end of which is a spacious Place with a Fountain of good Water; from the Foot of which flows a small Brook: But because none have made any farther discovery of this Cave, the other parts of it remain yet unknown.


On the top of 
St. Antonio,
 the 
Indians
 live with their Families in Caves between the Rocks.


Not far from hence appear two Mountains, whose tops, though they lie at a great distance from one another, at the bottom they are so near, that a Man may step from one to the other.


The six Rocks 
Pennoles,
 formerly Garrison'd by the Kings of 
Mexico,
 have Gold, Lead-Mynes, and a Root which is us'd in stead of Soap.


In the Village 
Totomachiapo,
 is a Cave of half a Mile long, at the end whereof the Water prevents a farther discovery.


The Rocky Countrey 
Zapotecas
 formerly bred very salvage Inhabitants, Mantled in Furrs, but now Civiliz'd, clad after the common manner.


The People spread over 
Guaxacualco, Yluta,
 and 
Cueztxatla,
 observe Circumcision, according to an ancient Custom; from whence some have in vain sought for a te∣stimony, that these 
Americans
 should be originally extracted from the scatter'd Tribes of 
Israel;
 but the 
Tartars
 more immediately, who at last crossing the 
Straits
 of 
Anian,
 furnish'd the desolate Countrey of 
America
 with Inhabitants: But this Opinion is without any probability of truth; for it will never follow from their Circumcision, that the 
Tartars,
 the greatest People on Earth, must owe their origi∣nal to a few 
Israelites,
 Prisoners, since that Ceremony was never thought on by them till they embrac'd the 
Mahumetan
 Religion. And though they had been Cir∣cumcis'd before 
Mahomet
's time, this would be no testimony that they were ex∣tracted from the 
Israelites:
 for how many People embrac'd Circumcision, which were never extracted from 
Abraham
's Seed? It is affirm'd by 
Diodorus Siculus,
 that the 
Cholchians;
 by 
Philo Judaeus,
 the 
Egyptians;
 by 
Herodotus,
 the 
Moors;
 by 
Strabo,
 the 
Troglodytes;
 by 
Cyprian,
 the 
Phoenicians
 and 
Arabians
 Circumcis'd themselves from all Antiquity, which is to this day observ'd by some of them. It also plainly ap∣pears by the Prophet 
Jeremiah,
 that the 
Egyptians, Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites,
 and 
Ishmaelites,
 had the same Custom anciently amongst them.


The Towns of principal note inhabited by the 
Spaniards
 in this Province, are 1. 
Antequera,
 in the Valley aforesaid, a stately City, and beautifi'd with a fair Ca∣thedral Church, built with Pillars of the finest Marble, of great heighth and bigness. The River which glides by the Walls, springing out of the Ground, runs to the Mountain 
Coatlan.
 Not far from thence lies the Village 
Herrera,
 which boasts four hundred 
Spanish
 Families, though some say that the greatest part of them are 
Indians,
 who pay the 
Spaniards
 Cotton Cloaks and Nuts for Tribute.


2. 
Illephonso de los Zapotecas,
 lies on a Mountain belonging to the 
Mixes,
 anciently a salvage, strong, and long-bearded People, who speak a gross Language, and in former times went naked, onely a white Deer-skin, Tann'd in Man's Brains, about their Middle. They maintain'd continual War against the 
Zapoteca's,
 and could

never have been subdu'd by the 
Spaniards,
 had it not been for their Dogs, which kept them in such awe, that thirty 
Spanish
 Soldiers ventur'd to live in 
Illephonso
 amongst thirty thousand 
Mixes,
 who now drive a Trade in Cotton, 
Maize,
 and Gold.


3. 
San Jago de Nexapa
 appears at a great distance on a high Mountain, where al∣so twenty Soldiers with their Dogs were wont to awe the cruel Natives.


4. The last Place, built by 
Gonzales de Sandovall, Anno
 1522. is 
Villa del Espiritu Santo,
 Commands fifty 
Indian
 Villages, which with great difficulty were brought to submit to the 
Spaniards.


The River 
Aquivicolco
 affords a convenient Harbor, the Mouth thereof being a hundred and ninety Paces broad.


Upon the Southern Ocean is the Haven 
Guatulco,
 where the Ships that Sail to 
Honduras
 and 
Peru
 take in their Lading. The Custom-house belonging to this Place was first plunder'd by Sir 
Francis Drake,
 and nine years after burnt by 
Candish.


The River 
Ometipu,
 which springing out of the Mountain 
Cacatepec,
 falls into 
Te∣poanteque,
 abounds with divers sorts of good Fish, especially Cra-Fish. There are al∣so reckon'd of the Natives of this Province, no less than fifteen thousand Persons that pay Tribute to the 
Spaniards,
 besides Women and Children, and also a great number of 
Spaniards.






Sect. V. Panuco.


PAnuco
 is the most Northerly Province of 
Hew Spain,
 by some call'd 
Guasteca,
 bounded on the East with the Gulf of 
Mexico;
 on the West with 
Uxitipa,
 a Countrey of 
New Gallicia;
 on the North with some undiscover'd Countreys of 
Florida,
 from which it is divided by the 
River of Palms;
 on the South with 
Me∣choacan
 and 
Mexicana.
 It is call'd 
Panuco,
 from a River of that Name, which turn∣ing from the Mountains 
Tepecsuan
 in 
New Gallicia,
 and dividing 
New Biscay
 from the Province of 
Zacatecas,
 passeth through the midst of this Countrey also, and at last empties it self into the Gulf.


This Countrey is reckon'd to be about fifty Leagues in length, and not much less in breadth; of a fruitful Soil, having some Mynes of Gold in it, and once very populous till the 
Spaniards,
 about the Year 1522. dispeopled it by their insatiable cruelty.


Before 
Ferdinand Cortesius, Francis de Garay
 attempted to Conquer this Province, but after much pains to no purpose, he return'd with but a small remnant of those he carried with him; and though 
Cortesius
 subdu'd the Countreys 
Ayotetextetlatan
 and 
Chila,
 yet it was not without many considerable Losses; for the Inhabitants being valiant and cruel, not fearing the 
Spanish
 Bullets, ran in amongst them, and made great slaughter, and (according to an old Custom in 
New Spain
) drank their Blood.


These People, on their Festival Days call'd 
Raeaxipo Veliztli,
 which signifies 
A Flaying of Slaves,
 us'd to pull off the Skins of a certain number of Slaves, with which they walkt about begging Alms from Hut to Hut, and whosoever deny'd them, was sure of a Blow in the Face with the bloody Skin; of which so long as there was but one Lappet remaining, they went a Begging; and whatsoever they got, was employ'd in Uses and Necessaries belonging to their Idolatry. On the fore∣mention'd Days they also us'd other barbarous Customs, amongst which this was





 one: The Priest challenging the Slave which was to be Offer'd, to Fight for his Life, he had one of his Feet ty'd to a great round Stone, and having a Sword to offend, and a Shield to defend himself, Encountred with the Priest, who was Arm'd after the same manner, whom if he conquer'd, he not onely preserv'd his Life, but gain'd the Name of a valiant Man.


They also dealt strangely with Persons that were yearly to be Offer'd to their Idols: for after having wash'd them, they put on them the Clothes of the Idol, and gave them the same Name, every one honouring them as a God; were permit∣ted▪ to walk up and down, but guarded by twelve Men, that they might not escape; for then the chiefest of the Guard was to supply the others place: More∣over, they resided in the chiefest Apartments of the Temple, eat of the best, were serv'd like Princes, and attended through the Towns by Persons of the greatest Quality, who led them through the Streets; where they no sooner play'd on a little Pipe, but all People came running to them, fell at their Feet and wor∣ship'd them: In the Night they lock'd them up in a Cage, secur'd with Iron Bars, and at the appointed time flay'd them alive.


The chief Towns now remaining, and inhabited by the 
Spaniards,
 are 1. 
St. Lewis de Tampice,
 a Colony of 
Spaniards
 situate on the Northern Bank of the River 
Panuco,
 at the very Mouth of it; where it hath a very large Haven, but so barr'd with Sands, that no Ship of any great Burden can enter or abide in it with safety; and yet the River otherwise so deep, that Vessels of five hundred Tun, might Sail up threescore Leagues at least within Land, and thereby visit the rich Mynes of 
Zata∣tecas
 on the one side of it, and of 
New Biscay
 on the other, at pleasure, and without fear of much opposition.


2. 
St. Stevan del Puerto,
 on the South side of the same River, eight Leagues distant from the Sea, or Gulf of 
Mexico,
 at present the Metropolis or chief Town of the Province, built by 
Cortesius
 in the place where stood old 
Panuco,
 which was likewise the Metropolis, or Head Town of the Natives, before the 
Spaniards
 burnt and de∣stroy'd it.




3. 
St. Jago de las Valles,
 which is a Fronteer Place, and enjoyeth certain special Immunities, and some fair Possessions also for defence of the Countrey against the Salvages. It is twenty five Leagues distant from 
St. Stevan del Puerto,
 lying in an open or Champain Countrey, and is fenc'd about with a Wall of Earth.


Miles Philips,
 an 
Englishman,
 put ashore by Captain 
John Hawkins,
 in the Bay of 
New Spain, Anno
 1568. suffer'd great hardship before he came to 
Panuco,
 from whence returning, he made mention of a City lying along a River of the same denomina∣tion, (which is there not above two Bowe shoots-broad,) in a pleasant Countrey, containing two hundred 
Spanish
 Families, beside the antient Inhabitants and 
Negro's,
 which all drive a great Trade in Salt, which is made in Pans Westward from the River: 
Philips
 travelling from 
Panuco
 to 
Mexico,
 saw by the way the Villages 
No∣hete,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Santa Maria,
 and a Cloyster of white 
Monks:
 Next he view'd 
Mestitlan,
 where some grey 
Monks
 had a House, and the Town 
Puchuen.


Another account of this Province is taken from a Journal kept by 
John Chilton,
 four years after 
Philips
's Voyage; he having a 
Spaniard
 for his Convoy, left 
Mexico
 to find out 
Panuco;
 in three days time they reach'd the City 
Mestitlan,
 where he ob∣serv'd, that twelve 
Spanish
 Families liv'd amongst thirty thousand 
Indians.
 The Ci∣ty built on a high Mountain, full of Woods, is surrounded with Villages, through which run many brave Springs; and the Air about them is no less wholsom than the Ground fruitful; the High-ways are shaded with all sorts of Fruit-Trees.


The Village 
Clanchinoltepec,
 four times more Populous than 
Mestitlan,
 belongs to a 
Spanish
 Nobleman, who built a Cloyster there for nine 
Augustin
 Monks, of which Order there also reside twelve in the City 
Guaxutla.


Moreover, they travel'd over the plain Countrey 
Guastecan,
 to the Village 
Tan∣cuylabo,
 inhabited by a tall People, with blue Painted Bodies, and Pleited Hair, hanging down to their Knees, going stark naked, but never without a Bowe and Arrow. They esteem nothing more than Salt, as being the onely Cure against certain Worms that grow between their Lips. From hence they travel'd to 
Tam∣pice,
 in which Journey they spent nine days; and coming thither, were inform'd, that of forty 
Christians
 which dwelt in the same, the 
Indians
 had slain twelve, whilst they were gathering of Salt. From hence they came to 
Panuco,
 then in a manner de∣serted, because of the 
Indians
 oppressing the 
Spaniards,
 of which, at that time, there were but ten, and one Priest. 
Chilton
 falling sick here, resolv'd nevertheless to change that unwholsom Air and barren place for a better; to which purpose, get∣ting a Horse, he took an 
Indian
 behind him for his Guide, but loosing his way in a thick Wood, happen'd amongst a Company of wild People, which dwelt in Straw Huts, twenty of them immediately surrounding him, brought him some clear sweet Water to drink, out of a Gilt 
Venice
 Glass, which having drunk, two naked Men led him into the high-way; which ended at the Gate of the Wall'd City 
Santo Jago de las Valles,
 inhabited by twenty five 
Spanish
 Families, who inform'd 
Chilton
 of the great danger which he had been in, for the People which gave him the Water were Man-eaters, who not long since, had burnt an 
Augustine
 Cloyster, built on a Mountain, had taken away, and eat the People, of which they had in all likelyhood gotten the 
Venice
 Glass; and had they not observ'd 
Chilton
 to be sickly, he had with∣out doubt been eaten by them, and his Skin, with some of his Hair, (that being a great Ornament amongst them) been hung about their middle.


During 
Chilton
's stay in 
St. Jago, Frans de Page
 came thither with forty Soldiers from the Vice-Roy 
Henry Manriques,
 and took five hundred 
Indians,
 good Bowe Men out of the Neighboring Villages, 
Tanehipa
 and 
Tameclipa,
 with which he design'd to go to the Silver Mines at 
Zacatecas: Chilton
 joyning with this Company, came to the

great Rives 
De las Palmas,
 which separates 
New Spain
 from 
Florida,
 where they spent three days in vain, seeking to find a passage over; wherefore they at last took pie∣ces of Timber, which joyning together, and standing upon, they were Tow'd over by Swimming 
Indians;
 being gotten on the other side, they March'd over steep Mountains, and thick Wildernesses, and came at last to 
Zacatecas,
 on whose Silver Mines, the richest in all 
America,
 work'd above three hundred 
Spaniards
 daily.






SECT. VI. Tabasco.


THe last Countrey belonging to 
New Spain is Tabasco,
 bounded on the North by the Northern Ocean, and on the East with 
Jucatan;
 and however some account it a distinct Province, yet others make no mention of it, let∣ting it pass for that part of 
Jucatan
 which lies about the City 
Tabasco,
 from which it seems to be denominated: The Ground level and without Mountains, hath many great Woods of Cedar-Trees, 
Brasile,
 and others. Here are also many good 
Indian
 Fruits, as the 
Manmeyes, Zapotes, Aguacates,
 and 
Guajabos.
 For three Moneths they have continually dry Weather, the rest of the year being for the most part rainy; which vicissitude of Moisture and Heat makes the Countrey exceeding fruitful, insomuch that they have three or four Harvests of 
Maiz
 in a year.


Vines, Figs, Lemmons, Oranges, Rice, Barley, and all sorts of Garden-Herbs grow here also in great plenty.


The Pools, Brooks and Lakes, abound likewise with all manner of Fish: and for Sea-Fish, besides the 
Tortugas,
 and 
Yguanras,
 the 
Manae,
 or 
Sea-Cow,
 is of principal note.


This Fish is terrible to behold, having a Head like an Ox, little Eyes, two Feet near the Head in stead of Fins, two round Holes in stead of Ears, round bones like Balls in its Brains, a short Tail, and bristly Skin: The Females have two Dugs, with which they suckle their Young.


Peacocks, Pheasants, Parrots, Quales, Hens, Pigeons,
 with several sorts of Birds altogether unknown to the 
Europeans,
 are here in great abundance.


The Woods also abound with Tygers and Lyons,
 which do no little hurt to the Inhabitants, Wild Hogs, Deer, and Rabbets, are likewise here in great plenty; and Turtles of an exceeding bigness: Likewise Apes, Polecats, and Squerrils, which do very much hurt to the Fruit-Trees, especially the 
Cacao.
 The 
Musticho's
 are a great annoyance to the People, and disturb their rest at Night.


Since the 
Spaniards
 have conquer'd 
Tabasco,
 they have forc'd the Inhabitants to observe their Laws and Customs. They speak three sorts of Languages, amongst which that most us'd, call'd 
Chontal,
 is copious of Words. The second, 
Zoques,
 is spoken on the Mountains which divide 
Chiapa
 and 
Tabasco.
 The 
Mexican
 Tongue was first brought thither by the Garrisons which 
Muteczuma
 plac'd there in the Forts 
Zimatlan
 and 
Xicalango,
 and is the most spoken, in regard it hath not onely its Accents, but is also of great use, partly because it is understood in most places of 
America,
 and partly because the Priests have made Songs in that Tongue, with which the 
Tabascans
 are much delighted.


The chief City 
Nostra Sennora de la Vittoria,
 already mention'd in 
Jucatan,
 was so call'd by 
Ferdinand Cortesius,
 from the great Victory which he obtain'd over the 
Indians
 when he march'd first towards 
Mexico.


Thus far of the Description of the several Parts and Divisions of 
New Spain,
 dif∣fering





 in Customs and Languages, though most of them have some affinity with the 
Mexicans,
 who by force of Arms had made a way to the supream Empire. All of them acknowledge a, Creator, but have no Name to express the Word 
God.
 But besides the Creator of the World they have made to themselves Gods of many other Creatures; amongst which are the Sun, Moon, Stars, and the Manes of the De∣ceased, the care of whose Burial they committed to the Priests, which was some∣times in the Fields, sometimes in their Houses; others carried their dead Bodies to the Mountains, some buried them in Temples; and as they either burnt or bu∣ried the Body, so they buried or burnt their Clothes and Riches with them, espe∣cially of Persons of Quality, whilst those that accompanied the Corps sung a mournful Song; after which they Feasted. The Heirs of Noble-men that had been at the Funeral put themselves all into Mourning. A Person, after he is dead, is stretch'd out upon the Floor, where he lies till all his Friends come to Present and Com∣plement him, as if living: But at the death of an eminent Person they not onely bring him Presents, but proffer him his Slaves, Steward, Butlers, Dwarfs, and Houshold Priest, (all which a Lord must keep) that they may serve him in the other World. The priests which perform'd the Funeral Ceremonies, walk'd before the Corps with the Image of the Idol which the Deceased had appropriated to him∣self, (for every Lord, according to the greatness of his Quality, bore the Name and Apparel of some Idol or another;) other Priests beat on Drums, play'd on Pipes and singing Dirges, perfum'd the Way with Myrrh, whilest the Servants and Re∣lations made a doleful cry; a Herauld also carried the Coat, of Arms and Tro∣phies of the Deceased, artificially painted on Cloth; at last they pyl'd sweet Wood about the Corps, which being lighted, and the Body burnt to Ashes, a Priest in a frightful Dress, Vizarded with a gaping Mouth, long Teeth, and fiery Eyes, came on a sudden, and with a long Stick stirr'd the Ashes about, and gathering it in an Urn, buried the same with the fore-mention'd things.


The Idols in 
New Spain
 are represented in terrible Figures, to which they Offer humane Sacrifices.




The Priests, divided into higher or lower Orders, acknowledge a supream Head, which they call 
Papas.
 Each Idol had a peculiar sort of Priests: Those that serv'd 
Viztlipuzli,
 obtain'd their Places by Inheritance; but others were chose by the Commonalty, unless they had been bred Priests from their In
ancy.


The 
Mexican
 Cloysters in the time of 
Heathenism
 were generally built in the chiefest Temples, in a great 
Piazza,
 or square Court, where for the most part two Monastical Houses stood one against another, the one inhabited by a Fra∣ternity of Recluses, and the other by a Sisterhood; which last being Maids of twelve or thirteen years of age, call'd 
The Penitential Daughters,
 swept the Temple, prepar'd Meat for the Idols and Priests, which was plentifully supply'd from the Alms and Offerings that were daily brought in to the Priests, consisting of little Cakes made like Hands and Feet, besides other strange Meats, which being set be∣fore the Idols, was soon, after taken away again, and eaten up by the were under a Governess, who employ'd them in making Embroideries to adorn the Temple; and sometimes rose up with the Priests at Mid-night, and play'd on Pipes, perfum'd the Temple, and scourg'd themselves till the Blood ran down their Backs, besmearing their Faces therewith, and leaving it on a whole year; then going into a large Chamber, where a Cistern stood for that purpose, they wash'd it off again; after which, if they committed the least uncleanness, they were put to a most miserable Death; which was judg'd upon seeing a Rat run through the Nuns Chamber, or a Batt flying by it, or finding any piece of Cloth gnaw'n by a Mouse or Rat; for they suppose that the fore-mention'd Creatures dare not come into a hallow'd place, unless defil'd. In this recluse manner they were onely confin'd to live a year, which being expir'd, they had free leave to Marry.


The House opposite to the Nuns in the same square place of the Temple, was inhabited by Youths of eighteen and twenty years of age, whose Heads were shaven like Monks, and pleited Tufts hung from the Crown down to their Backs; they liv'd also mean and chaste, kept the Priests Clothes and Perfuming-Vessels, carried Wood for Offerings, and kept always burning Lamps before 
Viztli∣puztli
's Altar. Amongst them were also Boys of a less Age, whose Office was to gather Flowers and Herbs to strow the Temple with, to sharpen the Priests Lan∣ces, which they Let themselves Blood with every Night in the Legs, and carry them Water. These Youths, Cloth'd in Nets, fell on their Faces on the Ground when they met with a Woman, and went four and four, or six and six together to beg Alms, and by turns watch'd the fore-mention'd Fire; in the Morning they drew Blood out of their Thighs, with which they anointed their Temples down to their Ears, and when the Blood look'd black, wash'd it off again in a consecrated Bath, which their strict and severe Life endur'd a whole Year.


The particular Religion of the 
Mexicans,
 compos'd of cruel slaughters and butcheries of Men, reign'd a long time against the minds of the other 
Indians
 that were under their Dominion, every one beginning more to abhor the cruel flaying of living People, and tearing out the Hearts of Men for Offerings; and the rather, because they were forc'd to fetch them out of their Enemies Countrey with the ha∣zard of their own Lives, insomuch that they were ready long before to have em∣braced another Doctrine, if any other Teacher had but appear'd amongst them; which was the chief reason why they so easily receiv'd the 
Roman
 Religion: for when 
Cortesius
 had conquer'd the City 
Mexico,
 the 
Mechoacan
 Agents entreated him to send them Teachers to prescribe them Laws, according to which they might live, because their Idolatry, which had long oppress'd them, was not to be suffer'd any longer, because of the Cruelties which were requir'd of them in the perfor∣mance thereof.




Their Processions were stately, and after this manner: The chiefest Nuns rai∣sing a Paste of 
Bledoi
-Seed and parched 
Maiz,
 kneaded it with Honey, of which they made an Idol resembling their Deity 
Viztipuztli,
 across whose Nose and Forehead they drew a blue Stroke; his Head they adorn'd with a Plume of Feathers, and in the left Hand plac'd a round Box, in the right a crooked Staff like a Serpent, and Wings behind on his Shoulders; at the appointed Feast-day the Nuns meet before Sun-rising, in new white Apparel, with Garlands of 
Maiz
 about their Heads and Necks, which hung down below the left Shoulder, their Faces painted with several colours, about their Arms hung Parrots Feathers from their Elbows down to their Hands: Thus adorn'd, they carried the kneaded Idol to a Court, where the Youths that inhabited a Cloyster in the same Temple, fetching the Idols blue Throne, with great Reverence set it down at the lower Step of the Temple, at which the People threw Dust on their Heads; which was no sooner done, but the Boys ran with all speed to the Mountain 
Chapultepec,
 a League from 
Mexico,
 whither the Multitude flowing them in manner of Procession, made all short Prayers and Offerings there; from thence hastening into the Champain Fields 
Atla∣cuavaya,
 they perform'd the like Service as before; which done, they went to the Village 
Cuyoacan,
 a League farther; from whence they came back in all haste with their Idol into 
Mexico:
 Wherefore this Processioning for its expedition was call'd 
Ipaina Viztliputli.
 The Idol being brought into the Temple, was by four Cords made fast to his Throne, hoised up to the Cieling with the noise of Drums and Trumpets, whilst the fore-mention'd Youths strow'd the Temple both within and without full of Roses; after which the Nuns gave the Boys the resemblances of Bones made of the same Dough with the Idol, with which they were to cover the Floor of the Chappel; then appear'd the Temple-Priests, with Scarfs about their Bodies, Garlands on their Heads, and Strings with Flowers about their Necks, each going in order according to his quality to the place where the Bones lay; which being Consecrated with Songs and Dances, were religiously worshipp'd for Bones of the Idol; after which six of the Priests went down to the Stone 
Quauxi∣calli,
 on which the Prisoners lying upon their Backs, had their Hearts pull'd out; which being finish'd, the Maids and Boys before-mention'd went to meet one ano∣ther, Dancing to the sound of Pipes, Drums and Songs; which their nearest Rela∣tions answering, Danc'd round about them, whither the whole City and Coun∣trey People all about came flocking in great numbers.


During this high Feast none, upon great Penalties, durst eat any other Food but the Cakes made of the same Dough of which the Idol was made; neither were they permitted, though Children, to drink till the Afternoon.


Lastly, the Priest climb'd up to a Chappel strow'd with Roses, in which the Idol sitting, they disrob'd him, broke his holy Arms and Legs into little pieces, which they distributed amongst the common People, who receiv'd them with great Reverence, and with tears in their Eyes, imagining they eat the Body of their God; for which honour every one paid a tenth part of the Charge which had been spent in this high Feast. Then a Priest admonish'd them how they should lead their Lives, since they were united with their God; which ended, they all went to their several Habitations in a wonderful good order from the Temple.


Concerning the 
Mexicans
 Apparel, it is a sufficient testimony, that they are no way of the same original with the several barbarous Nations, that run up and down naked in 
New Spain:
 for the Inhabitants of 
Mexico
 went antiently Cloth'd in Cotton: On their Heads they wore a high Plume of red Feathers; about their Necks, over their Shoulders, Breast and Back, a kind of large 
Thorax
 of Feathers





 curiously pleited; each Arm adorn'd with Armlets, and their Middles girt with broad white Girdles full of red Streaks; in stead of Garters they wore Laces of Feathers, as also a little above their Ancles. Their Priests besmear'd all their Bodies, especially the Head, with an Ointment, whose special vertue was to make their Hair grow exceeding long, which they braided with broad Cotton Strings; they also smutch'd themselves with a kind of blacking Stuff; when they went to make Offerings to their Idol in Caves, Woods, or on high Mountains, they be∣dawb'd themselves with an Ointment made of Spiders, Salamanders, Adders, Scorpions and Toads, which the Temple-Boys caught for them in great abun∣dance. This Ointment they made with many Circumstances; for having roasted the fore-mention'd Vermine on the Hearth of the perpetual Fire before 
Viztlipuztli
's Altar, and stamp'd the same in a Mortar with Tobacco, living Scorpions, the Seed 
Ololuchqui,
 (to which they ascrib'd a power of representing Visions) hairy Worms, and Soot, they kneaded all together, put the Ointment in Pots, and plac'd it before the Idol, thenceforth reputing it a sanctifi'd Medicine, that would prove good against all manner of Diseases; wherefore the Priests being always sent for to the Sick in stead of Doctors, perfum'd the Patient, shav'd his Hair, hung Snakes Bones about his Neck, and order'd him at a certain Hour to bathe himself, and in the Night to watch before a Fire-hearth, and to eat no Bread but what had been Offer'd to their Idol. Moreover, the said Ointment is thought to have another power, 
viz.
 to make those that anointed themselves with the same, valiant and strong; which the common People believ'd, because the Priests would go through Woods and Wildernesses that abounded with ravenous Beasts.


These 
Heathens
 also seem'd to have something of Circumcision and Baptism; for they not onely cut off a piece of the Infant's Ears and privy Members, which they Offer'd to their Idols, but also wash'd them as soon as they came into the World, putting into their Hands such Tools as were of use in their Fathers Profession.


Their Marriages also were celebrated with great solemnity: The Priest having ask'd the Bride and Bridegroom, If they would joyn together in Matrimony? if

they both consented, he ty'd the Brides Scarf, and Bridegrooms Coat together, and so accompanying them home, led them nine times about the Fire-hearth: If the Bride had no Impediments, then the Bridegroom made Presents to her Father and Mother, Offerings to the Gods, and a brave Dinner to the nearest Relations; after which an Inventory was drawn of what each of them had brought, that upon their being Divorc'd, (which was very common amongst the 
Mexicans
) each might have his share; and if they had Children, the Man was to keep the Sons, and the Woman the Daughters; nor were they permitted, on pain of death, being once part∣ed, to joyn together again.


On the ninteenth of 
May
 they kept the Feast 
Texcoalt,
 Consecrated to the Idol 
Tezcatlipuca,
 before whom they Offer'd a Slave, which was done after this manner: Towards the Evening the Multitude coming into the Temple, the Priests pulling off the Idols old, put on new Apparel, hung him full of Precious Stones and Arm∣lets, set Plumes of Feathers on his Head; which done, the Curtains behind which he stood, were drawn, and a Priest Cloth'd exactly like the Idol coming forth, turn'd himself round, blow'd a kind of Trumpet towards the four Winds, and ate Earth, which all the People imitated: whereof those which had committed any hainous Offence, Offer'd Incense to the Idol, and weeping, begg'd forgiveness of their Sins. Those that were Soldiers besought him to grant them store of Prisoners, and strength to conquer their Enemies; for which they would return him thanks with Offer'd Prisoners.


This Feast of 
Texcoalt
 lasting ten days, ended on the twenty ninth of 
May
 with peculiar Ceremonies; for in the Morning a company of Priests, black all over, carried on their Shoulders a large Chair of State richly adorn'd; in which sat their Idol 
Tezcatlipuca,
 and Priests with long pleited Hair, and Clad in the same Appa∣rel with the Idol, which they set down at the Foot of a pair of Stairs which led up to a Chappel; whither the attendant Youths and Virgins came and spread Car∣pets before it, and green Boughs of 
Manghey;
 after which two Priests carried the Idol into a spacious Court in the Temple, several others walking before, each with a perfuming Vessel; when they threw their Perfumes on the Consecrated Hearth, they held their Hands towards the Idol, desiring him that he would send their Prayers to Heaven: Next follow'd the Multitude, who scourg'd themselves till the Blood ran down from their Backs. So soon as the Procession was ended, the represented 
Tezcatlipuca
 was hoised up to the Cieling, and abundance of Flowers strow'd before the Altar; which done, every one went home to Dinner, whilst the Youths and Virgins adorn'd the Idol, and plac'd Meat before him: Lastly, the Votaresses came two and two with Baskets of Bread, and Dishes of Meat: their Governess in a white Sur-Coat over a red Vest, with Wings on her Shoul∣ders, and broad Girts, at which hung 
Calabashes
 fill'd with holy Reliques and Flowers: Moreover, she conducted the Votaresses to the Steps of the Altar on which the Idol sat; where having eaten Bread they came back, and the Temple-Servants went in their places, and carried the Meat which stood on the Altar to the Priests Cells, who by that time were to have Fasted five days: this done, the Peo∣ple came all to the Temple again, to be present at the end of the Feast: then a Slave, who had represented the Idol a whole year, appear'd, to whom every one having shew'd Reverence, the chief Priest cutting open his Breast, tore the Slave's Heart reaking out of his Body, and shew'd it to the Sun; then the Consecrated Youths and Maids made a great noise with Drumming, Singing and Dancing about the Body till Sun-set; after which the Virgins going up to the upper Chappel, plac'd Bread and Fruit, made up like dead Mens Bones and Heads, before the Idol,

where, after it had stood a little while, the Servants went up and fetch'd it down, whilst the Youths and Maids went to their several Cloysters.


Much after the same manner, and with such like brutish Ceremonies, not worth mentioning, was also celebrated the Feast of 
Quetzatcoalt.


In the inner part of the Temple stood a Stage, on which upon Festival Days the People Acted Drolls; in which they sometimes feign'd themselves deaf, blind, lame, and the like, and begg'd to be cur'd of their Idols; sometimes were dress'd like Serpents, Adders, Crocodiles, or other ravenous Beasts, in which postures they fought one with another.


Those Feasts were all kept on certain times, according to the 
Mexican
 Alma∣nack, in which the Year was divided into eight Moneths, and each Moneth into forty five Days, which together made three hundred and sixty: The five remaining Days, to compleat the Year, they kept apart, on which all Affairs whatsoever were laid aside, as Selling, Buying, Offerings, 
&c.
 nothing else being thought on but Feasting one another for the passing away of the time. The first Day of their Year was on the twenty sixth of 
February.
 Each Moneth had a peculiar Name and Sign. Moreover, they divided the Year into four parts by as many Representations, 
viz.
 a House, a Rabbet, a Cane, and a Flint to strike Fire with; and Figur'd it out by a Wheel with four Spikes jutting out round about it, colour'd green, red, blue, and yellow, and in the middle thereof a Sun; each Spike signifi'd thirteen years, wherefore it had thirteen Divisions, distinguish'd by the four fore-mention'd Re∣presentations: At each Division of the Wheel they set down what remarkable things should happen that year by certain Characters; as, a Man in red Apparel typifi'd that Year when 
Ferdinand Cortesius,
 clad in Red, conquer'd 
Mexico.
 When the Wheel was fill'd with fifty two years Prognostication, then on the last Night they broke all their Pots and Vessels in pieces, and blew out their Candles, because they believ'd, that at the end of the said fifty two years the World would be at an end, and therefore they had no need of Housholdstuff, or ought else: But so soon as the Day appear'd again, they play'd on Pipes, Trumpets, and Drums, rejoycing that God had deferr'd the destruction of the World fifty two years longer; then they bought new Utensils and Candles, and made solemn Processions.


Concerning the Art of Writing amongst the Inhabitants of 
New Spain, Joseph Acosta
 tells us, That some old Books, containing ancient Passages, the Course of the Heavens, nature of Beasts and Plants, were found in 
Jucatan,
 according to the Re∣lation of a Learned 
Indian,
 but were all burnt by Command of a 
Spanish
 Bishop, be∣cause he suppos'd them to be full of Matter touching the Black Art. Their Histo∣ries they describ'd with the Representations of the Things. Rhetorick and Poetry the Children were taught by Rote in the Schools, so that they never forgot what they had once learnt; But at present they use 
Spanish
 Letters or Characters.


Moreover, the Government of 
Mexico
 hath ever been kept in a good Order, the King's Power being exactly limited, that nothing might be lost of the common Priviledges. The fourth King 
Icoath
 made Earls, who next to the Lords of 
Tezcuco
 and 
Tacuba,
 had right to the Crown; which was like a Mitre turn'd up behind, and rising before with a Point. According as they increas'd in Power, so they advanc'd in Royal Dignity; in which 
Muteczuma
 the Second exceeded all others: And to manifest his splendor, his House for all sorts of Creatures, and many other things, might serve for a sufficient testimony: for in it he kept Sea-Fish in salt Water, River-Fish in fresh Water, and all manner of Beasts in peculiar places: The Birds were kept in great Aviaries, surrounded with golden Rails. Next to the Kings fol∣low'd four Earls call'd 
Atlacohecalcatl,
 which signifies 
Princes of the Throne Launces,
 a

Weapon much us'd amongst the 
Mexicans.
 The next in Degree were the 
Tlacate∣catl,
 or 
Man-cleavers; Esauahuacatl,
 or 
Blood-shedders; Tsallancalqui,
 or 
Lords of Black∣ness,
 without all which the King durst not take any Business in hand. High and lesser Courts of Judicatory, where Matters of Life and Death were try'd, were in most Cities; and other Courts also for petty Quarrels, Controversies, and the like. The Collectors brought their Revenues to the Court every Moneth. The chief thing which preferr'd both Rich and Poor to Places of Honor, consisted in Valour and heroick Exploits. Their Arms were chiefly sharp pieces of Flint made fast to a Stick, with which they could at one Blow chop off a Horses Head. They also us'd Pikes, Clubs, and Lances, and sometimes Slings: For defensive Armour, they had Helmets and Shields, made of Tygers, Leopards, and Lyons Skins. They always fell upon their Enemies unawares, their Design being generally to take Prisoners rather than to kill them; for they reserv'd them for Offerings to their Idols. 
Muteczuma
 made several Commanders over his Armies, giving them a Power one above the other, which were to be distinguish'd by several Marks; for the chiefest ty'd the Hair on the top of their Heads with a red String, betwixt which stuck a brave Plume of Feathers; at the end whereof hung as many Tassels as they had done noble Exploits. To this Order belong'd also the King, who wore one of the same Marks, with which King 
Muteczuma
 and his Son stand Carv'd on a Rock. The 
Ayulas,
 or 
The Order of the Eagle,
 consisted of valiant Men. The 
Grey Knights
 were of less Quality, and wore Collars which reach'd up to their Ears, the lower part of their Body being naked. Persons of greater Dignity, when going to the War, were Arm'd from Head to Foot: Which Order was also permitted to wear Cotton-Clothes, and Shoes richly embroider'd with Gold and Silver; they us'd painted Vessels, and had Lodgings provided for them at Court.


Moreover, it is worthy of obesrvation, what great care the 
Mexicans
 took in the bringing up of their Children; to which purpose they had Schools near to their Temples, in which Youth was taught to Sing, Dance, Morality, Obedience, and also Martial Discipline. Children of noble Extract had Learned Men for their Tutors. Their Punishments for Transgressions were very severe, the Masters for∣cing their Scholars to Fast and Watch, carry great Burthens of Provisions to the Army, and be in the midst of Engagements. Others, whose Fancy led them to a holy Life, willingly embrac'd the Services of the Temple.


Their manner of Dancing in 
New Spain
 was very strange and differing; they us'd pretty Instruments, and Songs which contain'd antique Passages, according to the Times; they in their Motions imitated Shepherds, Fisher-men, Plowmen, Hun∣ters, and the like: Sometimes they Danc'd in 
Mascarades,
 with a Man on their Shoulders, making the same Motion with his Hands in the Air, as the other with his Feet on the Ground. They had also Tumblers and Dancers on the Ropes, which shew'd strange Tricks on an erected Pole. But above all Dances, the 
Mitotes
 was the chief, which was generally Danc'd in the King's Palace, or inner Court of the Temple; in the middle of which they plac'd a great Drum and a hollow Tub on a large Image; round about which the most eminent Persons made a Ring, Sang sweetly, and Danc'd leisurely, when on a sudden two that are more nimble, with divers Motions came into the midst of them, and Danc'd exactly after the sound of the Drum and hollow Tub, which was seconded with the noise of Flutes and Pipes.










CHAP. VI. New Gallicia.


NEw Gallicia,
 by some call'd 
Guadalajara,
 from the chief City. This whole Province is the most Northern Countrey of all 
America,
 that is inhabited to any purpose by the 
Spaniards.
 Here, 'tis true, they are scatter'd up and down in all the parts of it, but it is at a huge distance, and for the most part onely where the Mines are. It is bounded on the East and to the South, with the King∣dom of 
Mexico
 or 
New Spain;
 on the West, with the Gulf or Bay of 
California;
 Northward, for so much as is yet discover'd, with 
Quivira
 and 
Cibola,
 lying between eighteen and twenty eight Degrees of Northern Latitude, that is, from 
La Nativi∣dad,
 a Port so nam'd by the 
Spaniards,
 in the Confines of 
New Spain,
 to the most Northerly Borders of 
Cinoloa,
 a part of this Province, containing, as is suppos'd, not much less than three hundred Leagues in length, and in breadth much more; and whereof not a tenth part is either us'd or frequented by the 
Spaniards.


The Air is generally here very temperate, inclining rather to Heat than Cold, and subject now and then to sudden Storms of Rain, and great Claps of Thunder, which yet do not hinder, but that the Countrey is held to be reasonably healthful, and the People observ'd to live generally to a good old Age. The Soil, by reason of the Climate, would be a little inclining to Drought, but that, besides the frequent Rains which it hath, it is constantly moistned with fresh Morning Dews, which make it for the most part wonderfully fruitful, almost beyond belief, yield∣ing for every Pushel of Wheat that is sown, threescore; and of 
Maiz,
 two hundred for one; besides great plenty of Sugar-Canes and 
Cochinele;
 both which neverthe∣less the 
Spaniards
 are said to neglect in some sort, employing themselves wholly about richer Commodities: for the Countrey affords them good store of Mines of Silver and Brass, but of Gold or Iron, not many as yet have been found. The Ri∣vers abound plentifully with Fish, and the Woods with Wenison, and some other wild Beasts. The Countrey is generally more mountainous than plain, frequently shaded with Woods, and whole Forrests of the stateliest Pine-Trees and Oaks that are to be seen; amongst which breed abundance of Wolves, which do great mis∣chief to the People, as also Scorpions and 
Mustiecho's.
 The Hurts receiv'd from Scorpions, are heal'd with the Juice of the Fruit call'd 
Queon;
 those from the 
Mu∣stiecho's,
 by Vinegar and the Juice of Lemmon. Here is likewise a green Stone, accounted a soveraign Medicine against the Gravel.


The Trees peculiar to this Countrey, are, the 
tunas,
 already spoken of in 
Guati∣mala,
 and thought to be the same we vulgarly call 
Indian Fig-Trees,
 and are distin∣guish'd into six sorts.


The first, by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Cardon,
 hath sharp Prickles, thick Leaves, full of slimy Juice, an odoriferous Flower, oval Fruit, cover'd with an Orange-colour'd Rind, and small Roots: The Fruit within consists of a white juicy, and well tasted Pulp, full of black Seed.


The second hath a round Body full of Boughs, with Star-like Prickles hang∣ing downwards, the Flower white, and the Fruit very like that of the 
Cardon,
 onely smaller.








The third is the 
Caxabra,
 which shoots up to a great Tree full of prickly Cods; at the utmost end grows a large white Flower; the Fruit, which is as big again as an Egg, is pleasant and cooling.


The fourth sort hath a straight Body full of Prickles, runs lesser and lesser to the top; at the end of the small Boughs, each thick Leaf produces another; the Wood, if kindled, burns like a Candle.


The fifth, nam'd 
Cumbeba,
 grows out of small Roots, with three or four corner'd thick Leaves, full of Prickles, the Flower somewhat less than the former, the Fruit oval, hard and red, having a white and juicy Pulp: The Prickles of this 
Cumbeba
-Tree are so sharp, and stick in so deep, that they can scarce be pull'd out. This is that sort of 
Tunas
 that produces 
Cochinele,
 which is a Worm that grows under the Leaves, and is cover'd with a Skin, which being neatly taken off and dry'd in the Sun, as formerly mention'd, becomes a rich Commodity. 
Joseph de Acosta
 tells us, that the 
Spanish
 Fleet, 
Anno
 1578. carried so much 
Cochinele
 to 
Spain,
 as amounted to two hundred eighty three thousand seven hundred and fifty Ryals.


But the last sort of the 
Tunas
 is the 
Unirumbeba,
 which hath a straight Body full of Prickles, on the top whereof grow divers prickly Leaves, not unlike those of the Palm-Tree: It is onely found in barren places, remote from the Sea.


Moreover, all kind of Fruits transplanted hither from 
Spain
 thrive very well, as Apples, Pears, Granats, Figs, Peaches, Apricocks, Muskmelons, 
&c.


The Root 
Castanuela
 affords a much better Feeding for Swine than Acorns. But a∣mongst many other Roots which are found here, as the 
Xiquimas, Yaca, Cochuco, Cari, Totora
 and 
Mani,
 the chief is the 
Batata,
 which is fat, sweet, and windy; it runs over the Ground with a tough green Sprig, the new Fibres taking Root dispersedly up and down, being yellow without, and within full of milky Juice; the Leaf resem∣bling a Heart, is of a pale yellow colour on the top, and donuy underneath; roasted in Ashes, it eats better than a Turnip: It is divided into three sorts.


The first, call'd 
Omenapo-yeima,
 when boyl'd, shews like red 
Betel,
 but Dyes of a Skye-colour; the innermost Skin, which is of a dark Red, yields an Ink-like Juice.




The second sort, call'd 
Parro,
 differs little from the first, onely the Body, Root, and Veins of the Leaves, are of a Purple colour.


The third sort 
Jetiope,
 being white, hath a very good rellish, and cures the Ague.


The Pepper, which is here call'd 
Axi,
 grows in the warmest Valleys, and the more by being often water'd: there are of it divers kinds, differing in colour, smell, and taste one from the other; for one sort is green, yellow, or red; another sort yields a strong musky scent; and one sort is sharper, another milder: the Veins and Kernels thereof are eaten with Salt.


The Herb 
Cevadilla
 cures all manner of Sores.


This Countrey also breeds an innumerable company of Deer, Hogs, Goats,
 Sheep, Oxen, and Horses; and of hurtful Creatures, Pismires, which do great mischief to the Plants, and Locusts, which fall in huge swarms on the Corn, and cannot be frighted from the same by any means whatsoever. The want of Water is also no small prejudice to the Fields.


The biggest River, call'd 
Guadalajara,
 with many windings runs North-westward into the Southern Ocean; and four Leagues from the City of the same, falling down from a steep Rock, it makes such a horrible noise, that it deafens those which approach the same.


The Lake 
Mechoacan
 opens here also with a wide Mouth.


The River before mention'd, produces all manner of Fish in great abundance; and also a sort of Hedge-hogs, call'd 
Iguana,
 which live both in the Water, and on the Land, and are of two sorts: The first, call'd 
Senembi,
 is four Foot long, of a deep green colour, with black and white Spots, hath a scaly Skin, white Spots on each side of the Head, a row of sharp Prickles from the Head to the Tail, wide Nostrils, great black Eyes, and little Teeth. The second sort, call'd 
Tejaguacu,
 dif∣fers from the first, in having white Spots on a brown Skin, a longer Tail, and a red Tongue, which is slit. Both sorts are reported to fast eight Moneths together; and though often terribly wounded, and dead to all imagination, yet live a great while after; and though they swim up and down in Rivers, yet they Lay their Eggs in the Sand: their Flesh boyl'd is both wholsom, and of a good relish.


The 
Spaniards
 which inhabit 
New Gallicia,
 drive a considerable Trade in Merchan∣dizing, Husbandry, breeding of Cattel, and working in the Mines: They use Wayns and Carrs, drawn by Oxen, Mules, and Horses, to carry their Loads, as al∣so 
Spanish
 Weights and Measures. They are little troubled with any other Mischiefs but what may happen from the treacherous Natives, who take all opportunities to run into the Woods, that there they may exercise their 
Pagan
 Religion in freedom; in which having spent some time, they gather a considerable number together, and oftentimes fall unawares on the 
Spaniards,
 who use Leather Shields and Helmets, and furr'd Cotton Clothes, to secure them from the Arrows which the 
Indians,
 ly∣ing in Ambuscades, shoot at them out of the Bushes.


The Natives, though subtile, are lazy, and will not work, unless for great Re∣wards. They wear Cotton Shirts, square Cloaks of the same Stuff, made fast with two Buttons on their Breasts; Drawers, and soal'd Shoes: Flag-Matts serve them for Beds, on which they lie under Cotton Clothes: About their Necks, Arms, and Legs, they wear green Stones, and Snale Shells for an Ornament. Their greatest Recreation is Dancing, their Musick being nothing else but the noise or sound of a piece of hollow Wood. Horse-flesh, and Bread made of 
Maiz,
 is by them accounted a great Dainty. The Drink 
Cacao
 is also highly esteem'd amongst them; but much more the Wine that they make of 
Maquey,
 which is the wonder∣ful

Tree that affords many necessary things, 
viz.
 Syrrup, Honey, Oyl, Vinegar, Yarn, Needles, Water, and Wine; every Man making it his Business to plant and preserve the same with great care near his House, notwithstanding they grow in several places of the Fields; they have broad thick Leaves with sharp ends, out of which is drawn a Thorn, which serves them for a Needle or Pin. These Leaves have a hairy Filament about them, which serves in stead of Thred: the young Sprout being cut, produces a sweet Juice, which boyl'd, makes good Wine; when grown sowre, serves for Vinegar; but being twice boyl'd, becomes a Syrrup; and being hung over the Fire a third time, a perfect Honey: Also the Wood being spungie, keeps Fire as well as Match. Moreover, the Inhabitants when they travel, carry Leather Bags with them full of 
Cacao, Maiz,
 and Pepper, mix'd together.


Over each Village in this Countrey the 
Spaniards
 have plac'd an 
Indian Casique, Alcalde,
 and 
Alguazil,
 where all sorts of Provisions are sold at a Set-price.


The 
Casiques
 are succeeded by their Heirs, who resent nothing worse than Af∣fronts, and take pride in nothing more than their Valour.


The 
Moors
 or 
Negro's
 which are brought hither from 
Guinee,
 do all manner of hard Labour.


The 
Guachichiles
 and 
Guamares
 are a valiant People, and have each their peculiar Language, utterly different from the 
Mexican.


This Countrey comprehends these inferior Provinces: 1. 
Guadalajara;
 2. 
Xa∣lisco;
 3. 
Chiametta;
 4. 
Couliacan;
 5. 
Cino-loa;
 all of them on the Western Shore; 6. 
Zacatecas,
 to which some add 
Nova Biscaia
 and 
Nova Mexico,
 though others treat of them as distinct Countreys apart from the rest.




SECT. II. Guadalajara.


GUadalajara
 is bounded on the West, with 
Xalisco;
 on the South and South-West, with 
New Spain;
 and on the North, with 
Zacatecas.
 It is a Coun∣trey exceeding pleasant, and rich in all kind of Commodities, but especi∣ally in its Mines of Silver. It is well water'd with the River 
Barania,
 which run∣neth through the midst of it, and with divers other Streams: yielding abundantly both Wheat, 
Maiz,
 and some other Grain. In a word, there is nothing said of the properties of 
New Gallicia
 in general, either for Soil, Climate, or People, but is pe∣culiarly verifi'd of this Province.


The chief Towns are 1. 
Guadalajara,
 which gives Name to the whole Province. It is seated on the Banks of the River 
Barania,
 in a most delectable and sweet Air, and a rich Soil, by advantage whereof it is become the Metropolis of 
New Gallicia,
 honour'd with an Episcopal See, which was translated thither from 
Compostella
 in the Year 1570. with the Courts of Judicature, and the Residence of the King's Treasurers for that Province. This City was built on the Plain 
Molino,
 by 
Nunnez de Guzman,
 in the Year 1531. The neighboring Mountains afford store of Timber. All manner of 
Spanish
 Plants grow here likewise in great plenty. In the City is a Cathedral, several Cloysters, inhabited by 
Augustine
 and 
Franciscan
 Monks. The Bishop of this City belongs to the Arch-bishop of 
Mexico.
 The Air very tempe∣rate, neither molesting the Inhabitants with too great Cold, nor excess of Heat.


2. 
St. Maria de los Lagos,
 a Town thirty Leagues Eastward of 
Guadalajara,
 being a Fronteer Place, and built on purpose to secure the Countrey against the 
Chiche∣mecae,
 which are a barbarous and unreduc'd People of the North-East parts of this

Countrey, who harbouring themselves in Caves under Ground in the thickest of huge Woods and Forrests, do oftentimes issue out, and make foul spoil in the Countrey where they come, having first intoxicated themselves with a Liquor made of certain Roots, and would do much more harm, if it were not for this Garrison.


3. 
Del Spiritu Santo,
 built by the Founder of the other two, 
viz. Nunnez de Gus∣man
 aforesaid, in a part of the Countrey which they call 
Tepecque.






SECT. III. Xalisco.


Xalisco,
 or 
Galesco,
 as some call it, is bounded on the North, with 
Couliacan;
 on the South, with some parts of 
New Spain;
 on the East, with the Pro∣vince of 
Guadalajara;
 and on the West, with the Gulf or Bay of 
California.
 The Countrey is chiefly fertile in 
Maiz
 and Mines of Silver, not altogether so apt for Herbage and Pasture as some other Countreys about it. The People were Can∣nibals before the 
Spaniards
 came amongst them, eating Man's-flesh; were much given to quarrelling and Contentions amongst themselves, but by this time, 'tis suppos'd they are reasonably well reclaim'd both from the one and the other.


In this Countrey, besides many other goodly Streams, is the great and famous River 
Barania,
 on the Banks whereof are seated most of their principal Towns, as 1. 
Xalisco,
 which gives Name to the whole Province, and to a large Promontory or Foreland on the Western Coasts, which shoots it self out into the Bay of 
Cali∣fornia,
 right over against certain Islands, which the 
Spaniards
 call 
The Three Maries.
 This was an ancient City or Town of the Natives, but sack'd and taken by 
Nunnez de Gusman,
 in the Year 1530.


2. 
Compostella,
 built by the aforesaid 
Gusman,
 and so nam'd from the City in 
Spain,
 so famous for the Grave of 
James
 the Apostle, who (according to the 
Roman
 Writers) was buried there, lies near the South Sea on a barren Soil, within the 
Torrid Zone;
 yet the Ground breeds many sorts of Vermine, besides other noxious Creatures; amongst which the 
Capybara
 roots up whole Trees and other Plants in the Night. This Beast, resembling an indifferent large Hog, hath short Legs and Claws, thick Head, with a Beard, wide Ears, and on each Jaw-bone twenty four Teeth, besides two Tusks, but no Tail; it goes slow, but swims exceeding fast, and dives under Water for aconsiderable time together: they often feed together in great Herds, and make a terrible noise.


3. 
La Purification,
 a small Town on the Sea side, towards the Confines of 
New Spain.






SECT. IV. Chiametla.


AGainst 
Xalisco
 juts 
Chiametla,
 along the South Sea, where the Inhabitants wear short Cloaks, and Deer-skin Shoes; and in the Wars use Shields made of strong Twigs twisted together. The Women, which are indifferent hand∣som, are clad down to their Feet.


The chief Town of this Province is 
Sant Sebastian,
 so call'd from the River upon which it stands; it was built by Captain 
Franciscus de Yvarra, Anno
 1554. who disco∣vering

many Silver Mines, hath made several Melting-houses, in which the Silver being melted swims upon the Lead.






SECT. V. Couliacan.


NExt to 
Chiametla,
 Westward and Southward of 
Cinoloa,
 lies 
Couliacan,
 Coast∣ing all along the Bay of 
California,
 which it hath on the West; on the East it hath 
New Biscay;
 and on the South, 
Xalisco.
 The Countrey is not defective in any kind of necessary Provision, but more especially it aboundeth with Fruits of all sorts. But the 
Spaniards
 look onely at the Mines, of which they have some few in this Countrey. The People were generally Cloth'd with Cotton-Wooll when the 
Spaniards
 came first amongst them, but yet never a whit the more modest, being exceedingly given to Venery, and that in a more shameless and beastly manner than many other 
Americans
 who went naked.


The 
Spanish
 Towns are these,
 1. 
Hiustula,
 seated on the Banks of a fair River, distant about a days Journey from the Sea. 2. 
Quinola.
 3. 
Quatrobarrios,
 an old Town of the Natives, but new nam'd by the 
Spaniards.
 4. 
El Leon,
 an old Bur∣rough. 5. 
Couliacan,
 the chief Town of the Province. 6. 
St. Michael,
 in the Valley of 
Arroba,
 two Leagues distant from the Sea, in a rich and plentiful Countrey, both for Corn and Fruit, whither it was remov'd from the Banks of the River 
Orala,
 where it first stood; it was built by 
Nunnez de Gusman
 in the Year 1531. after he had burnt the Towns, and destroy'd a great number of the Natives, Inhabitants of the Countrey.


This Countrey was first discover'd by the aforesaid 
Nunnez de Gusman
 (after he had built 
Guadalajara
) after this manner: Marching from 
Chiametla
 to 
Piatzala,
 he ruin'd this Province with Fire and Sword: he likewise conquer'd the Countreys of 
Zapuatun
 and 
Piaztla;
 the first being a Plain, lay inclos'd within high Moun∣tains, where the 
Spaniards
 met none but Women, till they came to a great River call'd 
De la Sall,
 whose Banks on each side were well inhabited; the second juts against the Ocean, and is water'd by a River of the same Denomination. Here, within the Houses, (which are built after a strange manner) lay thousands of Ser∣pents mingled together, with their Heads sticking out on the top and at the sides, and hissing with open Mouth at those which approached them. The Inhabitants shew'd great Revence to these Serpents, because (as they said) the Devil often ap∣pear'd to them in that form. And this seems to be a Custome amongst them from the Tradition of 
Eves
 being tempted by the Devil in the shape of a Serpent:
 Nor was this Superstition peculiar onely to these 
Indians,
 forasmuch as divers Nations of the ancient 
Heathens
 of other parts of the World, worshipp'd the Likeness of a Serpent. And even amongst the 
Greeks,
 according to 
Plutarch, Hesychius, Clemens Alexandrinus,
 and others, it was no unusual thing in their religious Worship to call on 
Eva,
 and at the same time to shew a Serpent. 
Plutarchus
 and 
Aelianus
 say, That the 
Egyptians
 honour'd a Serpent for their God. The same saith 
Erasmus Stella
 of the old 
Prussians; Sigismund Baro,
 of the 
Liflanders;
 and 
Alexander Guaginus,
 of the 
Sarmatians
 and 
Samogethes.
 Moreover, some write, that in the Province of 
Calecut
 are Serpents with exceeding great Heads, and weighing as much as a great Hog, to which the King shews great Reverence; so that it seems the Devil takes delight to be worship'd in that shape wherein he work'd the Fall of Man-kind.


Gusman
 leaving 
Piaztla
 march'd to 
Bayla,
 where he found the great River 
De Mu∣geres,






 and the Countrey full of Woods and Pastures: thence travelling upwards along 
Mugueres,
 they ascended to the top of a Mountain, where they were assaulted by the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Village 
Quinola,
 whom nevertheless they soon put to flight; but not long after receiv'd a shrew'd Repulse at the Entrance into a Wood built full of Houses; yet nevertheless being at length Conquerors, though not without sufficient loss, they march'd farther in amongst the Mountains, till their Provisions beginning to grow scarce, and they seeing no likelihood of get∣ting to an end of this troublesom Journey, at last their Necessities forc'd them to retire.


The Flood which comes out of the Sea up to the City 
St. Michael,
 through the River 
Cignatlan,
 abounds with Fish, and especially the 
Guarapucu,
 which is seven Foot long when it comes to its full growth; it hath no Scales, but a smooth Skin of a Silver colour mix'd with Green: from the Head to the Tail runs a crooked Line of thin Scales on each side; it swims exceeding swift, feeds on lesser Fishes, and spawns in the Sea: the Flesh being wholsom and good to eat, is salted up against Winter. At the same Place is also the 
Piracarba,
 which shines exceedingly,
 having Silver-colour'd Scales, a broad slit Tail, a long white Beard, four great Fins, and a little Head. Farther into the Sea are a sort of flying Fish, call'd 
Pira∣bebes,
 which rise by thousands up out of the Water,
 so escaping the 
Dolphins
 and other Fish which prey on them; yet sometimes they are snatch'd up by the Birds, or else by the Fishes, when they dive down into the Water to wet their own Wings, which consist of a thin Skin, distinguish'd in length by tough Fins. These flying Fish also differ much one from another, for most of them are like Herrings; others have a thick Head, roud before like the Dolphins.


Moreover, the Countrey about 
St. Michael
 was always well inhabited. The Houses, being artificially built, were adorn'd on the top with many obscene Ima∣ges, and venereal Representations: But since the 
Spaniards
 have conquer'd this Countrey they have destroy'd them, and built other Houses in their stead, and also bestow'd much cost and labour on the Silver Mines 
De las Virgines.








SECT. VI. Cinoloa.


CInoloa
 is the most Northern part of 
New Gallicia,
 bounded on the West, with some part of the Gulf or Bay of 
California;
 on the East, with a long Ridge of Mountains, which they call 
Tepecsuan;
 on the North, with 
Cibola;
 and with 
Couliacan
 on the South. This Country, besides the general fertility of the whole Province of 
New Gallicia,
 yields great store of Cotton-Wool, by reason whereof both Men and Women here are better Apparell'd, for the most part, than else∣where the 
Americans
 are; is exceedingly well water'd with Rivers, which descend from those Mountains 
Tepecsuan,
 not above thirty or forty Leagues distant from the Sea; and which, with the variety of their Streams and Meandrous glidings, do divide the Countrey into many and good Pastures, which are likewise stor'd with abundance of Kine, Oxen, and other Cattel.


The chief Towns possess'd by the 
Spaniards
 are 1. 
St. Philip
 and 
Jacob,
 seated towards the Sea side, on the Banks of a fair River, about thirty or forty Leagues distant from the Town of 
Couliacan.


2. 
St. John de Cinoloa,
 an ancient Colony of 
Spaniards,
 setled there by 
Francisco de Yvarra,
 in the Year 1554, which is all they have in this Countrey, except some few old Forts of the Natives, which they found, after their manner, poorly furnish'd; but have since repair'd them for Defence against the Natives of those Parts, which as yet remain unreduc'd.


This Province was also discover'd by 
Nunnez de Gusman,
 who having rested some Weeks in 
St. Michael,
 proceeding on his Way, he Ferried over the River 
Pe∣tatlan,
 which receiv'd that Denomination because the Houses were cover'd with Mats, by the 
Indians
 call'd 
Petat.


The People hereabouts were generally Man-eaters.


Eighteen Leagues farther runs the River 
Tamochala,
 which hath many Villages on both sides thereof.


Between 
Petatlan
 and 
Tamochala
 lie several desolate Wildernesses, and Woods of the 
Brasile
-Tree.


But 
Gusman
 travelling up twenty seven Leagues along the fore-mention'd Ri∣ver 
Tamochala,
 came to Province 
Cinoloa,
 where they stay'd six Weeks, by rea∣son of the abundance of Rains; during which time the Villagers provided them Turtle-Doves, Hares, Rabbets, and all sorts of Fowls; but at last deserted their Habitations in the Night: after which the 
Spaniards
 crossing 
Tamochala
 went along a barren Desart, where (had they not found Water in certain Wells, and likewise store of Juice out of the 
Tunas
-Trees) they had without doubt perish'd; at last get∣ting over the River 
Yaguinu,
 they found a deserted Village, out of which a broad Path led along the Stream; whither 
Gusman
 marching, he came into a Plain, where he spy'd several 
Indians,
 which after some resistance were routed by the 
Spanish
 Horse.


The Villages built on the Banks of the River 
Yaguinu,
 as also the Language of the Inhabitants differ little from the former.


Not far from hence a Ridge of Hills runs into the Sea, and also extend them∣selves a hundred Leagues towards 
Xalisco.








SECT. VII. Zacatecas.


THe 
Zacatecas,
 as they call them, are bounded on the South, with 
Guadala∣lajara;
 on the North, with 
New Biscay;
 on the West, which 
Couliacan
 and some part of 
Xalisco;
 and on the East, with 
New Spain.
 The Countrey, especially the more Western part of it, is very rich in Silver Mines, no Province of this part of 
America
 richer; but not so apt either for Wheat or 
Maiz.
 But the Ea∣stern parts of it are abundantly stor'd with all sorts of Fruits, the Woods every where replenish'd with Deer, the Fields no less with Corn, and every Tree almost giving Entertainment to some Bird or other.


The Towns are 1. 
Las Zacatecas,
 forty Leagues distant from 
Guadalajara,
 and fourscore from 
Mexico,
 but neighbor'd with most rich Mines, and therefore both Garrison'd and well peopled by the 
Spaniards;
 for 'tis suppos'd there are no less than five hundred Families of them in the Town, and about the Mines.


2. 
St. Martins,
 twenty seven Leagues distant from 
Zacatecas,
 and as rich a Place, having a Colony of four hundred 
Spaniards
 at least.


3. 
St. Lucas de Avinno.
 4. 
Erena,
 lesser Towns, but both of them rich, and seated in the midst of excellent Mines.


5. 
Nombre de Dios,
 in the most Northerly part of this Countrey, sixty eight Leagues distant from 
Guadalajara,
 and founded by the aforesaid 
Francisco de Yvarra;
 who having subdu'd and quieted the Natives, and thereby gain'd to himself the Government of these Countreys, granted the propriety of some Silver Mines both to the 
Spaniards
 and to the Natives, and by that means drew so many of them thi∣ther, that in a short time it became the chiefest and best peopled town of the whole Province.


6. 
Durango,
 in the Valley of 
Guadiana,
 eight Leagues distant from 
Nombre de Dios,
 and built by 
Yvarra.


7. 
Xeres de Frontera,
 a Place built on purpose for the repressing of the 
Chichemecae
 aforesaid, and other Salvages that infested the Borders of 
Guadalajara,
 in the Re∣gency of the Marquess of 
Villa Manrique.


8. Last, 
St. Lewis,
 built by 
Alonso Pacheco,
 in that part of the Countrey which is call'd 
Uxitipa,
 and people by him with a Colony of 
Spaniards,
 being distant about twenty Leagues from 
Panuco
 in 
New Spain,
 to which the whole Countrey of 
Uxitipa
 once belong'd.


The aforesaid 
Franciscus de Yvarra, Anno
 1554. discover'd the Mine call'd 
Sant Martin,
 and since also 
Lucas Avinno,
 the Mine 
Del Sombrereto,
 lying near the City 
Del Erena:
 but the Mines 
De los Ranchos, Chalchuites, De las Nieves,
 and 
Del Frisuillo,
 would produce much more Silver, if the Mine-works were stor'd with Quick-silver. The Vice-Roy of 
New Spain,
 nam'd 
Lodowick de Velasco,
 order'd a certain number of Sol∣diers, Slaves, Horses and Mules, for every Mine, to defend the Workmen from the Assaults of the Natives, which oftentimes Sallied out upon them. Moreover, 
Ve∣lasco
 sent Priests through all the Countrey to Preach the 
Gospel:
 But 
Yvarra
 having the care of the Priests, guarded them with a company of Soldiers, and in his Way discover'd the Valley 
San Juan,
 and the River 
De las Nacos,
 where he conquer'd the rebelling Natives.


Near the Silver Mine 
Sant Martins
 the Monks built a Cloyster; after which 
Yvarra
 gave free leave to all that would, to dig in the Mine at 
Avinno,
 which he had

bought, on condition they should pay the real fifth part of what they got, to the 
Spanish King:
 which Priviledge stirr'd up many, insomuch that 
Avinno
 in a short time grew very populous. 
Yvarra,
 though having brought his Business to this pass, could not rest, but sent 
Antonius Pacheco
 to a Valley in 
Guadiana,
 to build the fore∣mention'd City 
Durango,
 where several Rivers make a convenient and delightful place for Habitation, whither 
Yvarra
 follow'd three Moneths after, and finish'd the new Town. But the chiefest Silver Mines, which borrow their Denominations from the Province 
Zacatecas,
 are continually guarded by five hundred 
Spaniards,
 and as many Slaves.








CHAP. VII. New Biscay.


NEw Biscay,
 by some accounted a Province of 
New Gallicia,
 hath on the South, 
Zacatecas;
 on the West, the Countrey of 
Cinoloa;
 Northward it is boun∣ded with 
New Mexico;
 the Eastern Borders of it looking towards 
Florida,
 not yet well discover'd: so call'd by the 
Spaniards,
 onely from its neighborthood to 
New Gallicia.
 It is, as the other Provinces, exceeding rich in Silver Mines, and hath some also of Lead; which serve principally, as some say, for the refining or pur∣ging of the other Metal. The People generally are of a stout and resolute Dispo∣sition, and with much difficulty submitting to the Yoke; yea, the 
Spaniards
 them∣selves confess, that there remain yet to this day four great Towns unreduc'd, though they lie, as it were, in the mid-way, betwixt the 
Zacatecas
 aforesaid, and the Mines and Town of 
St. Barbara
 of this Province: The 
Spaniards
 call them 
Las Qua∣tro Ceinegas,
 or 
The Four Quagmires,
 as lying, perhaps, in the Marshes, or in some Fenny and lower parts of the Countrey.


The Towns which themselves hold, are, 1. 
St. Barbara,
 famous for the rich Mines about it.


2. 
St. Johns,
 equal to the other, and not above three or four Leagues distant from it.


3. 
Ende,
 the most Northerly Town which the 
Spaniards
 have in this Countrey, distant about twenty Leagues from the other.


These be all Colonies of the 
Spaniards,
 and built on purpose for securing the Mines; which when they were first discover'd by 
Yvarra,
 he order'd 
Roderigo del Rio
 to guard the same, and took up his Winter Quarters at 
St. Juan
 in a strong House, stor'd with all manner of Provisions, and erected there by him, as a place of de∣fence against the 
Chichimecae,
 who (though the 
Spaniards
 kept the place with strong Guards) kill'd above four hundred of their Horses and Mules; which loss no way daunted him, so as to change his Resolution of going 
Topia:
 whither travelling, he found many snowy Mountains, and suffer'd extream Cold, which kill'd most of their Horses, being seen fifteen days after to stand so stiffly frozen, as if still alive: at last getting within the Borders of 
Topia,
 after he had suffer'd many inconveni∣ences, he was oppos'd by the Inhabitants, till he pacifi'd them with Presents.






SECT. II.


THis Countrey hath many convenient Havens, 
viz. San Jago, Navidad, Ma∣lacca, Chacalla,
 below the Promontory 
Corientes,
 the Bay 
Xalisco,
 the Road 
Massatlan,
 and 
Chiametla,
 so call'd from a Town about eleven Leagues from the Ocean.


Here, and in several places of 
New Gallicia,
 grow Lillies, Roses, Violets, Jessa∣mins, and many other Flowers; amongst which the 
Floripondium
 deserves peculiar observation, because it flourishes the whole Year; and its white Blossoms, which are bigger than Lillies, opening in the Morning, yield an exceeding sweet smell.


In no less esteem is the 
Murucuia,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Granadilla,
 which will not grow, it bereav'd of any of its Leaves: it bears a Flower from the resem∣blance of our Saviour's Suffering, call'd 
The Passion-Flower,
 which exceeds the biggest Rose in circumference; the uppermost Leaves green, those underneath of a purple colour; on the top hangs a round Bush of a thousand interwoven threds of divers colours, distinguish'd by white and red Specks; the pale Stalk which sticks in the middle of the Flower, is divided into five others, that bend downwards with a yel∣low Button-like Knob; on the middlemost Stalk stands a pale yellow Flower, which appear three hours after Sun-rising, and closes again a little before Sun-set; the Fruit, which is very round, smooth, and a pale Green, hath white Specks, a thick Rind Saffron-colour'd Pulp, which is wholsom, of a good rellish, and hath abundance of black Seeds inclos'd in little Husks.








CHAP. VIII. New Mexico.


NEw Mexico
 (as 'tis call'd for distinction's sake) is bounded on the South-West, with 
New Biscay;
 more directly Westward, with some parts of 
Quivira;
 the Countreys Northward of it not yet discover'd; Eastward it extends it self as far as 
Florida.


This Province doubtless for largeness may compare with 
New Gallicia,
 having been search'd and discover'd by the 
Spaniards
 above a hundred, some say two hun∣dred Leagues directly Eastward, and to the North-East: and they report Wonders of it, if we may believe them, at least in respect of what was generally found in these Northern parts of 
America
 at their first Discovery; as namely, That they have Towns fairly and well built of Lime and Stone, Houses of four Stories high, and most of them provided with Stoves for the Winter Season, as well as any in 
Europe;
 the Streets fair and broad, and the People as curious and expert in divers Arts and Manufactures as any of theirs. More particularly they tell us of a Town call'd 
Chia,
 of the Province of 
Cuames,
 so big, that it is said to contain eight several Mar∣ket-places. Another call'd 
Acoma,
 a great Town, but seated on the top of an high Rock, without any ordinary way of access to it, but by a pair of Stairs hewn out of the hard Stone, or else by certain Ladders, which the Inhabitants let down and take up as they please. And likewise of a third, which they call 
Conibas,
 containing, as they say, no less than seven Leagues in length, and about half so much in breadth,

seated upon a Lake, but scatteringly built, and much of the space taken up with Mountains and many fair Gardens, in the midst of which the Town standeth; of all which more hereafter. This certain, that the Countrey to which they give the Name of 
New Mexico,
 is of a vast extent, reaching from the Mines of 
St. Barbara
 in 
New Biscay
 Eastward, and to the North-East, above two hundred Leagues al∣ready discorver'd, but doubtless taking up no small part of those Countreys which are sometimes assign'd to 
Florida,
 if not of the Confines of 
Virginia
 also.


This Countrey was first, 
Anno
 1581. discover'd by a 
Franciscan
 Monk, nam'd 
Augustine Ruyz,
 who with two other Monks of his Order, got eight Soldiers of 
Conde de Coruna,
 Vice-Roy of 
New Spain,
 for his Companions; with whom he tra∣vell'd from the Valley 
Sant Bartholomew,
 to the Province 
De los Tiguas,
 where one of the two Monks was kill'd by the Natives, which occasion'd such a fear amongst the Souldiers, who judg'd themselves too weak to make any resistance, that they resolv'd to return, notwithstanding all the arguments which 
Ruyz
 us'd to disswade them from it; yet nevertheless he and his Brother 
Franciscus Lopez,
 and four 
Indi∣ans,
 went onward of their Journey; which news the Souldiers carried back to the 
Franciscans
 in 
Sant Bartholomew;
 who fearing their Brethren would be destroy'd, sent several Souldiers and a Monk, call'd 
Bernardyn Beltran,
 after them, who were also accompanied by 
Antony Espejus,
 who spent a great part of his Estate in raising of Men, providing Arms and Provisions, loading therewith a hundred and fifty Horses and Mules; with which he travell'd direct North from the fore-mention'd Valley, and after two days Journey found a People call'd 
Conchi,
 who went naked, and liv'd in Huts built together like a Village: They were Govern'd by 
Casiques,
 fed on Hares, Deer, Rabbets, 
Maiz, Calabashes,
 and Melons. Several adjacent Ri∣vers afford them plenty of Fish. They were amaz'd at the Crosses which the 
Spa∣niards
 there erected, till they were inform'd of a Crucifi'd Saviour. 
Espejus
 being every where kindly Entertain'd amongst them, and conducted twenty two Leagues father, came amongst the 
Indians
 call'd 
Passaguates,
 of the like Constitution with the 
Conchi's;
 who had skill in Minerals, and judg'd that there were many Silver Mines in that Countrey. From whence the 
Passaguates
 travell'd with the 
Spaniards
 to the Borders of the 
Los Tobosos,
 who no sooner saw them, but they fled, because a few years before they had been miserably dealt with by the 
Spaniards;
 but being inform'd by the Interpreters, that they needed not be afraid of any thing, they all appear'd, and conducted 
Espejus
 to the Borders of the 
Patarabueyes;
 which People possess a large Countrey, Stone Houses and Villages built in good order. Great Rivers with come out of the North, and others that disembogu'd into the North Sea, af∣forded them all sorts of Fish; as also the Woods plenty of Venison, Fowls, and wholsom Plants. In some Pools also the salt Water afforded Salt.


The Valour of the Inhabitants may sufficiently appear by the rough Entertain∣ment which the 
Spaniards
 met withall the first Night; for the 
Patarabueyes
 fell so fiercely upon them, that had not the Watch given notice thereof in time, none had escap'd with Life; nevertheless five Horses were kill'd, and a considerable num∣ber of Men wounded: after which retreating, they went upon a neighboring Hill, whither 
Espejus
 sent his Interpreter, and an 
Indian
 the same Countrey, to inform them, That the 
Spaniards
 came not to molest them, and if they pleas'd to come to them, they should meet with none but Friends; which was the more easily credi∣ted, because the 
Casiques
 receiv'd some Presents; after which being reconcild, they conducted the 
Spaniards
 twelve days Journey up a long River, whose Banks were inhabited in several places. from thence they reach'd to a Place, inhabited by a People richly Cloth'd, who also seem'd to have some knowledge of God; for in

their Discourse they pointed up to Heaven, call'd the Creator and Preserver of all things 
Apalito,
 and signifi'd that they had receiv'd that Knowledge formerly from those that were left of 
Pamphilius Narvaez
's Army, who having rang'd through 
Florida
 were driven hither.


These People also Presented 
Espejus
 many tann'd Skins, with which he went to a great Village, the Inhabitants whereof were very courteous, and barter'd them for brave Plumes of Feathers and Cotton Cloaks, streak'd with blue and white: but 
Espejus
 having no Interpreters whom they could understand, could not learn by what Name they were known; yet by signs they express'd what time of the year they had Precious Stones brought to them; and also what their Countrey produ∣ced; and also that abundance of those Riches was to be found in a Province about five days Journey Westward from thence, whither they freely offer'd to conduct the 
Spaniards,
 which accordingly they did, bearing them company one and twenty Leagues to the next Province, inhabited by a People whose Name also they could not be inform'd of, yet staying three days amongst them, they were Entertain'd with Presents and Dances both Night and Day. The Countrey afforded them also store of Venison and Fruits: Those that understood Minerals, judg'd that there were likewise several Gold Mines.


Leaving this Province, they entred into a great Wilderness of Pine-Trees, in which they travell'd twelve Leagues in fifteen days, without seeing either Man or House; but at the end of the Wood they spy'd a Village of Straw Huts, where there were great quantities of white Salt, and Deer Skins neatly dress'd. The Peo∣ple of the Place courteously Entertain'd the 
Spaniards,
 and conducted them along the River 
Del Norte,
 to 
New Mexico:
 The Banks of the River on each side was plan∣ted with Nut-Trees and Vines, which spread themselves out above three Leagues; through which they had scarce pass'd three days together, when they saw ten Po∣pulous Villages pleasantly seated on the the said River, from whence came many thou∣sands of the Natives to meet 
Espejus,
 who was not so much amaz'd at the great number of People, as at their extraordinary Civility and decent Habits; for they Entertain'd him with well dress'd Meat, roasted Poultrey, and pleasant Fruits: Their Garments were Cotton Cloaks, Deer-skin Breeches, Shoes and Boots of good Leather. The Women wore their Hair neatly Comb'd and Pleited. Their Houses were almost four Stories high, handsomely built, and divided into fair Chambers, had Stoves or Cells under Ground against the Cold in the Winter. Every Village was Govern'd by a 
Casique,
 whose Commands were publish'd by the 
Alguaziles.
 Each House had a peculiar place in which their Idol stood, before whom they set Meat twice a day. Near the High-ways stood Temples very curiously painted, wherein their Deity, as they say, diverted himself in his Progress from one Village to ano∣ther. At certain Distances near their Plough'd Lands, stood 
Portico's,
 supported on four Columns, under which the Husband-man us'd to eat, and take his Noon-sleep. Besides their Swords, which were strong enough to cut a Man through the Middle, they us'd Bowes and Arrows: Their Shields were made of Deer Skins.


Espejus
 having stay'd here four days, went to the Province 
De las Tiguas,
 which had sixteen Villages; in the chiefest whereof, call'd 
Poala, Augustine Ruyz
 and his Brother Monk 
Franciscus de Lopez
 had been slain, besides four others; wherefore the People being conscious of this Crime, and fearing that Revenge would follow, fled to the Mountains, from whence they could not be enticed, whilst the 
Spaniards
 found their Houses full of Provisions and some Minerals.


Now those being dead whom they sought for, some though it convenient to re∣turn; but 
Espejus
 and 
Beltran
 perswaded the contrary, alledging, That farther up,

according to the 
Indians
 information, lay several Provinces which were worth the discovery, and advis'd that the chiefest part of their Forces might stay there, whilst they and some few resolute Men went farther upon the Discovery, which accor∣dingly was perform'd. 
Espejus
 having travell'd two days, came into a fruitful Province, jutting against 
Cibola,
 in which he found eleven Villages, inhabited by above fourteen thousand People, who were clad in Skins and Cotton, worshipp'd many Idols, and receiv'd the 
Spaniards
 with great Civility.


The like Entertainment they met withall in the Countrey 
Los Quires,
 wash'd by the River 
Del Norte;
 near which stood five Villages, inhabited by about fifteen thousand People.


Thirteen Leagues farther they found 
De los Cunames,
 having also five Villages, the chiefest of which being 
Cia,
 boasted (as above mention'd) eight Market-places: The Houses, made of Lime, were neatly Painted, and compris'd in all above twenty thousand Persons, and civil People, who presented 
Espejus
 and his Company with handsom Cloaks, set good boyl'd Meat before them, and shew'd them rich Minerals, and the Mountains out of which they got the same.


Of the like Constitution were the Inhabitants 
De los Amires,
 which being thirty thousand in number, resided in seven well built Villages, lying North-West from 
Cunames.


After this they march'd Westward, and found the eminent Village 
Acoma,
 men∣tion'd before, built on an exceeding high Rock, to which led onely a narrow Path up a pair of Stairs cut in the Rock; as also many Wells to receive Rain, besides what they have out of a River, led by moats round about their Plough'd Lands. The 
Spaniards
 staying here three days, were Entertain'd with all sorts of good Meat, Dances and Drolls.


From hence travelling twenty four Leagues more Westerly, they entred the Pro∣vince of 
Zuny;
 where the erected Crosses which had remain'd there till that time, were sufficient testimonies of 
Cornaro
's having been there, after he was deserted by 
Andreas de Cuyocan. Casper de Mexico,
 and 
Antonius de Guadalajara,
 being setled on 
Zuny,
 (otherwise call'd 
Cibola
) and speaking the 
Indian
 Tongue better than their Native Language, inform'd 
Espejus,
 that sixty days Journey farther lay a great Lake, whose Shores were crown'd with many brave Villages, inhabited by a People which wore Golden Armlets and Ear-rings; whither 
Franciscus Vasquez
 had gone a second time, had not Death prevented him. This Information so encourag'd 
Espejus,
 that notwithstanding it was so great a Journey, yet he resolv'd to venture thither, though the Monk 
Beltran
 and most of his Company perswaded him to the contrary; whereupon 
Beltran
 return'd: After which 
Espejus
 went on to the said Lake; wither he was accompanied with a hundred and fifty 
Indians.
 Having gone twenty six Leagues, he found a populous Province, whose Borders he no sooner approach'd, but he was told, 
That if he was willing to lose his Life, he and his Party might enter into a forbidden Dominion;
 yet notwithstanding this threatnign Message, he wrought so much upon the 
Casique
 by the Presents which he sent him, that he was permitted to come in freely; nay, the Inhabitants of 
Zaguato
 strow'd Meal on the Earth for the 
Spaniards
 to go over, and presented 
Espejus
 at his departure with forty thousand Cotton Cloaks, and a considerable quantity of Plate, which he sent with five of his Soldiers, and all the 
Cibolan Indians,
 back to 
Cibola,
 keeping onely four Companions and one Guide, with whom he travell'd forty one Leagues Westward; where he found a Mountain, to the top whereof led a broad Path; which ascend∣ing, he took up Silver Oar with his own Hand. The several sorts of People that inhabited here were all civil and courteous, living in good fashion, in pretty large

Houses, built on the Banks of a pleasant River, shaded with Vines and Nut-Trees, and thick planted with Flax: They inform'd 
Espejus,
 that near a River which runs eight Miles towards the North Sea, were such stately Places, as could not be beheld without great admiration. But 
Espejus
 going back a plain Road to 
Cibola,
 found not onely those whom he had sent from 
Zaguato,
 but also 
Beltran,
 with the other Soldiers, who having been detained where by the Civilities and kind Entertain∣ments of the 
Indians,
 were now upon returning home; so that 
Espejus
 was left alone with eight Soldiers, who resolv'd to venture their Lives and Fortunes with him. They travell'd along the River 
Del Norte,
 through the Provinces 
De los Guires
 and 
Habutas,
 whose Mountains, over-spread with Pine-Trees and Cedars, have many rich Mines. The Natives wore painted Cotton Cloaks, and dwelt in stately Houses five Stories high. At the Borders of the Realm 
Los Tamos
 they were stopt, and not permitted to come on farther; wherefore being but few in number, and several of them sick, they judg'd it convenient to cross the River 
De las Vaccas
 (so call'd from the abundance of Cows that were thereabouts) to the River 
Conchos
 and the Village 
Bartholomew,
 where 
Espejus
 was inform'd, that 
Beltran
 was long before his arrival gone to 
Guadiana.


And now that we may have the better Account of 
New Mexico
 (which 
Ruyz Espejus,
 and 
Beltran
 endeavor'd to discover) it will be necessary to begin with the first original thereof, according as several ancient. Histories make mention.


The most ancient Possessors of that part of 
Northern America
 call'd 
New Spain,
 were for their fierce and salvage Nature call'd 
Chichimecae,
 who dwelling in Caves, fed on Moles, Rabbets, Hedghogs, Serpents, Roots and Herbs. Whilst the Women accompanied their Husbands in their Travels, the Children were put into Baskets, and hang'd in a Tree. No manner of Government was to be found amongst them. They never Till'd their Ground till the 
Navatlacans
 came from 
New Mexico
 (which was anciently divided into two Countreys, 
Aztlan
 and 
Teuculhuacan
) to 
New Spain;
 after which they Sow'd their Lands.


The 
Navatlacans
 (who us'd to dwell in Houses, worship Images, plough their Lands, and obey their Governors) were divided into six Tribes, each Tribe posses∣sing their limited Bounds: and there goes a Tradition, That out of six Pits that are to be seen in 
New Mexico,
 the 
Navatlacans
 had their original. The time when they deserted 
New Mexico,
 as their most authentick Histories or Records declare, was (according to our computation) 
Anno
 940. and they farther affirm, that they spent forty years in a Journey, which might have been travell'd in a Moneth: The reason of which tediousness was, because they rested in all places where they found a fruitful Countrey; but as they had advice from their diabolical Spirits, which (as they say) appear'd visibly to them, they still went on farther and farther, yet left behind those that were aged, sick, and decrepid, building convenient Houses for them, and appointing Overseers to look after them. The Ruins of the Houses are yet to be seen on the Way along which they pass'd.


The six Tribes divided themselves after this manner: Four of them setled round about the great Lake of 
Mexico.
 The 
Sichumilans
 taking the South part, built, besides two other Towns, a Metropolis of their own Name, as the 
Chalcans
 on the North. The 
Tapunecans
 built 
Azcapuzalco
 in the West, which signifies 
A Pismires Hole,
 because of the abundance of Inhabitants. The Eastern part was taken up by the 
Chalhuans.
 And all these Names have a peculiar signification; the first signifies 
People of Flowry Fields;
 the second, 
People of Mouthes;
 the third, 
People of Bridges;
 and the fourth, 
Crooked People.
 Not long after, the 
Tatluicans,
 a strong People, went over the Mountains on the other side of the 
Mexican
 Lake, where they built several Towns

on a hot, yet fruitful Soil, the chiefest whereof they call'd 
Quahunachua,
 that is, 
A Place where an Eagles Voice is heard.
 The 
Tlascaltecans
 went near the Snowy Moun∣tains, one, of which, being between 
Mexico
 and 
De los Angelos,
 vomits horrid Flames and Smoke up into the Skie. Here scattering up and down, they built several Vil∣lages, besides the City 
Tlascalla;
 the Inhabitants whereof assisted the 
Spaniards,
 as hath been related in the taking of 
Mexico,
 for which good Service they live free, without paying any Tribute.


When these six Tribes came first from 
Mexico
 thither, the 
Chichimecans
 made little or no resistance against them, but hid themselves amongst the Rocks: yet some of them not long after taking courage, flew to Arms, and had without doubt destroy'd the 
Tlascallans,
 had not a subtile Plot sav'd them: for under a shew of Friendship they falling on the unarm'd 
Chichimecans,
 kill'd every Man of them.


Joseph de Acosta
 tells us, that 
Anno
 1586. he saw a Grave in 
Mexico,
 wherein a 
Chi∣chimecan
 of a Gygantick size lay buried.


After this Conquest gotten by the 
Tlascallans,
 the fore-mention'd six Tribes liv'd in Peace and Quiet, and strengthned themselves the more by Marrying into one anothers Families.


The 
Chichimecae
 keeping on the Mountains left the new People in quiet posses∣sion of their Lands, nay, learnt some of their Customs, insomuch that they be∣gan to build Huts, chuse Governors, and live according to their Laws.


The 
Tlascallans
 having possess'd 
New Spain
 three hundred and two years, a seventh Tribe (a valiant and civiliz'd People) came thither, upon their Daemon 
Viztli∣puztli
's promise of having the supream Government: wherefore he was carried in an Ark by four chief Priests, whom he inform'd whither and when they should travel or rest, for where ever they stopt, they built a Tent in the middle of their Army for their Idol, whom they set on an Altar; which done, they Sow'd the Ground about them: yet if their 
Daemon
 commanded them to march before Harvest, then they left the Product to the ancient and sick People. But at last 
Mexi,
 from whence the Name of 
Mexico
 is deriv'd, conducted the Army into 
Mechaocan,
 where the pleasant Soil among the Lakes entic'd many to take up their Habitation. But 
Mexi
 proceeded on his Journey, yet not without great Crosses, in regard 
Viztli∣puztli
's Sister (some Inchantress probably so call'd) did much hurt to the whole Army by her Sorceries, because they would not honor her as a Goddess, till 
Viztli∣puztli
 inform'd one of them that carried the Ark, that the Army should march on, and banish the Witch from them: whereupon she accordingly being driven away, built the Village 
Malinalco,
 as a Habitation for Conjurers. Mean while, the Army grew weaker and weaker by their leaving so many People behind them in most places; therefore they judg'd it convenient to rest a while in 
Tula,
 where a great River water'd the Countrey; which, according to 
Viztlipuztli
's Commands, being dry'd up, made a large Lake about the Mountain 
Coatepeck,
 whose Banks being planted with Willow and Poplar-Trees, were exceeding pleasant, and the more, because of the variety of Birds that made their Nests in the same; which so delighted ma∣ny of the People, that being tir'd with travelling, they resolv'd to settle there; which Resolution was so ill resented by 
Viztlipuztli,
 that he commanded the Bank to be broken, that the Water might have liberty to flow its former Course, and threat∣ned them with heavy punishments: after which in the Night a terrible Cry of Murder was heard in one part of the Army; which being inquir'd after the next Morning, they found divers People lying on the Ground with their Breasts cut open, and their Hearts pull'd out: whereupon those that remain'd went on to 
Chapultepec,
 where they fortifi'd themselves in the Mountains against the adjacent







depiction of Huitzilopochtli, Aztec god of war


Viztlipuztli idolum Mexicanorum






People, which 
Copil,
 Son to the 
Malinalcon
 Witch, had rais'd up against them; and soon after the 
Tapunecans
 and 
Chalcans
 went against their new Neighbors, with whom they began a bloody Fight, when 
Vitzilovitli,
 at that time General of the 
Mexican
 Army, pressing in amongst them, broke their Ranks, and made way for all his Army (though with his own Death) to march Conquerors to 
Culhuacan:
 The Prince of which Province gave them a Place to settle on, near the white Water 
Ticaapan,
 whose Shores swarm'd with Adders and Serpents, upon Design that the Strangers might be destroy'd by them; but it prov'd quite otherwise: for they without regret eat the poysonous Animals; and Dunging the unfruitful Soil, re∣ceiv'd a plentiful Harvest: They would willingly have setled here, after their so long ranging up and down, if 
Viztlipuztli
 would have approv'd thereof; but he told them, that they must possess themselves by Arms, and make a 
Culhuacan
 Maid their Goddess: whereupon they desir'd the 
Casique
's Daughter of 
Culhuacan,
 who was sent them in rich Ornaments, and with a stately Retinue: But she was no sooner entred on the 
Ticaapan
 Shore, but they flay'd her alive, and her Skin being stuff'd, and nam'd 
Tocci,
 was religiously worshipp'd. But not satisfi'd with this cruelty, they sent for her Father to visit his Daughter in her Dignity; who ac∣cordingly coming with great Attendance, was led into a dark Chappel, where by the burning Tapers he knew the Goddess to be no other than his Daughters Skin stuff'd full of Cotton; whereat burning with rage, he afterwards fell upon these Murderers with all his Forces, and drove them to the Place where they afterwards built 
Mexico,


We have often made mention heretofore of the Governor of this Journey, 
Viztlipuztli,
 it will therefore be necessary to give an exacter Description of him, as followeth:


He was a woodden Image like a Man, sitting on a blue Seat in a triumphant Chair; at each end of which was plac'd a Staff with a Serpents Head upon it, from whose Forehead, which was Painted blue, ran a Streak of the same colour, cross his Nose to both his Ears; upon his Head stood a Plume of Feathers, the ends whereof were tipp'd with a golden Varnish; his left Hand held a white Shield, on which stuck five Feathers, and on the top a Laurel Bough; next the Shield lay four Arrows, pretended to be sent from Heaven; in his right Hand a Truncheon, full of blue crooked Streaks like Serpents; behind on his Shoulders appear'd Wings, not unlike those of a Bat, his Eyes large and round, and his Mouth reaching from Ear to Ear, made him terrible to behold, also gaping, and full of Teeth, which stuck out of his Belly; in his Breast also were two fiery Eyes, and under them a shrivell'd Nose; his Feet ended in Claws, hung round about with Precious Jems, golden Boxes and Shields set out with divers colour'd Feathers. The Curtain be∣hind which this Idol sat, was not drawn open except on a Feast-Day.


Next 
Viztlipuztli
 stood generally a lesser Image, call'd 
Tlaboc,
 and also the God∣dess 
Tocci,
 Daughter to the Prince of 
Culhuacan,
 who (as before mention'd) was flay'd by their 
Daemon
's Command. Since which time they suppos'd, that they were never more acceptable to their Gods, than when they appear'd Cloth'd in an∣other Man's Skin; and accounted no Offering better, than a Heart taken out of their Enemies Breast, since their Spirit destroy'd so many after that manner in the Army at 
Tula.


But 
Tocci,
 they say, had also a Son much inclin'd to Hunting,
 whose Image they carry, attended by a thousand People, with the sound of Horns and Trumpets, to an Arbor on a high Mountain; which being made of green Leaves pleited, had in the middle an Altar, on which they set the Idol, whilst the Multitude surrounded

the Foot of the Mountain, and set all the Bushes about the same on Fire; which done, they shouted and hollow'd, and play'd on several Instruments; which fright∣ing the wild Beasts that lay shelter'd in the Woods, made them run to the top of the Mountain, where they were more and more inclos'd by the People, insomuch that many of them were slain for an Offering before 
Tocci
's Son's Altar; which done, they carried the Idol back to his Temple, and the People made Merry with the slain Venison.


As great Reverence they shew'd to 
Tezcatlipuca,
 because (as they said) he pardon'd their Sins. This Idol was made of a black shining Stone, richly Apparell'd, having Golden Ear-rings; in his undermost Lip a Silver Sheath, in which stuck some∣times a green, and sometimes a blue Plume of Feathers; his Hair was ty'd with an embroider'd String, at the end of which hung a Golden Ear, whereon Smoak was Painted, signifying the Prayers of oppress'd Sinners; moreover, the String hung full of Pearls, and about the Neck in a String hung a Jewel; on his Breast, as al∣so on his Navel, a green Stone; in his left Hand he held a Fan made of a Gold Plate, in which stuck many colour'd Feathers: this Plate glittering like Glass, was in stead of a Mirrour for 
Tezcatlipuca,
 to observe all worldly Transactions in the same: and to punish Criminals, he held four Darts in his right Hand. His Feast they kept once in four years.


This Idol also had the Command of Hunger, Drought, Famine, and pestilen∣tial Distempers; wherefore he had quite another shape, sat on a Stool behind a red Curtain embroider'd with dead Mens Bones and Sculls; his Body Coal black, his Head stuck full of Quails Feathers, a Quiver with four Arrows in his left, and a Rod in his right Hand, which made the Image seem very terrible.


The Idol 
Quetzalcoalt,
 being their Guardian over the Merchants, was plac'd in a high Temple, being shap'd like a Man, his Face onely excepted; for that resem∣bled a Bird's Head, with a red Bill full of Teeth, a Comb, and a long Tongue; on the hind-part of his Head stood a Mitre, and about his Legs Silk Garters beset with Pearls.






CHAP. IX. Cibola, Tontonteac, and Nova Granada.


THough the Province of 
Zuny
 above-mention'd in the Chapter of 
New Mexico,
 in the Voyage of 
Espejus,
 be there otherwise call'd, and appear to be the same with 
Cibola,
 yet we find it not treated of by any as part of 
New Mexico,
 but by some as a distinct Province, by others as a part of 
California
 largely taken; for besides that 
California,
 properly so call'd, hath formerly been ta∣ken rather for a 
Peninsula
 than an Island, and still affords to some an Argument of question, whether it be one or the other. The whole extent of the Province gene∣rally so term'd, hath been reputed to comprehend the suppos'd 
Peninsula
 it self, 
Ci∣bola, Quivira,
 and 
Nova Albion;
 but since, according to the best Maps and Discove∣ries, there seems little doubt to be made, that 
California,
 strictly taken, is a perfect Island: and since upon that Consideration we have reserved it to be describ'd amongst the Islands of 
Northern America,
 we also consequently judge it most requi∣site to consider those Countreys apart that were included in the extended 
California.




Cibola
 lieth Southward of 
Quivira,
 betwixt it and 
New Gallicia,
 to the North and East: on the West it hath 
Mar Vermiglio,
 or the Bay of 
California.
 The Air of the Province is indifferently temperate, especially if compar'd to the sharp Frosts and Colds of 
Quivira.
 The Countrey is for the most part level and plain, as 
Quivira
 is, having but few Trees in it, except here and there some Woods of Cedars, which yet do abundantly supply the Natives both with Timber and Fewel. The Ground affords plenty of 
Maiz,
 and some small white Pease, of both which they usually make Bread. There is great store of Venison, and a kind of Sheep (as they say, and as it should seem by their Fleece) as big as some little Horses or Oxen, some of their Horns weighing forty or fifty Pound: But perhaps by some mistake of Authors, this Beast may be no other than 
Taurus Mexicans,
 elsewhere describ'd, whose Hair is extreamly thick and shaggy, and of which they make Cloth as of Wool, as hath been said. There are also Lyons, Bears, and Tygers in this Province, in such numbers, that the People of the Countrey are not a little troubled with them, and would gladly destroy them if they knew how. The People are generally well Limb'd, tall of Stature, and seem to be a little more Ingenious than their Neigh∣bors of 
Quivira;
 yet they go naked many of them, onely cover'd with Mantles made of Skins, which are many times painted, and that with such Curiosity and Art, as do sufficiently argue, that neither themselves nor their Neighbors of 
Quivira,
 from whom they have them in Traffick, do make them, but that they are the Merchan∣dise and Commodity of some other Nations, perhaps of 
Cathay
 or 
China,
 who, by the North-West Seas, do Trade with the Maritime Parts, and People of 
Quivira.


This part of the Countrey hath been reasonably well search'd by the 
Spaniards,
 but as yet nothing discover'd so considerable, as to perswade them to stay in it.


That which seems most observable, is the great Lake 
Tonteac,
 situate almost in the midst of the Province; upon which, or near unto it, they found seven or eight old Towns of the Natives, some whereof contain'd four or five hundred of their Cottages or little Houses, and were fortifi'd also with Ramparts, and other Works of Defence, so as the 
Spaniards
 could not become Masters of them, but by Force and Storming: In the attempt whereof 
Vasquez Coronado,
 their Commander in chief, was twice beaten down with Stones by the Natives; yet at last carrying the Place, he found in it good plenty of 
Maiz
 indeed, which was some refreshment to his Army, but nothing else: whereupon having nam'd the Place 
Granada,
 in memory of the Vice-Roy of 
New Spain,
 who sent him upon that Expedition, he departed. In his return homeward he fell upon a certain Countrey, which he nam'd 
Tu∣cayan,
 of which his Companions report great matters; as first, of a certain River call'd 
Huex,
 on the Banks whereof, in the space of twenty Leagues, or thereabouts, there stand no less than fifteen good Burroughs, well built, and furnish'd likewise with Stoves or Hot-houses, against the Cold, as in other Countreys of 
Europe;
 as also of a very fruitful and pleasant Valley, which they therefore call'd 
Aroba de Cora∣zones;
 of another great Town and Territory, call'd 
Chichilticala;
 and lastly, of the Valley of 
Nuestra Sennora,
 or 
Our Ladies Dale,
 in the South parts of the said Terri∣tory, all of them describ'd for such rich and delicious Places, that some take them for the 
Campi Elisii
 of 
America,
 especially seeing the 
Spaniards
 were never known to visit them a second time, the Discoveries that have been made since being onely of the North-West Parts of the Countrey, along the Coasts of 
Mar Vermiglio,
 and this no farther than onely to give Name to certain Capes or Promontories which they met with, as namely 1. 
Porto de St. Clara,
 near to the Mouth of the River which they call 
Rio del Nordt.
 2. 
Las Playas.
 3. 
St. Michael.
 4. 
Lago del Oro,
 which bordereth on 
Quivira;
 and lastly, 
El Rey Coronado,
 Eastward of that.




TOntonteac
 is mention'd by so few,
 and by those few so obscurely, that it can∣not well be determin'd to be any other than that Countrey which lies about the great Lake 
Tonteac,
 above spoken of in 
Cibola,
 and which being made Habitable by six or seven Towns not inconsiderable for Habitations of native 
Indians,
 might haply pass for a distinct Province. And perhaps the reason why this Province hath been so obscure, and little taken notice of, might be from the ruine of these Towns by War, or some other Accident: and to this purpose are the words of a late Wri∣ter, 
The Province of
 Tontonteac (saith he) 
hath five Houses onely left, which stand on the Shore of a salt Lake.


NOva Granada,
 besides that it is a generally known and describ'd Province of 
Southern America,
 is also nam'd amongst the Provinces of 
Northern America,
 particularly by 
Bertius, Cluverius,
 and 
Golnitzius,
 and in some late Maps of 
America
 so conspicuously specifi'd, that it might appear to be all that Tract of Land which contains both 
New Mexico
 and the several Provinces adjoyning to it; but since we find it not describ'd by any at large, it will with most verisimility pass for that part of 
New Mexico
 where stands the City of 
St. Foy;
 and this is most plainly express'd by Monsieur 
Martini,
 though there are who confound 
Cibola
 with 
New Granada.
 Wa∣ving which Decision, we shall onely insert a short Description of the Place, accor∣ding to 
Cornato,
 who seems to have been one of the first Discoverers of these Parts, and whose Credit is preferr'd before that of 
Marcus de Niza.


Nova Granada
 (saith he) consists of seven Villages,
 built in the circumference of four Leagues, the chiefest whereof boasts two hundred Houses, which for the most part are four or five Stories high, and built of Stone; the Cellars thereto belong∣ing, being neatly Pav'd, serve for Stoves against the Cold: they ascend to their upper Rooms by Ladders. The Inhabitants go naked, onely some Covering about their Middle, and over their Shoulders Cotton Cloaks, painted with divers Co∣lours. They live on 
Maiz,
 white Pease, Hares, Rabbets, and Venison: their Salt wherewith they season the same, they fetch from a neighboring Lake. The Tur∣kies, which they have in great numbers, are kill'd onely for their Feathers, not∣withstanding their Flesh is exceeding good Meat. The Soil is for the most part plain, yet hath some high Mountains; and the Pastures flourish with Grass. The Woods abound with Bears, Tygers, Lyons, wild Hogs, Rhinocerots, and the like ravenous Beasts, which make the Ways dangerous for Travellers. Besides large Deer, there are also Sheep, which in bigness may compare with Horses, having ex∣ceeding great Horns, and little Tails.


Concerning the abundance of 
Turkoises,
 of which 
Niza
 makes mention, 
Cornato
 could give no certain account, because a little before his Arrival the 
Granadians
 had convey'd their Children, which were under fifteen, and the aged People, who were above sixty years of age, with their chiefest Goods, into remote places. However, it is not unknown, that this Countrey affords 
Turkoises;
 for 
Cornato
 in his Journey to 
Quivira,
 Besieg'd a City in these Parts near a great River; the Inhabitants whereof, when they were not able to defend themselves any longer, throwing their Cloaks, 
Turkoises,
 and other Riches into the Fire, Sallied out upon the 
Spaniards,
 and died not altogether unreveng'd, as shall be specifi'd more at large in the Description of 
Tignes,
 which being nam'd among the Towns of 
Quivira,
 will upon the compa∣ring of Circumstances, be apparently found to be the same with this.


Lastly, 
New Granada
 hath no Fruit-Trees, but little Cedars fit for Building.








CHAP. X. Quivira.


QUivira
 is the next Region accounted of 
California,
 largely taken; yet appear∣ing by some Charts to lie so vastly remote, that all 
New Mexico, Gallicia,
 and other Provinces already mention'd, lie between that and the Island. And whereas 
New Granada
 is by several made a part of 
New Mexico;
 yet most cer∣tain it it is, that by some it is confounded with this Countrey, or at least accounted a part thereof, as hereafter shall more plainly appear, according to the Account of those that have most fully and particularly describ'd it.


Quivira
 takes up the most Northern and unknown part of 
America
 towards the West, reaching as far as the supposed 
Straight
 of 
Anian
 aforesaid (if there be any such) or else joyning to the Continent of 
Tartary.
 It is likewise the least fruitful part of all the 
West-Indies,
 especially for Corn. Cattel it hath good store, and Pa∣sturage indifferent good, the Countrey being for the most plain and level, and no∣thing else but Pasturage. The Natives are few and salvage, living in Hoards or great Companies together, after the manner of the 
Tartars,
 to whom they are Neighbors, and (as it is not improbably thought) of their Race. The Men Clothe themselves most commonly in that kind of Oxes Hide, elsewhere spoken of under the Name of 
Taurus Mexicanus.
 The Women wear little else but their Hair, notwithstanding the Countrey, especially for one half of the year, is excessive cold. Their Cattel, though they are much less than the ordinary Kine of 
Europe,
 are the chief Sustenance and Employment of the Natives; by Pasturing huge Herds whereof from place to place, the People live, and maintain a Traffick with other Parts. Yet some of them inhabit Towns, the chief whereof, as yet discover'd, seem to be these which follow:


1. 
Acus,
 or 
Acuco,
 a small Town, but seated in a strong defensible place, and being a great Staple for Cotton, the Territory about it hath been taken for a di∣stinct Province, and by some call'd 
The Kingdom of Acuco.


2. 
Tignes,
 a Town seated upon the Banks of a River bearing the same Name, and inhabited, it seems, by a stout and resolute People, and whom the 
Spaniards,
 coming amongst them in the Year 1540. had much ado to master: for they endur'd a Siege for the space of six Weeks; and at last finding themselves so strongly begirt by their Enemies, that there was no means to escape but by Death, or yielding up themselves, rather than they would fall alive into their hands, they first buried and spoil'd all such Treasure as they had (which were chiefly Saphires, and a few other Gems, that the Countrey afforded) and after that setting on fire their Houshold-stuff, they took their Wives and Children with them, and made a desperate Sally out upon the 
Spaniards;
 wherein although they were most of them slain, and trod under the Horses Feet, or drown'd in passing the River, yet was it not without some loss to the 
Spaniards
 themselves: nor would those few that were left behind deliver up the Town, till it was fir'd about their Ears, and that they could no longer abide in it. This Town, by all Circumstances, must needs be the same with that before mention'd in 
Nova Granada,
 which makes good what we have said above, 
viz.
 That 
New Granada
 is by some confounded with, or at least taken for a part of this Region.




3. 
Cicuic,
 another small Town, four days Journey from 
Tignes.
 The Countrey about this place, although generally it be all good Pasturage, and maintains abun∣dance of Cattel, yet is it so open and plain, that for almost a hundred Miles toge∣ther, the 
Spaniards,
 in their March hither from 
New Spain,
 found neither Stone nor Tree, nor any thing else that could serve them for a Land-mark; so that they were forc'd, as they march'd along, to raise up Heaps of Cow-dung, to serve them for direction in their coming back, which was not long after: for not finding the Com∣modities they sought for, and fearing to be surpris'd by Winter in those cold Coun∣treys, where they had no kind, of accommodation, they made somewhat a hasty Retreat, leaving behind them onely some few Religious Men, of the Order of 
St. Francis,
 whose Endeavours to do the People good by Converting them to the true Knowledge and Worship of Almighty God, procur'd them not long after, the Crown of Martyrdom, being murder'd all of them, except one, by the Natives, and he not without much difficulty escaping their Hands.


NOva Albion
 was so denominated by Sir 
Francis Drake,
 when he was there Enter∣tain'd by the King of that Countrey; but whether it were in 
Quivira
 that he was thus Entertain'd, and left that Denomination, or in the Island of 
California,
 ap∣pears not either from the Relation, or from the common Consent of Cosmogra∣phers, since some there are, who will have 
Quivira
 and 
Nova Albion
 to be one and the same Province; others reckon it to be the utmost North-West part of 
California;
 others make it distinct from 
Quivira,
 yet determine it not to the Island 
California,
 seeming rather to make it an adjoyning Countrey to 
Quivira:
 wherefore finding little else that concerns the Description of the Place, except the said Voyage of 
Drake,
 we shall here set it down, and leave the farther Disquisition concerning the Situation of the Place, till we come to describe the Island of 
California
 it self.


Captain 
Francis Drake
 set Sail from 
Plymouth Anno
 1577. and after much hardship getting through the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 arriv'd in the Haven 
Guatulco,
 having be∣fore his coming thither taken as many rich 
Spanish
 Ships in the Southern Ocean as he could possibly have wish'd for, so that his onely care now needed to have been how to get safe home; yet he put on a Resolution, not to come short of 
Ferdinandus Magellanus,
 who Saild about the World. Which brave Resolution of 
Drake
's was approv'd of by all his Sea-men; whereupon he set Sail along the North of 
Califor∣nia
 the fifth of 
June;
 being gotten into forty two Degrees, which was the farthest that 
Cabrillo
 went, he came on a sudden out of a warm Air into so frigid a Climate, that the Sea-men were almost kill'd with Cold, and the farther they went, the colder it grew; wherefore falling down three Degrees more Southerly, they got into a convenient Haven, where the Natives who liv'd along the Shore brought them Presents; which 
Drake
 left not unrequited, by returning them others, that were to them more novel, and not unuseful.


These People are exceeding hardy; for, notwithstanding the extraordinary cold∣ness of the Climate, the Men go naked; but the Women wear Garments of pleited Flags or Rushes, which being put about their Middle, hang down to their Ancles; on their Stomachs hang the ends of a hairy Skin ty'd together, which hanging also over their Shoulders, cover their hinder Parts. They shew great Respect and Obedience to their Husbands. Each House is surrounded with an Earthen Wall, and all the Corners thereof being close stopp'd, and Fires made in the midst of them, they are very warm. Rushes and Flags strow'd thick on the Ground near the Walls, serve them in stead of Beds.


The 
Indians
 coming a second time to Visit the 
English,
 brought them Plumes of



 Feathers, Neckbands of Net-work, and store of Tobacco: 
Drake
 pleas'd with this their kindness, built Tents on the Brow of a Hill, on the top of which the 
Indians
 stood that brought the Presents, whil'st one of them with a loud voice maintain'd a long Discourse; which he had no sooner ended, but everyone laid down his Bowe and Arrows, and walk'd unarm'd down to the Tents to proffer their Gifts: their Wives staying behind on the top, pinch'd their Cheeks, and made sad lamentation; which 
Drake
 suppos'd was because they made Offerings there: whereupon he also caus'd all his Men to kneel down and say their Prayers, which made the 
Indians
 to look very earnestly upon them, and to return him the Presents which the day before they had receiv'd of him.


The rumour of these Strangers arrival spreading all over the Countrey, made the Inhabitants far and near desirous to see them; the King himself sending Am∣bassadors to 
Drake,
 to inform him that he was on the Way coming to see him; all which the Agents related at large, and desir'd some Presents, as a testimony that their King should be welcome; which he being assur'd of, came with a Retinue of above twelve thousand Men, before whom walk'd one of a Gygantick size, carry∣ing a costly Scepter, on which, by three long Chains made of Bones, hung a great and a small Crown made of Feathers; next follow'd the King himself in a Sute of Cony-Skins; then came a great confus'd company of People, each of them carrying a Present: whereupon 
Drake
 putting his Men into good order, march'd to meet the King; at which the Mace-bearer made a long Preamble, and when he had done, Danc'd to the Tune of a Song, which he Sung himself; then the King and his whole Retinue also fell a Singing and Dancing so long, till being weary the King went to 
Drake,
 and humbly desir'd of him, that he would accept of the Realm, assuring him, that all the People should be under his Obedience; which said, he put the fore-mention'd Crown on his Head, and hanging three double Chains about his Neck, call'd him 
Hioh:
 whereupon 
Drake
 took possession of the Countrey in Queen 
Elizabeths
 Name. The King staying alone with 
Drake,
 his Re∣tinue went amongst the 
English,
 every one looking very earnestly upon them, and

to those whom they lik'd best, being the youngest, they falling down and crying, proffer'd Offerings, as to Gods, and held their Cheeks to draw Blood out of them; which the 
English
 refusing, they desisted; but shew'd them great Wounds, and de∣sir'd some Plaisters of them; which they suppli'd them with.


The 
English
 going up into the Countrey found the same well grown with Woods, which abounded with Coneys, whose Heads differ'd little from the 
European,
 but having Feet like Moles, long Tails like Rats, and in their Sides a Bag, wherein when they had fill'd their Bellies they put the remainder. They also saw nume∣rous Herds of Deer, with whose Flesh having been courteously Entertain'd in several Villages, they return'd to the Fleet. 
Drake,
 just before he weighed Anchor, caus'd a Pillar to be set in the Ground with a Silver Plate on the same,
 with an Inscrip∣tion, mentioning the Day of his Arrival, Name and Arms of Queen 
Elizabeth,
 and free delivering of that Realm to him by the 
Indians:
 he also nail'd a Sixpence with the Queens Effigies on the Plate, under which he caus'd his own Name to be Engraven.






THE ISLANDS OF Northern America.




CHAP. XI. 
Terra Nova,
 or 
New-found Land,
 with the Island of 
Assumption.


H
Aving treated at large of all the several Regions and Pro∣vinces of the North part of the Continent of 
America,
 we come now to those Islands that lie within the same De∣grees of Northern Latitude with that part of the Conti∣nent: The first is 
Terre Neuve,
 or 
New-found
 Land, disco∣ver'd together with several other Parts upon the Continent before mention'd by Sir 
Sebastian Cabott,
 by the Counte∣nance and Charge of King 
Henry
 the Seventh of 
England;
 whereupon a rightful Claim thereunto, and Interest therein, hath been own'd by the succeeding Kings of 
England,
 as hereafter shall be more particularly related.


New-found Land
 is situated betwixt the Degrees of forty six and fifty three of Northern Latitude, and is divided from the Continent of 
America
 by an Arm of the Sea, in like distance as 
England
 is from 
France.
 The Island is as large as 
England
 in length, greater in breadth, and lies near the Course that Ships usually hold in their Return from the 
West-Indies,
 and is near the mid-way between 
Ireland
 and 
Virginia.








map of the Caribbean


INSULAE AMERICANAE IN OCEANO SEPTENTRIONALI, cum Terris adiacentibus.








We shall not much need to commend the wholsom temperature of this Coun∣trey,
 seeing the greatest part thereof lieth above three Degrees nearer to the South, than any part of 
England
 doth, so that even in the Winter it is pleasant and health∣ful as 
England
 is.


The natural Inhabitants of the Countrey, as they are but few in number, so are they something a rude and salvage People, having neither knowledge of God, nor living under any kind of Civil Government. In their Habits, Customs, and Man∣ners, they resemble the 
Indians
 of the Continent, from whence it is to be suppos'd they come; they live altogether in the North and West part of the Countrey, which is seldom frequented by the 
English;
 but the 
French
 and 
Biscainers
 (who resort thither yearly for the Whale-fishing, and also for the Cod-fish) report them to be an in∣genuous and tractable People (being well us'd) and very ready to assist them with great labour and patience, in the killing, cutting, and boyling of Whales, and ma∣king the Trayn-Oyl, without expectation of other Reward than a little Bread, or some such small Hire.


It hath the most commodious Harbours in the World,
 and the most safe Seas to Sail to it, there being not any Islands, Rocks or Sands between the 
Lands-End
 in 
Eng∣land
 and 
New-found Land,
 and for the most part it is not above three or four Weeks Sail thither, and less coming back; and is the most commodiously situated for the dis∣covering of the North-West Passage, and other Inlets into the South Sea; whereby the ordinary Voyages to 
China, Japan,
 and the 
East-Indies,
 are much eas'd in the ex∣pence of Time and Charge; and the most open to Trade to all Parts, of any Island of the 
West-Indies.


On the East side of the Land, are the Bays of 
Trinity
 and 
Conception,
 which stretch themselves towards the South-West.


Tor-Bay
 and 
Capelin-Bay
 lying also on the East, stretch themselves towards the West.


The Bays of 
Trespassey, St. Mary, Borrel,
 and 
Plaisance,
 on the South part of the Land, extend their Arms towards the North.


The great Bay of 
St. Peters
 lying on the South-West side of the Land, and Sou∣therly from the great River of 
Canada,
 being about twenty Leagues distant, the same stretcheth toward the East.


Trinity
 Harbour lies in near forty nine Degrees of North Latitude, being very commodiously seated to receive Shipping in seasonable Weather, both to Anchor in, and from thence to Sail towards either the East, West, or South. It hath three Arms or Rivers, long and large enough for many hundred Sail of Ships to moare fast at Anchor near a Mile from the Harbours Mouth. Close adjoyning to the Rivers side, and within the Harbour, is much open Land, well stor'd with Grass suffi∣cient, Winter and Summer, to maintain great store of ordinary Cattel, besides Hogs and Goats, if such Beasts were carried thither; and it standeth North most of any Harbor in the Land, where our Nation practiseth Fishing: It is near unto a great Bay lying on the North side of it, call'd 
The Bay of Flowers;
 to which Place no Ships repair to Fish, in regard of sundry Rocks and Ledges lying even with the Wa∣ter, and full of danger.


The bottom of the Bay of 
Trinity
 lieth within four Leagues through the Land South-West, Southerly from 
Trinity,
 as by experience is found; and it comes near unto the Bay of 
Trespassey,
 and the bottom of some other Bays.


Trespassey
 in like manner is as commodious a Harbour, lying in a more temperate Climate, almost in forty six Degrees of North Latitude, and is both fair and plea∣sant, and a wholsom Coast free from Rocks and Shelves; so that of all other Har∣bours

it lies the most South of any in the Land, and most conveniently to receive our Shipping, passing to and from 
Virginia
 and the 
Bermuda
 Islands; and also any other Shipping that shall pass to and from the River of 
Canada,
 and the Coast there∣of, because they usually pass, and so return in the sight of the Land of 
Trespassey,
 and also for some other purposes, as shall be partly declar'd in the following Discourse.


The Soil of this Countrey in the Valleys and sides of the Mountains is so fruit∣ful,
 as that in divers places the Summer naturally produceth without Tillage, great plenty of green Pease, and Fitches, fair, round, full, and as wholsom as ours in 
England.


Of Berries and Fruits, there grows Strawberries, red and white, and as fair Raspice-berries and Goose-berries as there be in 
England;
 as also Bilberries, which are call'd by some 
Whortes,
 and many other delicate Berries peculiar to the Coun∣trey, in great abundance. Likewise small Pears, Cherries, Filberds, 
&c.


There are also Herbs for Sallets and Broth, as Parsly, Alexander, Sorrel, 
&c.
 and also Flowers, as the red and white Damask Rose, with other kinds, which are most beautiful and delightful, both to the sight and smell. And questionless, the Coun∣trey is stor'd with many Physical Herbs, though their Vertues are not known.


When Corn was first Sow'n here, it was observ'd to grow very fair, the increase was great, and the Grain very good; and several sorts of Kitchin Plants that have been Set here, have prov'd very well.


In divers parts of the Countrey there is great store of Deer,
 and some Hares, ma∣ny Foxes, Squerrils, Beavers, Martins and Otters, yielding excellent Furrs, Wolves and Bears, with other sorts of Beasts, serving as well for Necessity, as for Profit and Delight.


Variety both of Land and Water-Fowl is in this Countrey infinite:
 The chief Land-Fowl, besides a great number of small Birds, that live by scraping their Food from the Earth in the hardest Winter, are Hawks, great and small Partridges, Thrush, and Thrussels abundance, very fat; as also Filladies, Nightingales, and such like, which sing most pleasantly. There are also Birds that live by prey, as Ravens, Gripes, Crows, 
&c.
 For Water-Fowl, there is certainly so good, and as much variety, as in any part of the World, as Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Gulls, Penguins, and many other sorts. These Penguins are as big as Geese, but do not flye, for they have but a little short Wing; and they multiply so infinitely upon a certain flat Island, that men drive them from thence upon a Board into their Boats by hundreds at a time, as if God had made the innocency of so poor a Creature to be∣come such an admirable Instrument for the sustentation of Man: And also God∣wits, Curlews, and such like; which Fowl do not onely serve those that Trade thither for Food, but also they are a great furthering to divers Ships Voyages, be∣cause the abundance of them is such, that the Fisher-men do bait their Hooks with the quarters of Sea-Fowl on them; and therewith some Ships do yearly take a great part of their Fishing Voyages with such Bait, before they can get others.


The fresh Waters and Springs of that Countrey are many in number,
 and with∣all so very pleasant, delightful and wholsom, that no Countrey in the World hath better: And Fewel for Fireing, no where more plentiful.


In like manner there is great abundance of Trees fit to be employ'd in other ser∣viceable uses:
 There are Fir and Spruce-Trees, sound, good, and fit to Mast Ships with, and as commodious for Boards and Buildings as those of 
Norway;
 and out of these come abundance of Turpentine. Moreover the Pine and Birch-Trees here are scarce to be compar'd for heighth and greatness.




The Rivers also and Harbours are generally stor'd with delicate Fish, as Salmons, Peals, Eels, Herrings, Mackrel, Flounders, Launce, Capelin, Cod, and Trouts, the fairest, fattest and sweetest, that ever were seen in these Parts. The like for Lobsters, Cra-fish, Mussles, and other variety of Shell-fish.


The Seas likewise all along the Coast, do plentifully abound in other sorts of Fish, as Whales, 
Spanish
 Mackrel, Dorrel, Pales, Herrings, Hogs, Porposes, Seals, and such like Royal Fish, 
&c.


But the chief Commodity of 
New found Land
 yet known, and which is grown to be a setled Trade, and that it may be much better'd by an ordinary Plantation there, (if the Traders thither will take some better course than formerly they have done, as shall be declared) is the Cod-fishing upon that Coast, by which our Nation and many other Countreys are enrich'd.


Almost incredible is the benefit of the Fish, which the 
French, Biscainers,
 and 
Portuguese
 fetch yearly from this Coast of 
New-found Land,
 and the 
Bank,
 which lieth within twenty five Leagues from the South Cape of that Countrey, where the 
French
 use to Fish Winter and Summer, usually making two Voyages every year thither. To which Places, and to the Coast of 
Canada,
 which lieth near unto it, are yearly sent from those Countreys, more than four hundred Sail of Ships.


This Island of 
Terra Nova
 belongs properly and justly to the Crown of 
England,
 having been under the sole Jurisdiction of the 
English
 from the first Discovery there∣of, which was by Sir 
Sebastian Cabot,
 Employ'd by King 
Henry
 the Seventh, to find out some other part of 
America,
 than what had been discover'd by 
Columbus,
 as hath been above declar'd in several places.


Afterwards King 
Henry
 the Eighth continu'd the 
English
 Interest there, and Employ'd one 
Rutt
 into that Island, in order to the Plantation thereof.


Queen 
Elizabeth
 no less careful to preserve that Plantation, sent Sir 
Humphrey Gilbert,
 a 
Devonshire
 Knight, to plant a Colony there, the better to secure the same, and to increase Trading there; and accordingly the said Sir 
Humphrey
 with two good Ships and a Pinnace in her Name, took possession of that Countrey, in the Harbour of 
St. Johns.
 He Sail'd from thence towards 
Virginia,
 and by reason of some unhappy direction in his Course, the greatest Ship he had struck upon Shelves on the Coast of 
Canada,
 and was there lost, with most part of the Company in her; and he himself, being then in a small Pinnace of twenty Tun, in the company of his Vice-Admiral (Captain 
Hays
) returning towards 
England,
 in a great Storm, was overwhelm'd in the Sea, and so perish'd.


In the Year 1608. it was undertaken anew by 
John Guy,
 a Merchant of 
Bristol,
 and with so good success, that the Colony in a short time were well furnish'd with Wheat, Rye, Barley, and other Grain of their own Sowing, with Turnips, Cole∣worts, and abundance of other necessary things, not without some probable hopes of Metals, a certain and plentiful Trade of Sables, Musk, and other rich Com∣modities.


In the Year 1620. Sir 
George Calvert
 Knight, then principal Secretary of State, and a Privy Councellor to King 
James
 the First of 
England,
 &c. purchas'd a part of 
New-found Land,
 which was afterwards in the Year 1623. granted to him and his Heirs by Patent from the said King, under the Great Seal of 
England,
 bearing Date the seventh of 
April,
 in the One and twentieth Year of his Reign: by which means the said Tract of Land was erected into a Province, and at the Instance of the said Sir 
George Calvert,
 call'd 
Avalon,
 from 
Avalon
 in 
Sommerset-shire,
 where 
Christianity
 was first Planted in 
England.


This Province lies in the forty seventh Degree of Northern Latitude, and is thus

bounded: It begins Southerly from the middle part of a certain Neck of Land or Promontory, situate between the two Harbours, 
Fermose
 and 
Aquafort;
 and from thence following the Shore towards the North unto the middle part, or half way over a little Harbour, call'd in that regard 
Petit Port,
 or 
Petit Harbour,
 which boun∣deth upon the South part of the Plantation of 
St. Johns,
 including the one half of a certain fresh River, that falleth into the said Port of 
Petit Harbour;
 and so tending along the South Border of the said Colony of 
St. Johns,
 extendeth it self to a certain little Bay, commonly call'd 
Salmon Cove,
 lying on the South side of the Bay of 
Conception,
 including the one half of the River that falleth into the said 
Cove,
 as also one half of the 
Cove
 it self; from whence passing along the Shore of the said Bay towards the South, and reaching unto the bottom thereof, where it meets with the Lands of the fore-mention'd 
John Guy,
 nam'd 
Sea Forrest,
 is bounded with a cer∣tain River or Brook, which there falleth into the Sea, and from the Mouth of the said Brook ascendeth unto the farthest Spring or Head thereof; from thence pas∣sing towards the South for six Miles together along the Borders of the said 
John Guy
's Plantation, and there crossing over Westward in a right Line, reacheth unto the Bay of 
Placentia,
 and the space of one League within the said Bay from the Shore thereof; whence turning again towards the South, passeth along the Harbour of 
Placentia,
 with the like distance from the Shore, and descending unto 
New Falkland
 towards the North and West part thereof, stretcheth it self in a right Line East∣ward, continuing the whole Southerly length upon the Bounds of the said 
New Falkland,
 unto the middle part or Point of the Promontory, or Neck of Land be∣fore mention'd, between the Ports 
Fermose
 and 
Aquafort;
 at which place is describ'd and finish'd the Perambulation of the whole Precinct, whose Extent may be thus computed, commencing from the Promontory between the Ports 
Fermose
 and 
Aqua∣fort,
 which is fifty or sixty Miles from South to North distant from 
Petit Harbour;
 from whence crossing Westward to the Bay of 
Placentia,
 is judg'd to be sixty Miles more or upwards, from East to West.


And thereby was also granted to the said Sir 
George Calvert
 and his Heirs, all Islands and Islets, within ten Leagues of the Eastern Shore of the said Region to∣wards the East, together with the Fishing of all sorts of Fish, saving unto the 
English
 free liberty of Fishing, as well in the Seas as in the Ports and Creeks of the Province aforesaid, and the Priviledges of salting and drying their Fish upon the Shores of the said Province, as heretofore they reasonably us'd and enjoy'd the same, so as they do no injury or notable loss or detriment unto the Lord Proprietary, his Heirs and Assigns, or to the Inhabitants of the said Province, in the Ports, Creeks, and Shores aforesaid, and especially in the Woods growing within the said Province.


And by the said Patent all Royal Jurisdictions and Prerogatives, both Military and Civil, within the said Province and Islands thereunto belonging, were farther granted to the said Sir 
George Calvert
 and his Heirs, and he and they thereby created the true and absolute Lords and Proprietaries of the said Province, saving the Al∣legiance due to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, to be held of them in 
Capite,
 yielding and paying unto them therefore a white Horse, when, and as often as any of them shall come into the said Province, and the fifth part of all Gold and Silver Oar which should be found there.


Sir 
George Calvert,
 before the obtaining of this Patent, had caus'd a fair House and Fort to be built in the said Province, at a place call'd 
Ferryland,
 and in the Year 1624. having obtain'd a Dismission from his Employment of Secretary of State, and being then created Lord 
Baltemore
 of 
Baltemore
 in 
Ireland,
 he did in the Year 1627. Transport himself to 
Avalon,
 to inspect his Concerns there in Person; from

whence returning the same year, he Embarqu'd himself again, together with his Lady and all his Family, except his eldest Son, for 
Avalon
 the year following; at which time (there being then War between 
England
 and 
France
) he redeem'd above twenty Sail of 
English
 Ships, which had been taken there that year by 
French
 Men of War, whereof one Monsieur 
De la Rade
 had the chief Command, and shortly after took six 
French
 Fishing Ships upon that Coast, and sent them the same year, with a great many 
French
-men Prisoners, into 
England.
 Coming thence, he left a Deputy there, and continu'd the Plantation till his Death, which was in 
April
 1632. After whose Decease it descended of right to his Son and Heir 
Cecil,
 now Lord 
Baltemore;
 who thereupon sent one Captain 
William Hill
 as his Deputy thither, to take possession thereof, and to manage his Interest there for him. Captain 
Hill,
 according to his Commission, shortly after repair'd thither, and liv'd some years at the Lord 
Bal∣temore
's House at 
Ferryland
 above mention'd.


In the thirteenth Year of King 
Charles
 the First, of 
England,
 &c. about the Year of our Lord 1638. Marquess 
Hamilton,
 Earl of 
Pembroke,
 Sir 
David Kirk,
 and others, under pretence that the Lord 
Baltemore
 had deserted that Plantation, obtain'd a Patent of all 
New-found Land,
 wherein 
Avalon
 was included, and shortly after dis∣possess'd the Lord 
Baltemore
 of his Mansion House in 
Ferryland,
 and other Rights there, and during the late Rebellion in 
England
 kept possession; but His now Ma∣jesty King 
Charles
 the Second, immediately after his most happy Restauration in the Year 1660, upon the now Lord 
Baltemore
's Petition, thought fit to refer the whole Matter to be Examin'd by Sir 
Orlando Bridgeman,
 then Lord-Chief Justice, now Lord-Keeper of the Great Seal of 
England,
 and others, to report the true state thereof to His Majesty, together with their Opinions thereupon: The Referrees accordingly, upon full hearing of Council on both sides, certifi'd; That they con∣ceiv'd the said Patent to Sir 
George Calvert,
 to be a good Patent, in force, and not avoided by the later to Sir 
David Kirk
 and others; and that the Title and Interest to the said Province did therefore belong to the Lord 
Baltemore.
 Whereupon His Majesty, on the twentieth of 
March
 in the same Year, Order'd the Possession thereof to be re-deliver'd to his Lordship, which was accordingly executed: Since which time his Lordship has peaceably enjoy'd the possession thereof, and continues the Plantation to this day, by deputing Lieutenants there from time to time, for the better Government of that Province, the rest of 
New found Land
 remaining still to the aforesaid Proprietors, claiming by the Patent of 13 
Car.
 1.


The Commodities that are either by Art or Nature produc'd there, are the same with those of the remainder of 
New-found Land.
 The Winter there is extream cold, the Summer very hot, but withal pleasant; and during that Season there is great plenty of Pasture for Cattel.


The Coast of this Province is very safe, and as well furnish'd with variety of bold and pleasant Harbors, as any other part of 
New-found Land;
 where the 
Eng∣lish
 likewise Fish for Cod, the lesser sort whereof is call'd 
Poor-John,
 which is there caught in great abundance, especially at 
Ferryland,
 and in the 
Bay of Bulls.
 Besides these two there are divers other excellent Harbors on the Eastern Shore of 
Avalon,
 as 
Capling Bay, Cape Broyle, Brittus, Isle of Spears, Barrom Cove, Whitburns Bay,
 and 
Petit Harbour
 above mention'd. On the West are the Bay of 
Placentia,
 and several other good Harbors.


There are no 
Indians
 in 
Avalon,
 and but few 
English,
 by reason of the excessive Cold in Winter, though Sir 
David Kirk
 and his Lady, and also his Family, liv'd in the Lord 
Baltemore
's House at 
Ferryland
 for the space of ten years and upwards.


The Soil seems to promise great store of Mines, which probably may in time be

disover'd. The late Lord 
Baltemore
 took accidentally a piece of Oar up that lay there upon the surface of the Earth, and brought it with him into 
England,
 which was found upon trial to yield a greater proportion of Silver, than the Oar of 
Potosi
 in the 
West-Indies,
 but hitherto no Mine of it hath been discover'd there.


The Trade of Fishing being of so great concernment to the Nation of 
England,
 the same (if it be well manag'd in this Island of 
Terra Nova
) will employ every year above two hundred Sail of 
English
 Ships, and ten thousand Mariners, besides the great benefit which may accrue unto the Nation by Imposition upon Strangers there, which would amount to several thousands of Pounds 
per Annum;
 with which those Coasts may be Guarded, and Ships Trading thither secur'd: besides the great Customs by the Ships call'd 
The Sacks
 (being commonly in great numbers every year) who carry Fish from 
New-found Land
 into the 
Straights, France, Portugal,
 and 
Spain,
 and who bring their Returns into 
England,
 as Bullion, and all other native Commodities of those Countreys.


If the Island were well fortifi'd, we might Command all those of other Nations that come to Fish in 
New-found Land,
 to pay Contribution in Fish or otherwise, for their Priviledge to Fish there, the said Island being first Planted by 
English,
 and per∣taining to the Kingdom of 
England;
 or if occasion should require, they might be utterly debarr'd of Fishing there.


The Trade of Fishing is of so great concernment to 
France, Spain, Portugal,
 the 
Straights,
 and other Parts, that they cannot well be without that yearly Supply in Fish which comes from that Island: Neither can the 
Hollanders, Spaniards,
 or 
Portuguese,
 well set any Ships to the 
West-Indies,
 without 
New-found Land
 Fish, there being none that will endure to pass the Line sound and untainted, but the Fish of that Countrey, salted and dry'd there. And so long as the Act continues still in force, That no Fish be Transported from the said Island, but in 
English
 Bottoms, it will contribute very much to our encrease of Shipping there, and by consequence, of the employment of Mariners; and the Fishing of that part of the Island will be solely appropriated to the 
English
 Nation, to whom of right it belongs, which will prove the greatest Ballance of Trade in that part of the World; and that whereas above two hundred Sail do Trade thither yearly to Fish, if a thousand Sail come, if there be but Fisher-men enow, they may all have Fraughtage there.


The 
French,
 if once the Island be fortifi'd, will be depriv'd of their Nursery of Mariners, this being the onely place, besides 
Canada,
 and one or two adjacent Coasts, where they come for supply of Fish, with which that Nation cannot be furnish'd so well from other Parts.


By well Planting and Fortifying 
New-found Land,
 the Trading to 
Virginia, New England,
 and those Parts, would be much encourag'd, 
New England
 having had of late great Traffick with 
New-found Land,
 where they vend the Growth of their Plantation. Besides, 
New-found Land
 is a Key to the Gulf of 
Canada,
 which if the 
English
 had again in their possession, as they had in the Years 1628. and 1632. they might give a Law to all foreign Kings and People interested in any of the parts of 
America,
 and a Protection to all the 
English
 Plantations upon that Continent, where∣by great security, comfort and profit would arise to the Nation and People of it: whereas on the contrary, if the 
French, Spanish,
 or 
Dutch,
 should possess themselves of the said Plantation, they would not onely deprive this Nation of all the Ad∣vantages aforesaid, but would also derive to themselves so great a Power to preju∣dice all the Plantations of the Coasts of 
America
 belonging to this Nation, that the Inconveniences thereof are scarce to be imagin'd or express'd.








map of Bermuda


ppa AESTIVARVM Insularum 
s BARMVDAS dictarum, ad Ostia Mexi∣
i astuarij jacentium in latitudine Graduum 32 Minutorum 25. Ab Anglia, Londino Scilicet versus Libonotum 3300 Miliaribus Anglicanis, et a Roanoack (qui locus est in Virginia) versus Euronotum 500 Mill. accurate descripta.




Nomina, fortunae bona submittentium in quaestus Virginiani alea A. j622, quam fieri potuit accuratissims, expressa numeris, corum portiones quam proxime in agrorum divisione referentibus, quae portiones illic Separatim distinguntur in regione ipsa. quemadmodum hic lineis ob oculos ponuntur.


Hammilton 
alias
 Har: rington Tribe.



1 To Lord Marq. Hammilton — Shares 6


1 Si. Edward Harwood — Shares 4


2 M. Iohn Delbridge — Shares 3


3 M. Iohn Dike — Shares 3


4 M. El. Robert — Shares 2


5 M Rob. Phipps — Shares 2


6 M Ralph King — Shares 2


7 M Quicks heires or assignes — Shares 2


8 M 
illiam Canning — Shares 4


8 M. Will. Canning — Shares 1


8 M. Will. Webb
 — Shares 


9 M. Iohn Barnard — Shares 2


10 Si. Tho. Huggia — Shares 2


11 M. Iohn Gearing — Shares 2


12 M. Cleoph. Smith — Shares 2


13 Robert, Earle of Warwick — Shares 4


14 M. Tho. Cowell — Shares 3


15 M. Greenwels heires, or assig. — Shares 1


16 M. Cley — Shares 1


17 M. Poulson — Shares 2


18 M. Iohn Dike — Shares 1½


19 Common ground — Shares 13 acres


20 M Iohn Dike — Shares 1½


21 M. Geo. Thorpe. Esquire — Shares 1




Smiths Tribe.



1 Si. Dudley Digge, Since M. Geo. Sandys. or his assig. — Shares 2


2 M. Rich. Edwards — Shares 2


3 M. Will. Payne — Shares 4


4 M. Rob. Smith — Shares 2


5 M. Geo. Berkleys assignes — Shares 5


6 Si. Sam. Sandys — Shares 7


7 M. Autho. Pennistone — Shares 4


8 Si. Edwin Sandys — Shares 1


9 Si Tho. Smith — Shares 5


10 M. Rich. Morer — Shares 4


11 M. Henry Timberly — Shares 4


12 Rob Iohnson, Alderman — Shares 5


13 M. Iohn Wroth — Shares 3


14 M. George Smith — Shares 4




Devonshire Tribe.



1 M. Antho. Pennystone — Shares 2


2 M. Iohn Dike — Shares 1


3 M. Iohn Dike — Shares 1


4 M. Iohn Barnard — Shares 2


5 Robert Earle of Warwick — Shares 2


6 M. Francis West — Shares 2


7 Will. Lord Cavendish — Shares 3


8 The said W. Lord Cavandish — Shares 2


8 Will. Earle of Devonshire — Shares 5


9 M. Edw. Lukin — Shares 5


9 M. Edward Ditchfield — Shares 1


10 M. Edw. Ditchfield — Shares 4


11 M. Will. Nichols — Shares 2


12 M. Edw. Ditchfield — Shares 1


13 M. Iohn Fletcher — Shares 2


14 M. Gideon Dolawne — Shares 2


15 M. Anthon. Pennistone — Shares 3


16 M. Best — Shares 2


17 M. Edw. Lukin — Shares 2


18 M. Rich. Rogers — Shares 2


19 M. Will. — Shares 4




Pembroke Tribe.



1 M. George Smith — Shares 4


2 Gleabland — Shares 2


3 M. Nicholas Hide, Esquire — Shares 1


4 Si. Laurence Hide — Shares 2


5 M. Thomas Ladwin — Shares 2


6 William, Earle of Pembroke — Shares 10


7 M. Richard Edwards — Shares 1


8 M. Harding — Shares 1


9 M. Richard Edwards — Shares 1


10 M. Ward — Shares 1


11 M. Richard Edwards — Shares 2


12 M. Iacobson or his assign — Shares 1


13 M. Iohn Farrar — Shares 1


14 M. Iohn Farrar — Shares 1


15 M. Nichol. Farrar — Shares 1


16 M. William Canning — Shares 2


17 M. Richard Martine. 
Esq
 — Shares 2


18 M. Morris Abbot — Shares 2


19 M. Rich. Caswell — Shares 1


20 M. Rich. Caswell — Shares 2


21 M. Rich. Caswell — Shares 1


22 M. Rich. Edwards — Shares 2


23 M. Rich. Edwards — Shares 2


24 M. Rich. Caswell — Shares 2


25 M. Rich. Edwards — Shares 2


26 M. Geo. Sandys, or his Assig. — Shares 2


27 M. William Payne — Shares 2




Pagets Tribe.



1 M. Iohn Chamberlaine, 
Esq
 — Shares 5


2 M. Thomas Ayres and — Shares 4


2 M. Rich. Wiseman — Shares 4


3 Rich. Wiseman — Shares 1


4 William, Lord Paget — Shares 10


5 M. William Palmar — Shares 4


6 M. Bagwell — Shares 5


7 Iohn Ball — Shares 1


8 M. Thomas Wheatley — Shares 1


9 M. Christopher Barron — Shares 4


10 M. Iohn Woodall — Shares 1


11 M. Iohn Woodall — Shares 1


12 M. Lewes — Shares 2


13 M. Geo. Etheridg — Shares 4


14 Incognira — Shares 2


15 Si. William Wade — Shares 1


16 M. Iohn Bernard — Shares 1




Warwick Tribe.



1 Captains Daniel Tucker — Shares 1


2.3.4.5.6 M. Ioseph Man — Shares 5


7 M. Step. Sparrow — Shares 1


8 M. Francis Meuerell — Shares 1


9.10 M. Sam. Tickier — Shares 2


11.12.13 M. George Smith — Shares 5


14.15 M. George Smith — Shares 5


16.17.18 Robert, Earle of Warwicke — Shares 5


19.20 Robert, Earle of Warwicke — Shares 5


21 M. William Felgate — Shares 1


22.23 Capt. Daniel Tucker — Shares 2


24.25 M. Rich. Wheatly — Shares 2


26 Capt. Daniel Tucker — Shares 2


27 Iohn Faucet — Shares 1


28 Doct. Anth. Hun. ton. or his Assign. — Shares 2


29 Doct. Anth. Hun. ton. or his Assign. — Shares 2


30 M. Francis Meuerell — Shares 1


31 M. Rich. Poulson — Shares 1


32 M. Mathew Shepheard — Shares 1


to. 42 M. Geo Tucker — Shares 10


43 M. Christ. Cletheros — Shares 1


44 M. George Swinhow — Shares 2


45 M. George Swinhow — Shares 2


46 M. Richard Tomlins 
Esq
 — Shares 1


47 M. Francis Meuerell — Shares 1


48.49 Sir Iohn Walter — Shares 2


50 M. Martin Bond — Shares 1




Southampton Tribe.



1 Capt. Tucker — Shares 1


2 Capt. Tucker — Shares 1


3 Capt. Tucker — Shares 2


4 M. Iohn Britton — Shares 1


5 M. Rich. Chamberlaine — Shares 3


6 M. Leo. Harwood, or his assig. — Shares 1


7 M. Iohn Bankes — Shares 1


8 Sir Nathaniell Rich. — Shares 12


9 Robert, Earle of Warwich — Shares 3


10 M. Rich. Morer — Shares 6


11 M. George Scot — Shares 6


11 M. Edmund Scot — Shares 6


11 M. Antho. Abdy — Shares 6


12 Heary. Earle of Southamton — Shares 4


12 M. Arch. Bromefield — Shares 2


13 M. Henry Timberly — Shares 2


14 S. Thomas Hewet — Shares — Shares 2


15 M. Peirces — Shares 1


16 S. Ralgh. Winwood — Shares 2




Refiduum.
 Quid hoc Refiduum sit. et cor hic apposition apparet libro Geodesae. Societati exhibito.



1 Captaine Tucker Parts 3


2 Gleabe-land Parts 2


1 Sandys Tribe Parts 2




Sandys Tribe.



3 M. Geor Barkley or his heires — Shares 5


4 S. Edwards Sandys — Shares 5


5 M. Ierom Heydon — Shares 10


6 M. Tho. Melling et M. Iohn Cusse — Shares 2


7 M. Rich. Chamberlaine — Shares 2


8 M. Abraham Chamberlaine — Shares 2


9 M. George Smith — Shares 2


10 M. Robert Gore — Shares 3


11 S. Edwards Sackvile — Shares 1


11 S. Iohn Davers — Shares 1


12 M. Robert Gore — Shares 2


13 M. Iohn Delbridge — Shares 1


14 M. Iohn Wroth 
Esq
 — Shares 1


15 M. Rich. Chamberl. 
Esq
 — Shares 10






Ad Communem agram in singu lis Tribubus quol attinet, in quot portiones dividatur et ibi inceat quemadmodum partim in Mappa Choragraphica exprimitur. Ita eti am claribus liquet ex Libre Geo desiae Virginianae Societati tradito.








After the granting of the Patent aforesaid of 13 
Car.
 1. Sir 
David Kirk
's great Pains there, and constant Endeavours, were beyond expectation bless'd with a con∣tinuance and preservation of Trade in that Place; in the carrying on of which, he had always a special regard to the real Advantage of this Kingdom, and the parti∣cular Service of His Majesty.


Before this Island, right over against 
Cape Ray,
 at the distance of twenty four Leagues or more, there lieth an huge Bank or Ridge of Land, extending it self in length out of the Sea, above a hundred Leagues, but in breadth not above four or five and twenty, when it is broadest, and in other parts much less, sharpning to∣wards each end into a 
Conus,
 or narrow Point. It is accounted one of the Wonders of the Sea, which round about, at some distance, is very deep, and hardly to be sounded, especially betwixt the 
Bank
 (for so they commonly call it) and 
Cape Ray,
 but drawing nearer, it grows by degrees more and more shallow, insomuch that nigh the Land there is not much more Water than is necessary for the Ships to Ride in. It runneth out in length, as was said, from North to South, from forty one Degrees of Latitude to fifty two; and round about it there lie scatter'd a multitude of lesser Islands, which Sir 
Sebastian Cabot,
 when he first discover'd the Place, call'd by one common Name 
Los Baccaloos,
 or 
The Islands of Cod-fish,
 from the great quan∣tity of that sort of Fish he there found; which was such, that they hindred the pas∣sage of his Ships, and lay in such multitudes upon the Coasts, that the very Bears would come and catch them in their Claws, and draw them to Land.


IN the Gulf of 
St. Laurence,
 towards the Mouth of the River 
Canada,
 is another less considerable Island, said to have been first discover'd by 
Quartier,
 and by him call'd 
The Island of Assumption;
 by 
John Alphonso, The Island of Ascension;
 by the Natives, 
Natistcotec:
 It extends it self from the forty eighth to the fiftieth Degree, between the South-East and North-West.


Quartier
 makes mention of a strange kinde of Fish, found in the River of 
Canada,
 like unto a Sea-Hog, but having the Head of a Hare, it is call'd by the Natives 
Adhothuys.


Not far from this is a little Island, call'd by the 
French, Isle de Sable,
 or 
The Sandy Island;
 and another on the West of 
Terra Nova,
 call'd 
Isle de Bretons,
 or 
The Island of St. Laurence,
 besides several little scatter'd Islands in the Gulf of 
St. Laurence,
 as 
Menego,
 and 
The Three Islands of Birds;
 in which are found a kind of amphibious Animal, call'd by the 
French, Cualrus,
 and by the 
Russians, Morsh;
 somewhat like a Sea-Calf, but more monstrous.






CHAP. XII. The Bermudas, or Summer-Islands.


THe 
Bermudas,
 or 
Summer-Islands
 (probably so term'd as to the first Appellati∣on from certain black Hogs, by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Bermudas,
 which from a Ship bound with them to some other parts of the 
West-Indies,
 and cast away upon that Coast, swam ashore, and there increased; or, as others say, from 
John Bermudes,
 a 
Spaniard,
 who is said to have been the first Discoverer; or, as to the second, from one 
George Summers,
 an 
English
-man, who there suffer'd shipwrack)

are situated in thirty two Degrees and twenty five Minutes of Northern Latitude, about sixteen hundred Leagues from 
England,
 twelve hundred from 
Madera,
 four hundred from 
Hispaniola,
 and three hundred from the nearest Coast of 
Virginia.
 The first that endeavour'd to settle Plantations here was a 
Spaniard
 nam'd 
Hernando Camelo,
 being design'd Conductor in this Expedition: And this Undertaking was so much the more eagerly prosecuted, upon consideration that the Plate-Fleet Sailing from 
Havana
 through the 
Straights
 of 
Bahama,
 might here have a conveni∣ent Harbour; but those who were invited to become Adventurers, with proffers of great Advantage, shewing themselves very slack in the Business, and 
Charles
 the Fifth being at that time intangled in War and other troublesom Affairs, the Design came to nothing, and for above sixty years after no farther Attempt was made by any for the Planting of these Islands, till at last the 
French
 made a Voyage thither under Captain 
Barboriere,
 but by Shipwrack were frustrated of their hopes; nor made they any more Preparations in this Design. In which nevertheless the 
English
 were not so easily discourag'd; for first Captain 
Gosnol
 and 
Smith
 set forth, at the Charges of Mr. 
Edward Wingfield;
 next, Captain 
Nelson;
 then successively 
West, Gates, Argal,
 and 
Wyat,
 but all with little or no success, till at length in the Year 1612. a Company was establish'd in 
London
 by the King's Letters Patents, who sent one Mr. 
Richard Moor
 with sixty Men to the 
Bermudas,
 where he spent three years in fortifying those Islands: but that which put a little stop to this good beginning, was a kind of Misfortune that hapned; for the Rats which were gotten ashore from a Shipwrack increas'd so exceedingly, that they devour'd all the Plants in the Field, and the Provision in the Houses, insomuch that a great Famine proceeded from thence, all means to destroy the Vermine being in vain; till at last Providence sent a Disease amongst them, which 
ill'd them all in a very short time. Mean while 
Moor
 went on in the fortification of the Island, and was ere long supply'd with fresh People. Mr. 
Barlet
 was sent over with sixty Men, and carried from thence▪ with him eighty Pound of Ambergreece. And soon after three Ships more, 
viz.
 the 
Blessing,
 the 
Star,
 and the 
Margaret,
 convey'd thither four hundred and ten, Men and Women. As soon as 
Moor
 was call'd away, 
Daniel Tuckard
 coming from 
Virginia
 to succeed him, bestirr'd himself very much, Planting all places full of Trees fetch'd from the 
West-Indian
 Islands; as also Tobacco, with which he fraighted a Ship to 
London.
 Moreover, the Countrey was divided into Acres, that every Planter might have an equal share, and know his own Lands. 
Anno
 1619. 
Tuckard
 was succeeded by 
Nathaniel Butler,
 who in four Ships brought thither five hundred Men and Wo∣men, to supply the first Plantation, which was much decay'd since the Rats had devour'd their Provisions, so that it was little look'd after by the Company in 
Lon∣don:
 But now they built a Church and erected a Court of Judicature, and all things were order'd conveniently for the publick good. After which many Noble Persons set Sail thither in the 
Magazine
 Frigat; and the Planters being now fifteen hundred in number, inhabited twenty Leagues of Land in length.


On the longest Island, call'd 
St. George,
 (for the 
Bermudas
 consists of several Islands, great and small) they built 
Warwick
 and 
Dover
 Forts, with other Fortifica∣tions and Towers, which had their Denominations from those Noble-men and Gentlemen that were Undertakers in this Plantation, as 
Cavendish, Paget, Herbert,
 &c. from the Earl of 
Devonshire,
 the Lord 
Paget,
 the Earl of 
Pembroke,
 and others.


Amongst the Havens the eminentest are, 
Southampton,
 the Inlet 
Harrington,
 and the 
Great Sound.


All these Islands lying together resemble a Half-Moon, and are surrounded with Rocks, which appear at Low-water, and at High lie but shallow; for it seldom

Ebbs or Flows above five Foot. The Shore, for the most part Rocky, and hardned by the Sun and Wind, receives no damage by the Waves which continually beat against the same.


The Ground it self differs; for in some places it is sandy or clayie, and in others partly black, and partly white, or Ash-colour'd Earth; which last is ac∣counted the worst, and the black the best. Three Foot deep under the Ash-colour'd Earth lie great Slates, and under the black, a white spungie Stone, like the Pu∣mice, in whose moist Crevises Trees take root.


The Pits or Wells, though they Ebb and Flow with the Sea, yet produce a wholsom and sweet Water.


The Skie is generally serene, but when over-cast with Clouds, is subject to Light∣ning and Thunder; yet the Air is of a good temper, being neither exceeding cold, nor excessive hot: for which reason the 
European
 Fruits grow better there than in their natural Soil.


Their Harvest is twice a year; for that which they Sowe in 
March,
 is ripe and gather'd in 
June;
 then what they Sowe again in 
August,
 they gather in 
January.


These Islands breed no hurtful Creatures; nay, the yellow Spider which spins silken Cobwebs, is free from Poyson.


The Plant 
Nuchtly,
 which bears speckled Pears, grows betwixt the Rocks which are drench'd with Sea-water.


The Hogs which above a hundred and fifty years since swam ashore out of the 
Spanish
 Wrack, are exceedingly increas'd there, but because of their poorness are scarce eatable, they feeding onely on the sweet Berries which fall from the 
Palmito
-Trees.


About the white and red Mulberries, which grow plentifully there, breed thousands of Silk-worms, which spin Silk according to the colour of the Mul∣berries.


The Sea produces some quantity of Pearls and Ambergreece.


From the beginning of the year till 
May,
 the Whales are seen to swim not far from the Shore.


A strange sort of Sea-Fowl breed in Holes like Rabbets; and amongst other Birds, here are also store of Cranes.


The Tobacco which the 
English
 have planted here grows very well.


Here are likewise great Tortoises, which Lay their Eggs in the Sand on the Shore, where they are Hatch'd by the Beams of the Sun, and are taken after this manner: In the Night some are set to watch where they Land, and whilest they are digging a deep Hole in the Ground, are thrown on their Backs, and not being able to get upon their Legs again, they lie and groan very pitifully: some of them having above two Basons full of Eggs in their Bellies; which being about the big∣ness of a Tennis-Ball, have a thin Shell, which incloseth a Yolk and White. If these Eggs lie buried six years, then the young Tortoises breaking the Shell, come out of the Sand, and instantly creep into the Sea. Their Flesh is not onely wholsom but toothsom. The Oyl made of them is not inferior to Butter.


Moreover, the 
Bermudas
 produce Cedars, the like of which are not to be found in the whole World: The Leaves are douny and prickly at the ends, almost like those of the Juniper Tree: The Wood hath a sweet smell, and the Berries, which are like the Myrtle, of a pale Red, inclose four white Kernels; the outermost Skin where∣of is sweet; the innermost, which covers the Kernel, sharp, and the Pulp tartish: The Trees are always flourishing, being at the same time full of Blossoms, green, and ripe Fruit: The Berries, when grown ripe, begin to gape, and fall off in rainy

Weather, leaving a round Stalk on the Boughs, which loses not its Rind till two years after; half which time the Berry requires, before it attains to its perfect ripe∣ness, which generally happens in the Winter: The Boughs shoot straight upwards, and become in time so heavy, that they cause the Body of the Tree to bend. This most excellent Wood grows in divers places of the 
Bermudas.


We shall conclude with the resolute Exploit of five Sea-men, 
Anno
 1616. who, to the great admiration of all People, set Sail from thence in an open Vessel of three Tun through the main Ocean, and after having suffer'd terrible Tempests, arriv'd in the space of seven Weeks safe in 
Ireland.


These Islands are remarkable for divers sorts of Plants, unknown in other Parts, as the 
Prickle Pear, Poyson Weed, Red Weed, Purging Bean, Costive Tree, Red Pepper,
 and the 
Sea Feather.
 Also several strange Birds, as the 
Egg Bird, Cahow, Tropick Bird,
 and the 
Pemlico,
 which presageth Storms.






CHAP. XIII. Hispaniola.


THe Islands call'd 
De Barlovento,
 by which are understood 
Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica,
 and 
Boriquen,
 as also the 
Lucaies,
 with the 
Caribes,
 and lastly the Isles call'd 
De Sotavento,
 viz. 
Margareta, Cabagua,
 and 
Tabago,
 are by some com∣prehended all under the general Name of 
The Isles Antilles;
 though others reckon the 
Antilles
 to be the same with the 
Caribes
 onely. But leaving this Controversie undecided, we shall begin with the Isles 
De Barlovento,
 the chief whereof is 
Hi∣spaniola.


Hispaniola,
 or 
Little Spain
 (as 
Columbus
 nam'd it) is, though not the largest, yet the fairest and goodliest of all the 
American
 Islands, call'd by the Natives anciently 
Hayti
 and 
Quisqueia:
 It lieth about fifteen Leagues Westward of 
Porto Rico,
 and distant from the main Land of 
America
 about one hundred and twenty; 'tis of a tri∣angular form, the sharpest Point whereof is that towards 
Porto Rico,
 which they call 
Cabo de Enganno:
 that towards the West inclines to a Semi-circle, containing a good and convenient Bay betwixt the two Points, 
viz. St. Nicholas
 to the North, and 
Cabo de Donna Maria
 towards the South. It is not thought to be less than a hundred and fifty Leagues in length, and in breadth from threescore to thirty, and to contain in the compass of the whole, four hundred Leagues at least, lying be∣twixt eighteen and twenty Degrees of Northern Latitude, having an Air somewhat infested with the Morning Heats, but well cool'd again in the Afternoon, by a con∣stant Wind from the Sea, which they call there 
Virason.
 It is, for the fertility of the Soil, one of the richest and most flourishing Countreys in the World; the Trees and all things else there continually clad, as it were, in their Summer Livery, the Meadows and Pastures always green, and of such an excellent Herbage, that Cattel both breed and thrive there beyond belief; both great Cattel and small, as Kine, Sheep, Hogs, 
&c.
 brought thither out of 
Spain,
 having multiply'd to such numbers, that they live wild now in Herds in several places, and are both hunted and kill'd, like Stags or other Venison, onely for their Hides, which they send yearly into 
Spain
 and other parts of 
Europe,
 as a great Merchandize and Commodity of huge profit to them.








Wild Hogs also have been formerly seen to feed in the Woods in great multi∣tudes, but the Dogs since they were brought over hither, have made great havock amongst them.


The Animals peculiar to this Island are 1. A little Beast call'd 
Hutias,
 not much unlike our Coneys. 2. 
Chemi,
 almost of the same form, but a little bigger. 3. 
Mohui,
 A Beast somewhat less than the 
Hutias.
 4. A Beast call'd 
Coxi.


Likewise amongst other strange sorts of Creatures here, the 
Cuyero
 is very obser∣vable, being about an Inch big, and having four Wings, of which two are larger than the other: when they flie they shine after such a manner, that in the Night they make a Room as light as day, insomuch that some have made use of them in stead of Candles to Read by.


No less wonderful is the Fish 
Manate,
 whose shape hath been describ'd else∣where: It breeds for the most part in the Sea, yet sometimes swimming up the Rivers, comes ashore and eats Grass. The Casique 
Caramatexi
 kept one in the Lake 
Guaynato,
 which was so tame, that when call'd by the Name 
Maton,
 it us'd to come out of the Water, and go directly to the 
Casique
's House, where being fed, it return'd to the Lake, accompanied with Men and Boys, who with their Singing seem'd to delight the Fish, which sometimes carried ten Children on its Back over the Water; but at last a 
Spaniard
 striking at it with a Pike, it would never come forth again when it espy'd a Cloth'd Man: It liv'd twenty six years in the fore-mention'd Lake, till by accident the River 
Hayboaic
 over-flowing into the said Lake, the Fish return'd to the Sea.


Besides this great Fish, here is also a sort of small Fish, call'd 
Abacatuaia,
 with a little Mouth, black Eyes encompass'd with Silver-colour'd Circles, four black Fins, two long ones under its Belly, one on the Back, and one on each side of the Head, the Tail slit and cover'd with a glittering Skin: It is as big as a Flounder, and not ill Meat, but thick and round.


When the 
Spaniards
 first setled on 
Hispaniola,
 they were exceedingly tormented with a sort of leaping Insects call'd 
Nigua,
 which us'd to eat through their Skin into

the Flesh in such a nature, that many of them lost their Arms and Legs; but at last they found out a Remedy against this Evil, 
viz.
 the searing the Wounds with hot Irons.


Besides the aforesaid plenty of Flesh, they have many excellent Fruits all the year long, as Banana's,
 Pine-Apples, Custud-Apples, Plantens, Papans, Musk∣melons, Water-melons, and many other peculiar Plants, as 1. the 
Auzuba,
 a fair large Tree, the Fruit whereof is call'd 
Pinnas,
 resembling a 
Malecotoon:
 Of this Tree there are three sorts, 
Jaima, Boniama,
 and 
Jaiqua;
 2. 
Quauconex;
 3. 
Axi;
 of which there are also several sorts, as 
Carive, Huarahuac, Axiblanco, Acafran-Axi,
 and 
Axi-Coral;
 4. 
Yuca,
 the Root of which serves in stead of Corn; 5. Certain Trees call'd 
Guaibes,
 besides plenty of Mint and Potato's.


The Island of 
Hispaniola
 was formerly divided into several Provinces, amongst which the Mountainous, Countrey 
Hyguey
 lies towards the Isle of 
Porto Rico.
 On the Mountains, which are flat on the top, are great variety of sharp-pointed Stones. The Soil is a sort of colour'd Earth, which produces all sorts of Fruit, especially the Root 
Casabi,
 and Melons.


Hyguey
 also conterminates with 
Ycayagua;
 Northward lies 
Samana;
 Southward, 
Yaquimo,
 where there is store of 
Brasile
 Wood: And between the City 
Domingo
 and 
Yaquimo,
 is the Countrey 
Baoruco,
 which with its Mountains extends sixty Leagues in length, and above twenty in breadth, without any Water, Pasture, or Food for Cattel or Mankind.


Next follows the Countrey 
Xaragua,
 lying at the great Inlet which divides 
Hi∣spaniola;
 for one side extends to the Promontory of 
St. Nicholas,
 and the other to the Point 
Tiburon.
 This Countrey produces abundance of Cotton.


Lastly, the Provin
s 
Guahaba, Haniguagya
 and 
Cahay,
 are very eminent; as also 
Cibao,
 which is full of Gold-Mines; and 
Lavega Real,
 with 
Magnana,
 which lie be∣tween the two great Rivers 
Neyba
 and 
Yagui;
 the stony Countrey 
Ciguayos,
 and the low Coast 
Darica,
 where 
Christopher Columbus
 built the City 
Navidad,
 which he after∣wards deserted.


Ginger was formerly brought hither from the 
East-Indies,
 but now grows here in such great abundance, that above two and twenty thousand 
Kintalls
 are yearly Transported from thence to 
Spain.


With as good success grow here also the Sugar-Canes and 
Maiz.


Peter Martyr,
 a Councellor to the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, relates, That 
Hispa∣niola
 produc'd in his time, besides Silver, Copper, and Iron, five hundred thou∣sand 
Ducats
 in Gold: Nevertheless the rich Mines lay undisturb'd, because they wanted People to work in them, insomuch that had they not planted their Royal Seat in 
Domingo,
 the Island had long since been deserted, notwithstanding the ex∣ceeding fruitfulness of the Soil, because the 
Spaniards
 exercis'd their Cruelty in such a nature, that of sixty thousand Inhabitants from the Year 1508. to 
Anno
 1514. scarce fourteen thousand of them were left alive; all which is affirm'd by the Bishop 
De las Casas.
 Nay, the fore-mention'd 
Peter Martyr
 relates, That the Men wearied with working in the Mines, kill'd themselves, despairing of ever, being re∣leas'd from their Slavery; and Women with Child destroy'd the Infants in their Wombs, that they might not bear Slaves for the 
Spaniards.
 He adds hereun∣to, That of a hundred and twenty thousand Persons, few were left in a short time.


These Provinces in former times had each of them their 
Casique,
 whose splendor consisted chiefly in Dancing to his Devotion, with a Girdle full of Bells about his Middle, a String of Pearls about his Arms, a Covering over his Privities, and a





 Plume of Feathers on his Head, with a Drummer before him, and a small Train of Arm'd Men after him.


On the Coast are first the Point of 
Nisao,
 ten Leagues to the West of 
Santo Do∣mingo.


Eighteen Leagues farther is the Port 
Ocoa,
 which is a Bay where the Fleets of 
Nova Hispania
 take refreshing, when they do not Anchor in the Nook of 
Sepesepin,
 which is near unto it, or in another call'd 
The Fair Haven,
 two Leagues before you come to 
Ocoa.


Twenty Leagues beyond 
Ocoa
 is the Port of 
Asua.


Thirty Leagues more Westwardly is a large Point right against the Island of 
Bola,
 which lieth five Leagues from the Coast.


The most Westerly Point is call'd 
Cape Tiburon:
 It hath an Island three Leagues from it Westward, call'd 
Caprio;
 and Sailing along the Coast, you will see an Island call'd 
Camito;
 and farther in the Nook of 
Yaguana
 another call'd 
Guanabo
 of eight Leagues long.


On the North side of the Island, the most Westerly Cape and Port is 
St. Nicholas,
 from whence North-East and by East, lieth the Island of 
Tortuga,
 near the Coast of 
Hispaniola:
 It is of five Leagues length.


Farther along the Coast is 
Monte Christo,
 the West Cape of 
Natividad;
 to the East of which there is a great Bay call'd 
Port Real.


This Island is so full of Harbours, that he that will Coast it, cannot well miss of one where he pleaseth, most of which afford fresh Meat and good Water.


Moreover, 
Hispaniola
 hath many brave Rivers, the chiefest of which are 
Hayna; Nizao,
 along whose Shore the first Sugar-Canes were planted; 
Neyba,
 a great Ri∣ver; 
Yaquimo; Yaqui,
 which 
Columbus
 call'd 
Rio de Oro,
 because the Ground thereof glitter'd like Gold; and lastly, the Rivers 
Nicayagua,
 amongst whose Sands is Gold; 
Nigua,
 which borrows its Denomination from the fore-mention'd leaping Insect; the swift Stream 
Juno,
 whose Banks are crown'd with handsom Houses; and 
Jaquin,
 which hath many Salt-pans.




The Rivers 
Itabo, Ocoa, Cepi, Bia, Cazui, Sanate de Plata,
 and 
Chiabon,
 have some one, others more Sugar-Mills upon them.


But the chiefest River is 
Ozama,
 broad, and so deep, that the biggest Vessel may lie close by the Shore; and also washes 
St. Domingo.


This City, the Metropolis of all the Isles round about, was built by 
Bartholomeus Columbus,
 and was peopled 
Anno
 1494. after which it flourish'd eight years, when, a terrible Storm blowing the same down to the Ground, 
Nicholas Olanda
 remov'd it to the Western Shore of 
Ozama,
 that the 
Spaniards,
 who had for the most part set∣led towards the West, might not be necessitated to Ferry over: but the first place stood much more conveniently, being not onely provided of a Fountain of sweet Water, but also freed of those unwholsom Vapours which daily rise with the Sun at this new-built City. To prevent the inconvenience of crossing to the fore∣mention'd Fountain, of which the Inhabitants found themselves oftentimes in great want, 
Olanda
 went about to lead the neighboring River 
Hayna
 into the 
Ozama,
 but the Design not being prosecuted, bereav'd 
Domingo
 of the onely thing which would have made it able to stand in competition with any City in the World; for it lies on a Plain, the South side whereof is wash'd by the Sea; the East side, by the River; on the North and West are many delightful Fields.


The City, which in a manner is built square, is divided into long straight Streets, full of fair Houses after the 
Spanish
 manner: in the middle thereof is a square Market-place, with a handsom Church, the Yard whereof is encompass'd with a high Wall, which upon occasion would serve for a place of great Defence.


The Collectors of the King of 
Spain
's Revenue dwell in stately Palaces; and the 
Dominicans, Franciscans,
 and Monks 
De la Merced,
 have brave Cloysters, besides two more for the Nu
s.


The 
Latine
 School and Hospital belonging to the City, are Endow'd with great yearly Revenues.


The Arch-bishop of 
St. Domingo
 hath Command over the Bishoprick of 
Concep∣tion, La Vega, Cuba, Venezuela,
 and 
Porto Rico.


The City is surrounded with a Stone Wall, and fortifi'd with a Castle, which with two Bulwarks reaches to the River 
Ozama,
 and within them two Half-Moons.


On the utmost Shore stands a round Tower near the Southern Bulwark.


Before the new discover'd Countreys entic'd away many People from 
St. Do∣mingo,
 and the Silver Fleet put into 
Havana,
 the Inhabitants drove a great Trade in Hides, Tallow, Sugar, 
Cassia,
 Horses, and Hogs.


Anno 1586. Sir 
Francis Drake
 Landed here with twelve hundred 
English
-men, took the City by Storm, staid a whole Moneth in the same, and upon Composition with the 
Spaniard,
 left it undestroy'd.


Other chief Towns in 
Hispaniola
 are 1. 
Salvaleon,
 twenty eight Leagues distant from 
St. Domingo,
 towards the East.


2. 
Zeybo.
 3. 
Cotny,
 formerly inhabited by those that work'd in the Gold-Mines; the last especially was once a rich Town, and much frequented, but now in a manner deserted.


4. 
Azua,
 or 
New Compostella,
 eight Leagues distant from 
St. Domingo,
 famous for the Sugar-Mills not far from it, and one of the Ports before-mention'd.


5. 
Yaguana,
 for its brave Harbour also call'd 
Maria del Puerto,
 in the more We∣stern parts of the Island; a small Town not above a League distant from the Sea; It was burnt by Captain 
Christopher Newport.








URBS DOMINGO IN HISPANIOLA








6. 
Conception de la Vega,
 adorn'd with a Cathedral and Cloysters of Fryers, and lying twenty or thirty Leagues Northward of 
St. Domingo:
 It was built by 
Columbus,
 and from thence he had his Title of 
Duke de la Vega.


7. 
Sant Jago de los Cavalleros,
 a very pleasant Place, ten Leagues Northward of 
St. Domingo.


8. 
Puerto de Plata,
 or 
The Silver Haven,
 four Leagues distant from 
St. Domingo
 to∣wards the North: It hath been counted the second Place of Trading and Wealth in the whole Island, being commodiously seated on an Arm of the Sea, and forti∣fi'd with a Castle.


9. 
Monte Christo,
 one of the Ports also above-mention'd: It lies fourteen Leagues Westward of 
Plata,
 and extends it self along the Northern Coast: it is wash'd by the River 
Yagui,
 on whose Banks are many Salt-pans.


All those Cities are much decay'd, and thinly inhabited, the 
Spaniards
 being most of them drawn by the temptation of new discover'd Gold and Silver Mines in other places, and the first Inhabitants having been miserably destroy'd. The Bi∣shop 
De las Casas,
 an Eye-witness, relates, That the King 
Gauccanarillo
 secur'd the Goods of a stranded Ship, of which Columbus was Commander, and receiv'd the 
Spa∣niards
 very courteously; but not being able to continue supplying them with that quantity of Gold they requir'd, wanting Men to gather so much out of the Streams and Mines, and seeing no way to rid himself from the 
Spaniards
 Oppressions, fled to the Province of 
Ciguayos,
 the 
Casique
 of which was his Deputy; whereat the 
Spa∣niards
 were so enrag'd, that they burnt all that they could meet with, neither spa∣ring young nor old; and at length taking 
Guaccanarillo,
 put him in Irons,
 and thought to have carried him to 
Madrid;
 but the Ship in which he went suffering Shipwrack, he with many others was cast away, being before almost dead with grief for his Consort, who had been Ravish'd by a 
Spanish
 Commander. Likewise 
Anacoana,
 Sister to the 
Casique,
 or Governor of the Province 
Xarana,
 and Partner with him in the Government, seeing three hundred of her Councellors burning in a great House, set on fire by the 
Spaniards,
 and her Subjects torn by Dogs, or cut in pieces, hung her self out of despair. The same Death died 
Higuanama,
 Queen of 
Huguey.
 Others say that 
Anacoana
 was put to death together with her Brother in a most barbarous and cruel manner, by 
Nicholas de Olanda,
 who succeeded 
Diego de Arana
 in the Government of this Island. Many Women and Children were kept alive onely to Manure the Ground. The Men dying of their hard Labour in the Gold-Mines, and those which endur'd stoutly the cruel Labour under Ground, were never suffer'd to go to their Wives; from whence proceeded a great decrease of People, the 
Spaniards
 seeming purposely to design the destruction of the Na∣tives of 
Hispaniola,
 though they receiv'd great benefit by their Service; for Gold in former times was found between the Cracks and split Stones of the Mountains, whose Veins the Mine-workers digg'd for not without great and dangerous La∣bour.


The first Planters of 
Hispaniola
 are, according to the common opinion, deriv'd from 
Matinio,
 a high and Mountainous Isle, from whence the most eminent Inhabi∣tants were driven by certain Rebels, as formerly the 
Syrians
 under the Government of 
Dido,
 were driven from 
Tyre
 to 
Lybia,
 and the 
Batavians
 from 
Hessen
 to the Coun∣trey between 
Rhyne
 and 
Wall,
 at present inhabited by the 
Gelders
 and 
Hollanders.
 These 
Matininoensians
 thus expell'd from their native Countrey, setled themselves on 
Cahonao,
 near the River 
Bahaboni:
 The first House they call'd 
Camoteia,
 and after∣wards turn'd it into a Temple, to which they shew'd Reverence, and made great Presents: In like manner the 
Tyema,
 which stood on a high Rock belonging to one

of the 
Canary
 Islands, was by the antient Inhabitants of the Place had in great vene∣ration, insomuch that many leap'd down from the same, being perswaded by the Priests, That the Souls of those which threw themselves off this sacred Break-neck, should immediately be translated into a place of everlasting happiness.


This Island was, as we said before, first call'd 
Haity,
 which signifies 
Wild,
 be∣cause in many places it swells with wondrous high Mountains, and in other places is over-grown with great Woods: it was afterwards by the antient Inhabitants nam'd 
Xusqueia,
 that is, 
Unmeasurably great,
 because they suppos'd it to be the whole World, and that the Sun shin'd in no other place.


The Natives of this Island, though wholly rude of acquir'd Knowledge or Lite∣rature, like the generality of the 
Americans,
 yet they took care to instruct their Chil∣dren in the Original and Antiquities of their Countrey, and the Wars and Exploits of their Predecessors, both which they contain'd in Songs call'd 
Areitos,
 which they us'd to Sing to the sound of Drums and Trumpets; but especially their Persons of chiefest Quality study'd most these 
Areitos,
 and exercis'd themselves in Dancing.


The most remarkable of these antient 
Areitos,
 were such as pretended to pro∣phesie of things to come, which if of sad consequence, were Sung very mournfully and with many Sighs; nor were they always, however inspir'd, without effect, as appear'd at last by woful event: for long before the 
Spaniards
 Landed on 
Hispani∣ola,
 it was foretold by one of them, that 
Maguacochios,
 signifying 
Clothed People,
 should Land on 
Hispaniola,
 who with sharp Weapons should cut off Heads and Arms, and under whose insupportable Yoke their Successors must spend their days without hope of ever being releas'd.


It might be disputed whether these Predictions were dictated by good or evil Spirits; but it is generally believ'd, that all their Oracles, whether hapning true or false, were suggested by diabolical Spirits to the Priests, who commonly convers'd with them; and that these Spirits knew the Design of several People to discover new Countreys.


Their Images 
Zemes,
 stuff'd full of Cotton, were fashion'd into very frightful Shapes, and might pass for those things which we call 
Terricula,
 or 
Bugbears;
 of which some were made very small, and those they ty'd on their Foreheads when they went to the Wars. Every Governor had a peculiar 
Zemes,
 to whom he shew'd Reverence, in return whereof he expected Rain, fair Weather, and to conquer his Enemies, supposing him to be a Messenger of a perpetual and endless Being, by them call'd 
Jocauna Guamaonocon;
 whom nevertheless they suppos'd to have a Mo∣ther, to whom they gave five Names, 
viz. Attbeir, Mamona, Guacarapita, Liella,
 and 
Guimazoa.


Their opinion of Man's Creation was thus: They say, that out from a Moun∣tain in the Province 
Cuanana,
 out of certain small and great Caverns therein, came little and great People: The biggest Hole, call'd 
Cazibaragua,
 and the little one, nam'd 
Amaiauna,
 were said to be lock'd up every Night, that none might pass the Sentinel 
Machchael,
 who out of curiosity leaving the Mountain 
Cuata,
 and going up into the Countrey, was discover'd by the Sun, whose Beams he not being able to endure, was turn'd into a Rock. The like Mischance hapned to many others, who in the dark Night going to Fish, in the Morning at their Return were chang'd in∣to Oaken Trees, onely one of the Fishermen Was sent away by the chief Comman∣der 
Vaguoniana,
 who moved at the Complaint of a Nightingale's Singing, suffer'd all the Men to go into the Hole, and the Women and Children he Transported to 
Matinino,
 But to make short of these non-sensical Stories, in conclusion, the Men being let out of their Caves, saw many strange Beasts amongst the Woods, which

being turn'd into Women, Were entertain'd by them, and brought forth a nume∣rous Progeny, which spread over all 
Hispaniola.


No less ridiculous an Account do the Priests give concerning the Original of the Sea, 
Viz.
 That 
Jaia,
 a mighty Man, buried the Body of his deceased Son in a Pumpion, which some Moneths after, out of meer affection to the Deceased, he cut∣ting open, abundance of Whales sprung out of it. This Wonder being every where known, amongst others, entic'd four Brothers born at one Birth (whose Mother died in Childbed) to get the Pumpion into their possession; which their Design prov'd successful: but afterwards struck with a pannick fear of 
Jaia
's coming thi∣thither (who oftentimes came to mourn over the Bones of his dead Son) they fled, and threw away the Pumpion, which breaking with the fall, the Sea gush'd out of all places thereof, and cover'd the Plains in such a manner, that nothing of them was seen, onely the tops of the highest Mountains appear'd; at which the four Brothers terribly afrighted, rang'd through barren Desarts, in which they had died of Hunger, had they not come to a Baker's House, which one of them entring, ask'd for 
Cazabi;
 but the Baker denying them Bread, spit on them, which caus'd a mortal Dropsie, which the Brothers upon consultation found no way to cure, but by cutting a hole in the Skin with a sharp Stone, and to let out the Water; but out of each running Wound sprung a Woman, who bare them four Sons and four Daughters.


There is a certain Cave call'd 
Jovana-beina,
 which is adorn'd with a thousand Pictures, in great esteem amongst them; at the Entrance on each side whereof stands a 
Zemes;
 that on the right side is call'd 
Binthaitelles,
 the other 
Marobur,
 to which they come from all places to pay their Devotions, because (they say) the Sun and Moon came out of the said Cave to lighten the World.


Much after the same absurd rate is their Opinion of the Deceased; for they sup∣pose that they range through Woods and Forrests in the Night, eat of a Fruit call'd 
Guannaba,
 and steal to the Embraces of Women in Moon-shiny Nights. A Tra∣veller, say they, if he be frighted at the appearance of a deceased Person, great in∣conveniences will certainly attend him, but if he goes stoutly towards it, then the Goblin vanishes.


These Delusions are made great Mysteries amongst them, and contain'd in Songs, which their Priests 
Boiti
 Sing to a kind of Tabor made of a piece of hollow Wood, pretending that they have familiar Conversation with the 
Zemes
 concern∣ing future things.


Their Ceremonies about their sick, especially if Persons of Quality, are like∣wise very remarkably odd and conceited: First they chew a strong kind of Herb, call'd 
Cohobba,
 with which having sufficiently intoxicated their Brains, they foam at the Mouth, and run with a Stone and a piece of Flesh in their Mouths to the sick Person, whose Family they drive all out of Doors, except one or two, whose pre∣sence the Patient requires; then the 
Boiti
 walks four times about the sick Person's Bed, making strange Gestures, pinching his Lips and Nose, blowing upon his Forehead, Throat and Temples, and sucking several parts of his Body, alledging, that thereby he draws the Distemper out of the Veins; after that he chafes and rubs his Shoulders, Thighs and Legs, and ties his Hands and Feet together, then running to the Door, proclaims, That the Sick in a short time shall be restor'd to his former Health; which said, he returns with his Arms stretch'd out towards the sick Person, takes the piece of Flesh out of his Mouth, which he gives him backwards, saying, 
You shall rise and go forth in Health, for I have taken away your Sickness:
 But if he judges the Distemper not curable, he makes the Sick believe, that 
Zemes
 is

displeas'd with him, because he did not build a House for him, or consecrate a Garden to him, or in some respect or other did not worship him as he ought to have done. When the Soul departs out of the Body, they conjure the Body with many Adjurations, to reveal whether it died according to God's decree, or through neglect of the 
Boiti,
 as not having sanctifi'd himself enough by Fasting when he went first to the Sick, or not prescrib'd sufficient Medicines: wherefore if (as they say) the Devil answers them from the Mouth of the Deceased, that the 
Boiti
 did not perform his due Office, then the nearest Friends revenge themselves on the 
Boiti,
 but if otherwise, then they are highly esteem'd amongst them. The Women ta∣king the Stones which the 
Boiti
 kept in his Mouth, wrap them up in a fine Cloth as a holy Relique, supposing that they will much facilitate their Child-birth.


The 
Casiques
 desirous to know future Events of War, or whether the approach∣ing Years will be fruitful, go into a Chappel consecrated to the 
Zemes,
 and snuff the intoxicating Herb 
Cohobba
 up their Nostrils; whereupon they break out into loud Exclamations, and some kind of strange extravagant Actions, till the power of the 
Cohobba
 begins to decay, and the Frenzie cease; then coming again to their Sen∣ses, they bow their Heads, and lay their Elbows on their Knees, in which posture they sit for a considerable time, then lifting up their Eyes they yawn as if they they came from sleep; then they mutter to themselves whilest their Retinue which stand about them (for no common Person is suffer'd to be there) thank them with a loud Voice, for the pains they have been at in discoursing with the 
Zemes;
 then the 
Casiques
 begin to declare what hath been reveal'd to them, 
viz.
 whether they shall be fortunate in the Wars or not; whether it will be a fruitful or unfruitful, healthy or sickly Year.


Moreover,
 at the Birth of the 
Casique
's Children, the neighboring Governors visit the Women in Child-bed, and every one gives the Child a peculiar Name, from whence it happens that one Man hath oftentimes forty Names, and is highly in∣cens'd if any one of them chances to be forgot in any Writing directed to him.


Their manner of Succession in Government is not unremarkable; for not the eldest Heir-male of the Family, but first the King or 
Casique
's Brother, if he have any, and after his Decease the eldest of the Sisters Inherits the Realm or 
Seigniorie:
 if the Sisters have no Male-issue, then the Brothers Sons Inherit; and in case they have no Male-heir, then the next of Blood, whether Male or Female: but if the Prince or 
Casique
 dies without Children, Nephews, or other near Relations, the next in Power in the Countrey Inherits, and Marries as many Wives as he pleases; of which she that he loves best is burn'd alive in her best Apparel with her Husband when he dies, and near the Corps stands a Cup of Water and some of the Bread 
Cazabi.


There are several Languages in 
Hispaniola,
 but differing from each other: for in the Province 
Bainoa
 they have a different, both Pronunciation and Dialect from that in 
Caizimu.


In the said Province of 
Caizimu
 is a very remarkable Rock, or vast Stone to be seen, at the Foot of a high Mountain; and underneath the said Stone is a great Cave, into which they go through a large Passage, not unlike a Temple Door; near which conjoyn many deep Rivers, with such a Noise and Foam, that they lose both their Sight and Hearing, whoever approach the same.


Of the Language of the Province 
Bainoa, Peter Martyr
 gives us this Specimen: 
The Wife of a 
Casique
 (says he) went to Prayers in a Chappel which was built by the 
Spaniards;
 at her Return from whence her Husband desiring to enjoy her, she refusing, said, 
Teitoca, teitoca, techeta Cynato guammechina,
 that is to say, 
Be con∣tented,

Be contented, God would be highly incens'd:
 to which the 
Casique
 answer'd, 
Gnaibba Cynato machabucha guamechyna,
 that is, 
What care I if God be angry,


Since the 
Spaniards
 had first possession of this Island,
 it hath been twice Invaded by the 
English,
 the first time under the Conduct of Sir 
Francis Drake,
 who took the Town of 
San Domingo,
 staid in it a good while, and could if he had pleas'd, have totally dispossess'd the 
Spaniards;
 the second time under Colonel 
Venables,
 sent thither by 
Oliver Cromwell
 during his usurp'd Dominion; at which time it might as easily have been taken as at first, had not the Business been rashly and indiscreetly manag'd, as shall presently be declar'd more at large. The first Expedition of Sir 
Francis Drake
 hath been already hinted, but for the memorableness of that bold Exploit, we shall give a particular Account of it from a late Writer, who hath set forth the Life of that brave 
English
 Heroe. In the Year of our Lord 1580. about the end of 
February
 setting Sail from 
St. Christophers
 for 
Hispaniola,
 by the Way they met with a small Frigat bound for 
San Domingo,
 and the Men of her being Examin'd, one assur'd them that the Haven of it was a barr'd Haven, and the Shore well fortifi'd, so that there was no convenient Landing within ten 
English
 Miles of the City, whither this Man undertook to conduct them. 
January
 the first they Landed ten Miles from the City, and marching thither under the Command of the Lieute∣nant General, arriv'd about one a Clock in the Afternoon; when they came near, about a hundred and fifty Gentlemen well Mounted, presented themselves against them; but the small Shot playing upon them, they departed, and the 
English
 pro∣ceeded towards the two Gates of the City that lay towards the Sea, both which the 
Spaniards
 had Mann'd, and planted their Ordnance without the Gates, and some small Shot in an Ambush by the Way-side: The 
English
 being about twelve hun∣dred Men, divided themselves; the Lieutenant-General leading the one half to one Gate, and Captain 
Powel
 the other half to the other Gate, vowing that with God's assistance they would not rest till they met in the Market-place: No sooner had the 
Spaniards
 discharg'd their Ordnance, doing some little Execution, but the Lieute∣nant-General hasted, or rather ran upon them, to prevent their Charging again, and notwithstanding their Ambush, entred Pell Mell with them into the Gate, not staying till he came into the Market-place, unto whom shortly after came Captain 
Powel
 with his Companies. This Place they strengthned with Barricado's, the City being too large to be guarded by so small and weary an Army. And after Mid-night they in the Castle, hearing some of the 
English
 busie about the Gate, quitted it, some being taken Prisoners, and others escaping by Boats. The next day the English enlarg'd their Quarters, and fortifi'd themselves, and held the Town for a Moneths space. During this time the General sent a 
Negro
 Boy with a Flag of Truce to the 
Spaniards,
 who by the Way was met by some Officers of the Galley which the 
English
 had taken, together with the City, who furiously thrust the poor Boy through the Body; who returning to the General, and having declar'd how barbarously they had us'd him, fell down and died in his Presence. The General being much mov'd herewith, commanded the Provost-Martial to take two Fryers, and to carry them to the same place with a sufficient Guard, and there to hang them; and withal he sent one of the Prisoners to inform the 
Spaniards
 why he did it, and to tell them, that till the Party who had thus murder'd his Messenger were deliver'd to him, there should no day pass wherein he would not hang two Priso∣ners, till all were consum'd. Hereupon the day following the Murtherer was brought, and an Offer made to deliver him to the General, who yet thought it more honorable to make them perform the Execution themselves in the sight of the 
Eng∣lish,
 which was done accordingly.




During their abode here, Commissioners oft pass'd between the 
Spaniards
 and them about the Ransom of the City, but not agreeing, the 
English
 spent every Morning till the heat of the Day in firing and destroying the Houses in the out∣ward part of the City, two hundred Mariners being employ'd therein for divers days; yet were the Houses built so magnificently and strongly of Stone, that they could not consume one third part of the Town all that time; whereupon the Ge∣neral was contented to accept of twenty five thousand 
Ducats
 of 5 
s.
 6 
d.
 apiece to spare the rest.


Here his Soldiers met with good Pillage, especially of rich Apparel, but Trea∣sure they found none; for the 
Spaniards
 by their Cruelties had so destroy'd the Na∣tives, who us'd to work in the Mines of Gold and Silver, that they were wholly given over; and in that Island they were forc'd to use Copper Money: yet they found store of Wine, Oyl, Vinegar, Wheat, Woollen and Linnen Cloth, some Silks, 
&c.
 which much reliev'd them: there was but little Plate found, but good store of 
Porcelane,
 or 
China
 Dishes; yet some they found, and very costly Hous∣hold-stuff.


Venables
 his Expedition was in the Year 1654. when 
Cromwell
 having gain'd the supream Power under the Title of 
Protector,
 and having us'd so many Engines for the getting of Money to maintain his Greatness and usurp'd Authority, that he was almost brought to his last Shifts, bethought himself of this Project, (or, as some suppose, had it put into his Head by Cardinal 
Mazarine,
 the then great Minister of State in 
France,
 with whom he had intimate Correspondence) thinking thereby to kill two Birds with one Stone: for on the one side, he thought by this notable Exploit to advance his Fame abroad, and gain Credit and Applause with the People at home, by enlarging his Empire, and spreading the Renown of the 
English
 Nation, and so consequently to establish himself the more firmly in his new gotten Power; and at the same time by the great Riches he promis'd to himself from this Adventure, to recruit his Stock, which all his griping Exactions, especi∣ally from the King's Party, could scarce supply for the keeping up of his Army, maintaining Intelligence, and other vast Expences: To this end he sets forth a con∣siderable Fleet with extraordinary speed and secrecy, it not being known whither this Fleet was design'd till they were almost upon the very Place, that the 
Spaniard
 might not be forewarn'd to provide against them, onely in general terms it was given out, that the Design was both advantageous to the Nation, and would prove a great enrichment to all that went upon it; so that it is no great wonder, if within a short space a good competent Army was got together of such as having neither Estates nor Employments, willingly offer'd themselves, as Men that went from the fear of Iron Grates, to the hopes of Golden Ingots; and many of them were such as having been in the late King's Army, and disdaining to take any Employment at home under that Government, were easily induc'd to List themselves in this Armada: nor was 
Oliver
 a little glad of this occasion of sending out of the Land, and employ∣ing upon a desperate Adventure those Men, who he had reason to suspect would, up∣on any opportunity offer'd, be the first Opposers of his usurp'd Power. This Army being sent to 
Portsmouth
 for Embarquation, and there making such Preparations as was convenient, which a Moneths time or thereabouts was thought would ac∣complish, a Messenger came from 
Desborough
 (who was there to set them going) to the General, that he should prepare to Embarque on 
Christmas
-day; which at the first the General receiv'd with great impatience, alledging, That it was not possi∣ble so to do, and that he would not set Sail without his Arms and other Necessaries, which were not yet come from 
London:
 however, at his going to 
Desborough
 he was

prevail'd upon to set Sail, with a promise that the Ships with the Arms should immediately follow him to the 
Barbado's,
 where he was to stay till their arrival; so on 
Christmas
-day they set Sail, and about the fourteenth of 
February
 arriv'd at 
Bar∣bado's
 with three thousand Men, and a Company of Reformado's, which there were doubled, and then, and not till then, it was told them, That the reason of their so sudden going away, was because there was a Plot forming in 
England
 for resto∣ring the King, and that they were not thought fit to be left there at the Head of their Regiments, to be tempted with the advantage of joyning with any such Party. At 
Barbado's
 they staid till they had almost undone that Place by eating up their Pro∣visions, the Planters there seldom preparing more than they have occasion to spend in their Houses, and for their Servants (having better and more profitable Employ∣ments upon their Hands) and the Soldiers not being content with such Provisions as their Servants would be well pleas'd with, so that they were in danger of star∣ving the Island and themselves too: Thereupon a Council of War was call'd, and the necessity of leaving that Island declar'd, and Orders issu'd out to set Sail for 
Hispaniola,
 where they might make such Attempt as their Condition would allow, wanting Arms and other Necessaries; when they came within five or six Leagues of 
Hispaniola
 the Fleet lay by, and a Council of War was call'd by the Commissio∣ners (for such they had who were never Soldiers) with some few Officers of the Army, where it was resolv'd to attempt San Domingo, and an Order made, That in case it be taken, no Soldier should offer to Plunder, but that satisfaction in lieu thereof should be given by the Commissioners; the Officers of the Army in vain opposing and protesting against it, which occasion'd the Soldiers to say, That the Commissioners should take the Town themselves, for they would not; Lots were there drawn by the several Colonels who should first Land, which fell upon the Black Regiment, who had no Arms but Half-pikes of eight Foot long, made of Cabbage-Tree in the 
Barbado's;
 And Orders were then given out to the several Colonels to Land at the River 
Hind,
 within two Leagues of 
San Domingo;
 so they steer'd their Course thither, as was thought, by Night, but the next Morning found themselves twenty Leagues at least from the place of Rendezvouz, though one Re∣giment Landed there, who durst not attempt the Town for want of Orders, though doubtless they might have taken it, had they not staid in expectation of the General and the rest of the Fleet; but when they were thus cast Leeward of the Town, they must Land their Men, who no sooner went on Shore, but the Order against Plundering was read, and the Soldiers in a Mutiny to whom it was read, which made the rest forbear to read it, judging it no time now to disoblige them, who had in their Officers opinion too just a cause of discontent: However this was made known to the rest, and discours'd as they march'd, That they had not thought to be under a Committee here, but they would make them weary of their Em∣ployment ere they had done: And this indeed was enough, besides the faintness and unusual Heat of the Countrey, to disanimate Men of good Resolutions, espe∣cially the ordinary Soldiers, whose hopes of Plunder is the chiefest prop to their Courage, and exected Gain the spurr to their Valour. After they had Landed their Men, next Morning early they march'd towards 
San Domingo;
 but before Noon the Heat and Drought which they felt made them sensible of their first Errour and Inadvertency, in coming from 
England
 without their Necessaries; for through want of Bottles, which were left behind, and came not till three Moneths afterwards, the Men fell down dead in the High-ways, every one fainting and languishing, and crying out for Water: shortly after they met with a Field of Oranges, which was no unwelcome sight, with which they stor'd themselves; but ere they had march'd

four or five Miles thought they had quench'd their present Thirst, and their Drought began to increase however, they march'd on, leaving some of their Men dead on the place, others fainting, were set upon the Troopers Horses till they came that Night to some Water, which gave them new life, and the Morrow early march'd again till they came within some Miles of the appointed Rendez∣vouz, where they heard of the other Regiment that Landed at the right place: And now having refresh'd themselves with Rest, Water, and Provision, they march'd to the taking of the Town; the General himself, with a small Party and a Guide, went towards the Town to find out some Water, which he knew the Soldiers would want, (not having Bottles to carry any) but as they were on their March, which was very leisurely by reason of the Heat, they heard a firing of Musquets, then making more speed in their March, supposing an Engagement, in the High∣way, about a Mile from the Town, was found one of the General's, Secretaries, with others, dead; and not long after some came back to the General, and told him, That looking for Water with the Guide, an Ambuscade issu'd out, and had kill'd the Guide that should have shew'd them the place of Water, and some others; and although some which Commanded the foremost Regiments were very forward and willing to assault the Town, yet it was not thought fit so to do till the Army came up, by which time it was Night; and though they were then within half a Mile of the Town, yet the Soldiers were so impatient for Water, that they could not stay till the next Morning to assault the Town, but were forc'd to march back to the River 
Hind
 about eight Miles; (and this Relater did at that time drink his own Water) there they staid till they had again refresh'd themselves, and then prepar'd for their Return to attaque the Town; and notwithstanding the March it self in a hot Countrey was irksom enough, yet they were forc'd to make the Soldiers to draw the Ordnance and other Carriages for want of Harness and other Necessaries, which were left behind; however, they willingly underwent it by Turns: And now a Forlorn was drawn out, and other Orders given for a March, especially it being taken notice of, that the Enemies manner of Fight was and would be by Am∣buscades, a File in every Company were order'd to stand till the other came up, and to face to the Right and Left to the Woods, which were all along as they went, for fear of a Surprize; and the Forlorn marching near an old Fort, call'd 
Jeronymo,
 which we had been possess'd of before, but thought not worth the keeping, and fearing they might meet with some small opposition there, began to fortifie them∣selves, and took a Dram of the Bottle, which as they were drinking, and others eating a bit, suddenly rush'd forth an Ambush of about a hundred and twenty 
Blacks,
 with a 
Spanish
 Commander in the Head of them, which so amaz'd and 
sur∣priz'd
 them, that some few onely Discharging, the rest immediately fled; the 
Blacks
 quickly falling in with their Lances, and doing such Execution as the time would allow them; for presently the Alarm being taken, and Supplies marching out for their relief, the Enemy, who had done more than they could possibly expect to have done, retreated into their Fort, which they had better fortifi'd than before, and had planted some small Drakes there upon it; the Execution was so short, that they had not time either to strip or pick a Pocket, lest they had paid too dear for it. After this Defeat a Council of War was call'd, and there it was agreed the next Morning early to fall on upon that little Fort, and so proceed to the taking of the Town; but very early, as they were in that expectation, Orders came from the General to the Army to march back to the River 
Hind,
 for what reason this Relator (though a considerable Person) never yet knew; where after they had staid some time, that Miscarriage was question'd at a Council of War, and one of the chief







view of Puerto Rico


PORTO RICO






Officers of the Forlorn order'd to have his Sword broke over his Head, with other dis
graceful Impositions, and two Colonels of the Army were order'd to draw up the Causes of this Miscarriage to send to 
England;
 which, because 'twas th
ought would too much reflect on them in Power that were to supply them, was by those Colonels judg'd inconvenient, and so 'twas never done. The number of Men lost by Stragling, Sickness, and this unhappy Engagement, amounted in the vvhole to about two hundred and thirty. In a short time after this, it was order'd to Ship the Men; which done, after some Debates amongst the Commissioners what was best to be done, Provisions nor Utensils yet coming fit for the Design in∣tended, which was to possess some considerable Place in the 
Main,
 it was agreed, That they should steer their Course for the Island of 
Jamaica;
 which they did accor∣dingly, and on the tenth day of 
May
 1654. with little opposition possess'd it: where the same Soldiers have shew'd not onely such Courage and Resolution upon all occasions, (in many and frequent Encounters and Invasions made by the 
Spani∣ards,
 not onely with Soldiers of those Parts, but such as have been sent from 
Spain, Naples, Catalonia,
 and other Places) as might speak them 
English
-men, but such hath been their Patience and Sufferance, as none of this Nation in the memory of Man have ever been put to, the Effects whereof their King and Countrey, 'tis hop'd, will have occasion to remember, to their immortal Honor and Renown.


Hispaniola
 is surrounded with several other Isles, as 1. Eastward appears 
Saona,
 full of pleasant Woods and Pastures, with Cattel feeding on them: in former times it produc'd much 
Cazabi
 for the City 
Domingo;
 but since the 
Spaniards
 murder'd all the Inhabitants 
Anno
 1502. it hath never been inhabited. 2. The Rocky Shelf 
St. Catalina.
 3. 
Abaque.
 4. 
Navaza.
 5. 
Guanabo.
 6.
Tortuga,
 abounding in Hogs. and 7. 
Beata,
 famous for the excellent speckled Wood which grows there, and a swift River, which oftentimes detains the Ships there whole Moneths.






CHAP. XIV. Porto Rico, and Monico.


ANother of those call'd 
The Isles of Barlovento,
 is 
Boriquen,
 anciently so nam'd, but now more generally 
Porto Rico,
 from 
St. Juan de Porto Rico,
 its chief Town, is an Island fifteen Leagues distant from 
Santa Crux,
 to the North-West, and about as many from 
Hispaniola
 to the South-East, but from the Continent or main Land of 
Paria
 (which seems to be the nearest) a hundred and thirty, or a hun∣dred thirty six, as some reckon. It lieth almost in a quadrangular Form, being suppos'd to contain about thirty Leagues in length, and not less than twenty in breadth, in eighteen and nineteen Degrees of Northern Latitude.


The Island on the North, which is less fruitful than the South part, produces Gold, and is generally water'd with many Rivers. There is also Silver, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, and 
Azure,
 us'd by Painters. The Rain generally falls there between 
May
 and 
August.
 A little before, or in the beginning of Harvest, the Hurricanes breaking forth from the Clouds, rage in such a manner, that it is impossible for any Ships to endure the Sea, and a Northern Blast generally doth great damage to the Plants here.


Ten Leagues towards the South-East beyond 
Porto Rico,
 appears 
Sierra del Lo∣quillo,






 being a continu'd Ridge of Mountains which runs through the whole Island from East to West, extending both ways to the very Sea-shore.


Twenty three Rivers discharge their Waters also into the Ocean;
 amongst which the chiefest is 
Cairabon,
 particularly noted for ten Sugar-Mills which are erected upon its Banks.


The Hills,
 Plains, and Valleys, are invested with variety of Trees peculiar to this place, as 
Tabunuco,
 which affords a medicinal Gum, good against Lameness, and green Wounds: it is also of great use to preserve a Ship's Keel from the Worms.


Another Tree call'd 
Maga,
 is everlasting Wood, and bears a great Flower like a Rose.


The Leaves of the 
Higillo Pintado
-Tree cures all manner of Bruises.


The same power is also in the little Tree 
Sancta Maria;
 as likewise in another by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Balsamo.


The Body of the Tree 
Zoyla
 is so thick, that fifteen Men holding Hands toge∣ther, cannot encompass the same.


The speckled Wood, and 
Cassia Fistula
 grow also here in great abundance.


Here is likewise Apple-Trees, which grow by Rivers sides, or on the Sea-shore, whose Fruit is rank Poyson, and who-ever sleeps under the shadow of them, will certainly be Lame: The Fruit eaten generally causes Death; or if Nature be so strong in him that eats of it, to overcome the same, yet he is certain to lose his Hair.


As hurtful is the prickly Herb 
Quibey,
 which bears white Flowers like Violets.


But this Island receives the greatest prejudice by the Tree 
Guaiaba,
 because it grows in most places, and over-runs Plains and Hills, so spoiling all the Grass, be∣tween which and the fore-mention'd Tree there is such an antipathy, that none will grow near it. The Tree bears a brown Apple full of Kernels, which are eaten by Beasts and Fowls, and from which falling on the Ground when ripe, grow up in new Trees, which makes the Countrey a meer Wilderness: The Body of it is smooth and of a pale colour, the Leaves hard, and glittering, and grow two and

two over one another; the Flowers have also five Leaves, in the middle of which rises a Crown like that on a Peacock's Head: The Fruit, which is cover'd with a soft Doun, and somewhat longer than the 
European
 Apple, when cut through, hath a pale red Pulp, full of eatable Kernels: before it is ripe, it is of a sharp taste, yet good boyl'd, but when ripe, of a most delicious and pleasant rellish; neverthe∣less too much of it causes a Lask: The Roots, which are red without, and white within, are juicy, sweet, and very long, the Leaves sallow and sowre of taste.


Amongst the strange Beasts the 
Javaris, Opassum,
 and 
Tatow
 are the most remark∣able. The 
Javaris
 are taken for a sort of wild Hogs, and have short Ears and a Navel on their Backs, little Tails, some black, and some spotted white.


The 
Opassum
 is as big as a Cat, hath a sharp Mouth, the upper Jaw-bone hanging over the lower, long, straight, and broad Ears, and a very long Tail, bald at the end, which winds in a Circle; on its Back black Hair sprinkled with grey Spots, and with its sharp Claws climbs up the Trees, where it feeds on Fruit, and sometimes preys on Fowls. Nature hath furnish'd this Beast with a strange Bag under its Belly, whereof the in-side hath a far softer Doun than the out-side, in which the young ones lie and suck, after which the Bag opening, they creep out upon the Ground. The Males have also a Bag, which serves onely to carry their Young in, for they and the Females carry them by turns.


The 
Tatow,
 which is arm'd with sharp Scales, hath the Mouth of a Hog, and at each Foot five sharp Nails: when it is Hunted, or goes to sleep in the Night, it draws its Head, Legs and Tail under its scaly Coat of Mail, like a Tortoise, and in that manner lies secure against all manner of danger.


The Venison taken here is very delicate, but difficult to be got; for this Beast having a breathing-place in its Back, never tires with running, and when encom∣pass'd by the Dogs, falls valiantly on those that are nearest to it, and often tears them in pieces.


The chief Towns in this Island, are 1. 
Porto Rico
 it self, commonly call'd 
St. John de Porto Rico
 (so term'd by 
Christopher Columbus,
 as being the first Land disco∣ver'd by him in the Year 1493. at that time when he could not perswade his Sea∣men, wearied out with continual hardship, from returning, if they discover'd not Land in two days) a strong and neat Town, built by the Command of 
Philip
 the Second, King of 
Spain:
 It was attempted by Sir 
Francis Drake
 in the Year 1595. without success, but a few years after taken by the Earl of 
Cumberland.


2. 
St. Germans,
 in the West part of the Island, three or four Leagues distant from the Sea.


3. 
Arrecibo,
 Westward from 
Porto Rico,
 where the most noted Haven is of those Parts, for all the others are full of Rocks and Sands.


The antient Inhabitants of this Island maintain'd continual Wars with the Cannibals (probably the Natives of the Islands so call'd) who us'd every year to come thither: those that were conquer'd, as well of the one side as of the other, were eaten by the Conquerors, so that in effect, both sides were but a different sort of Cannibals.


Columbus
 Landing here, found a great House surrounded with twelve others, but all of them empty and desolate.


This Island (which formerly is said to have been under the absolute Power of one sole King) the 
Spaniards
 not much regarded at first, having enough to do with 
Hispaniola,
 where they found more Gold than on 
Porto Rico.


Anno
 1510. 
John Ponce de Leon
 obtain'd a Commission from the Court of 
Spain,
 to be chief Governor of this Island, and built 
Caparra;
 which Place was inhabited

twelve years, notwithstanding it stood behind a scraggy Mountain, in a desart place far up in the Countrey; but their thirst after Gold, of which some Veins were discover'd there, made them dispence with all other inconveniences: yet at last beginning to be weary of this desolate and barren place of Settlement, they remov'd to 
Guanica,
 water'd by many Rivers, whose Sands had great quantities of Gold∣dust. Not staying long there, they went four Leagues farther, and call'd their new Plantation 
Soto Major.
 Lastly, returning again, they setled themselves in the former Valley 
Guanica,
 and built the fore-mention'd Town 
St. Germans
 by the Ri∣ver 
Guaorabo,
 which makes an inconvenient Haven.


Juan de Porto Rico
 stands Eastward at the beginning of the North Coast, on a small 
Peninsula,
 joyn'd to the Island by an high 
Isthmus
 call'd 
Puente de Aguilar.
 Near the Mouth of the Haven lies on a rising Hill the Fort 
Morro Empinado,
 built triangular by 
John de Texila
 and 
Baptista Antonelli
 (who also planted there forty Guns), and sur∣rounded with the Sea, which renders it a well fortifi'd place. The Governor 
Diego Mendez de Valdez
 had in it fifteen hundred Men and eighty Horses, when the fore∣mention'd valiant Duke of 
Cumberland
 with a far less number fell upon him in the Year 1597. and not onely took the City 
Porto Rico,
 but several other Fortifications; and besides an invaluable mass of Treasure he carried away eighty Guns. Sometime before this Defeat the 
Spaniards
 under the Government of 
Christopher,
 Son to the 
Portu∣guese
 Duke of 
Camigna,
 were Invaded by the Cannibals, and all that were then up∣on the place utterly destroy'd, none of them escaping but the Bishop and his Ser∣vants, who betimes fled away with the Church Ornaments; so that the Islanders from that time were put out of doubt that the 
Spaniards
 were mortal, for they sup∣pos'd them immortal when first they saw their great Ships, and heard the noise of their thundering Cannon.


Hugh Linschot
 relates, That the Casique 
Yaguara
 threw a 
Spaniard
 into the Water, to try whether he would drown or not, and seeing him wholly depriv'd of Life, he concluded by consequence that the rest of them were mortal, and thereupon he set upon them when they were seeking for Gold, and kill'd above a hundred and fifty of them.


Peter Martyr
 relates farther, That these People, though very expert in Arms, yet were oftentimes beaten by the Cannibals, who at one time carried above five thousand People out of 
Porto Rico
 for their Winter Provisions.


Nor was their Condition better'd after the 
Spaniards
 conquer'd the Island, for those that could not furnish them with Gold, were certain of Death: Nor were their Cruelties in other places undivulg'd to this People before their Arrival; where∣upon (as is related by 
Peter Ordonnez de Carellos
) the Casique 
Hatvey
 being inform'd of the 
Spaniards
 Approach, took an Oath from his Subjects, That they should never discover where the Gold lay, though they should be put to death for it; 
For
 (said he) 
Gold is their God, for which they make so many cursed Blood-baths where-ever they come; therefore throw the Gold into some very deep Waters, for when the
 Spanish 
God is sunk, the
 Spaniards 
will lose their Courage, and not plague us so much for it.


Many were the Idolatrous Ceremonies of the old Natives of this Place, which would be too tedious to relate; but amongst the rest, they annually kept a great Feast, at which the 
Casiques
 summon'd all their Subjects to a Temple appointed for that purpose, where the Priests had prepar'd an Idol ready set forth in all its Pa∣geantry; near which the 
Casique
 plac'd himself, when upon the beating of a Drum all the Commonalty came also into the Temple; the Men painted with divers Co∣lours, having on their Heads Plumes of Feathers, about their Necks, Legs, and Arms, Strings of Sea-shells. The Married Women had a light Covering about

their Middle, but the Maids went stark naked, all of them Dancing and Singing Songs in praise of the Idol; after which having saluted the 
Casique,
 they thrust little Sticks down their Throats, so to bring up all they had upon their Stomachs; which done, and sitting down with their Legs under them, they began to Sing anew, often bowing and shewing Reverence to the 
Casique;
 whilest some Women carried Baskets of Bread amongst those that Sang, and utter'd certain Prayers, which were answer'd by some of the Men; the Bread being bless'd by the Priests, they gave every one a piece, with which they return'd home very merry and jocund.


But the God of this Island, whoever he was, hath been a long time left without Worshippers; for those that were left by the Invading Cannibals, were cruelly massacred by the 
Spaniards,
 insomuch that they have been thereby necessi∣tated to furnish themselves with 
Negro's
 to work in their Mines and Sugar-Mills; and these also not able to endure such hard Entertainment, ran most of them away; for when a 
Negro
 did not bring Gold enough home at Night, his Master tying him naked to a Stake or Post, and beat him with Rods or Switches so long, till the Blood ran down his Back, then pour'd boyling Oyl into the Wounds, and then threw Pepper and Salt into them, and so let him lie, or else put him into a Pit, out of which his Head appear'd onely. But those that fled gathering together, some∣times met with the 
Spaniards,
 and paid them in their own Coin.


EAstward of 
Porto Rico,
 and betwixt it and 
Hispaniola,
 there lieth a little, but fruitful Island call'd 
Mona;
 and Westward of that, another call'd 
Monico,
 or 
Monetta;
 which last the 
English,
 when time was, found so admirably stor'd with a sort of wild Fowl, that the huge Flights of them seem'd to darken the Air over their Heads, and upon their Landing found such plenty of their Eggs upon the Shore and Ground thereabouts, that they presently laded two of their Boats with them. But how peopled or possess'd, not so well known.






CHAP. XV. Cuba.


VVEstward, or rather to the North-West of 
Hispaniola,
 lieth 
Cuba,
 ac∣counted one of the four Isles of 
Barlovento,
 and by 
Columbus,
 upon his first Discovery, call'd 
Joanna,
 afterwards 
Fernandina,
 then 
Alpha
 and 
Omega,
 till at last the present Name prevail'd; it is parted from the other by a Frith, or narrow Channel, which runneth betwixt the Capes of 
St. Nicholas,
 be∣longing to 
Hispaniola,
 and that call'd 
Mayzi,
 belonging to 
Cuba:
 On the North it hath a Frie of little Islands call'd 
The Leucayae Islands,
 of which more in their proper place, so many and so thick scatter'd, that they serve for no small Security and De∣fence of the Island on that side; besides, a part of the 
Peninsula
 of 
Florida,
 which Coasteth it likewise Northward; on the West it hath the Countrey of 
Jucatan,
 which is part of the Continent, but at a distance of forty or fifty Leagues; and on the South, 
Jamaica.
 It is reckon'd to be in length from Cape 
Mayzi,
 which looks towards 
Hispaniola
 to the Cape of 
St. Anthony,
 which is upon the Bay of 
Mexico,
 two hundred and thirty Leagues; but in breadth in some places not above fifteen or six∣teen Leagues over; in the broadest place from 
Jardines
 to 
Lucanaca,
 not above forty,

in others sixty five. But for fertility of Soil, contending with 
Hispaniola
 it self, and for temperature and healthiness of Air, much exceeding it; nor less rich formerly in good Mines both of Gold and Silver, and plentifully stor'd at present, not onely with Sugar-Canes of the best Growth, but likewise with abundance of Ginger-Roots, 
Cassia-Fistula,
 Mastick, Aloes, Cinamon, Long-Pepper of 
America,
 as they call it, and divers other sorts of Spices. The Pastures no less abounding with Cattel of all sorts, especially of 
European
 Breed; the Rivers and Coasts of the Sea with good Fish; no scarcity of Fowl, whether wild or tame; good Brass and Iron still found, with some Gold in the Rivers, especially those which fall into the Bay 
Xagua
 on the South side of the Island; the chiefest thereof are 
Arimao, La Luna, De Mares,
 and 
Cauto;
 the biggest of them falls Southward into the Sea; all of them breed store of Crocodiles, which have oftentimes seiz'd both upon Men and Beasts, and carrying them into the Water, devour'd them there.


The Cedars breathe forth a most excellent sweet smell,
 and grow so large, that out of the single Trunks of some of them Boats are said to have been made, capa∣ble to hold forty, sometimes sixty Men.


There are also many other very odoriferous Trees, yielding a certain Rozen or Gum, no less precious than the 
Storax.


But nothing grows here more plentifully than Vines,
 the Bodies or Stocks of which are as thick as a Man's Middle, and bear excellent Grapes.


Besides Partridges, Turtle-Doves, and other Fowl, the Sea-shore breeds thou∣sands of Cranes, which when young, are white, but when old, become of several Colours; they stand commonly with their Legs in salt Water, which they drink.


The Parrots which breed here us'd to be taken by the Natives after a strange manner: A Boy having a Bundle of Herbs about his Head, climbs up to the top of a Tree, holding a Parrot over his Head, which by griping he forces to make a noise, and thereby draws others to come flying about him; upon which, being ex∣pert in this Art, he throws a String with a Noose made fast to a Stick about them, and pulls them to him.


There are a sort of four-footed Serpents, by the Natives call'd 
Yguanas,
 of which they us'd to eat.


The Flesh of Tortoises or Turtles, was accounted a great Dainty amongst them, especially those of the biggest size, of which some have been known to weigh a hun∣dred and thirty Pound: The Feet of them are said to cure the Leprosie and Scabs.


Amongst the peculiar Trees of this Countrey, are the 
Zagua
 and the 
Caninga.


The Cotton, which is of the natural Growth of this Place, is exceeding fine.


Here is also the Bird 
Flamingo,
 and another sort of Bird call'd 
Bambayas.


In former times 
Cuba
 was Govern'd by several Lords, each Commanding over his own Province.


The chiefest of these Provinces are 
Mayzi, Bayamo, Cueyba, Camguey, Macaca, Xagua, Habana,
 and 
Uhima;
 some of them are plain, others mountainous, and being more or less fruitful, were very populous, before the 
Spaniards
 came thither, but since their cruel Massacres, scarce any of the antient Natives are left: Nor are the 
Spaniards
 here at present very populous, considering the largeness of the Island.


In the Province of 
Camaguey
 is a Valley three Leagues in bigness, where Nature produces a great number of large Stones so exactly round, that no Man with a Compass can make a more exact Circle.


Though the Gold, which is digg'd out of the Mines, and found in Rivers, is none of the purest, yet the Copper which this Countrey affords is accounted ex∣cellent.








view of Havana


HAVANA








The Serpents here are about the bigness of a Hare, having Heads like Weezles;
 they prey on little Beasts call'd 
Guabiniquinazes,
 and have been accounted delicious and wholsom Meat.


The antient Natives went formerly naked. The Men made it a Custom to for∣sake their Wives when they pleas'd; yet the Women were still oblig'd to be faith∣ful to them, though from the very first day of their Marriage they were taught to Cuckold them, by a certain wicked Ceremony in use amongst them; for the Bridegroom lay not with his Bride the first Night, but suffer'd her to be enjoy'd by one of his Friends of equal Quality with himself, whether he were Lord, Mer∣chant, Laboring-man, or what Estate soever.


This Island was reduc'd under the 
Spanish
 Government not without great effu∣sion of Blood; for the Natives having had continual Wars with the Cannibals, as hath been said, were not ignorant in the Exercise of Arms. The first 
Spanish
 Com∣mander sent against them was 
Valdivia,
 whom they slew with all his Men, and hew'd his Ship in pieces. Little better escap'd 
Fogeda,
 whose Men were all cut off, and he himself escaping very miraculously, died not long after of his Wounds in 
St. Domingo.


Within two years after, 
viz. Anno
 1514. 
Diego Valasquez
 with better success set forth for 
Cuba,
 where the first thing he did was to build a City, which he call'd 
St. Jago,
 lying near a Southern Bay, full of Fish, and defended with several small Isles, behind which the Ships in the greatest Storm may Ride very secure; by rea∣son whereof the new City increas'd so much, that in a short time it could shew two thousand Inhabitants, a brave Church, a Cloyster, and was made a Bishop's See, but subordinate to that of 
St. Domingo.


Three or four Leagues from the City are those famous Mountains, by the 
Spa∣niards
 call'd 
Sierra de Cobre,
 or 
The Copper Mountains,
 from the abundance of that Me∣tal which the Mines in them afforded, and do yet afford; but the City was after∣wards almost left desolate, (divers Houses in the same standing empty) having in it scarce two hundred Inhabitants;
 which made it the easier to be taken by a hun∣dred and sixty 
English
-men, led by Captain 
Cliff, Anno
 1601. who carried from thence a hundred thousand Pieces of Eight, and a Ships Lading of Hides and Sugar.


2. Besides 
St. Jago, Valasquez
 built the Town 
Baracoa,
 on the Eastern Shore of 
Cuba,
 wash'd by the River 
Mares,
 which falls into the Ocean between two Mountains on one side, and a flat Point on the other, and is a most excellent Harbor: Not far from which grows the best Ebony Wood.


3. He also built the Town 
St. Salvador,
 one of the most healthful Promontories of all 
Cuba,
 near the River 
Bayamo,
 which produces round Stones, us'd there in stead of Bullets.


4. He likewise built 
Trinidad,
 before which hardly accessible Harbor many a Ship hath been cast away: But this Fort was by a mighty Storm levell'd even with the Ground.


5. Near the Haven before the Town 
Puerto del Principe
 is a Fountain, out of which at certain times flows liquid Pitch.


6. The Town call'd 
Villa Sancti Spiritus,
 six Leagues from the Ocean, boasts fifty brave Houses, and is wash'd by the River 
Saaz.


7. The chiefest City which the 
Spaniards
 possess in the 
West-Indies,
 and the pre∣sent Seat of their Governor, is 
Christovall de Havana;
 which stood first on the South side of 
Cuba,
 but was afterwards built on the North, opposite to 
Florida:
 The Har∣bor before it is large and safe, for it is able to contain a thousand Ships, without the least endangering of one another, and yet the Entrance so narrow, between a

Promontory and a square Fort, that two Ships cannot Sail in together: the shal∣lowest part thereof hath six Fathom Water. On each side the Mouth of the Har∣bor is a Fort, the one call'd 
Mesa de Maria,
 which stands built on a Champain Ground; the other call'd 
Morro,
 which lies at the Foot of two Hills, on whose tops several Guns are planted, which Command the Town and Haven.


Betwixt these two Forts is a Tower cover'd, on the top whereof is a round Lan∣tern, wherein stands continually a Watch-man, who puts forth as many Flags as he discovers Ships at Sea, to give notice thereof to the City, which is a Mile from thence.


Before 
Havana
 stands a third Castle, well stor'd with Guns, as likewise the rest are, in all to the number of two hundred and forty, and strongly Garrison'd; of which great care was taken by the General 
Jean de Texeda,
 and 
Baptista Antonelli,
 an Architect, sent thither by 
Philip
 the Second, King of 
Spain,
 to secure the Place from all foreign Assaults, because the Plate-Fleet, and other Ships that come out of the 
West-Indies,
 have their place of Rendezvouz here, and from hence set Sail altoge∣ther for 
Spain.
 The City stands along the Haven, and hath two Churches with spiry Steeples. The Houses are now built after the 
Spanish
 manner.


But 
Havana
 was not so strongly fortifi'd in former times, for 
Anno
 1536. it could not resist a mean 
French
 Pyrate, who losing the rest of his Fleet was driven hither by Storm, and conquering 
Havana,
 had burnt the same, consisting at that time of woodden Houses cover'd with Thatch, had not the 
Spaniards
 redeem'd them from the Fire for seven hundred 
Ducats;
 with which Money the 
French
 set Sail, when the day following three Ships arriv'd from 
New Spain
 before 
Havana,
 and having unladed their Goods, and preparing themselves for Battel, pursu'd the Pyrate; whom getting sight of, the Admiral, who Sail'd before, durst not venture to Engage him alone, but staid for the other two Ships: from which cowardly Action the 
French
 Pyrate taking Courage, fell on the 
Spanish
 Admiral, who without firing a Gun ran his Ship ashore, and deserted the same: the next Ship thereby discou∣rag'd, Tacking about, made away from the Enemy; on which the third also fol∣low'd, insomuch that at last they were all three taken by the 
French;
 who encou∣rag'd with this unexpected Victory, steer'd their Course a second time to 
Havana,
 where they got as much more Money from the Inhabitants as before. After this the 
Spaniards
 built all their Houses of Stone, and a Fort at the Mouth of the Harbor, yet nevertheless the City lay open on the Land side; of which the 
English
 Fleet, Cruising about in those Seas, being inform'd, Landed not far from 
Havana,
 and en∣ter'd the City before Day-break: the 
Spaniards
 thus suddenly surpriz'd, fled into the Woods, whilest the 
English
 plunder'd and ransack'd the City without any resistance. But this was not the last Blow which 
Havana
 receiv'd, for during the Wars between the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, and the 
French
 King 
Henry
 the Second, a Ship set Sail with ninety Soldiers from 
Diep
 to 
Cuba,
 where they made themselves Masters of 
St. Jago,
 and carried great Treasure away with them: Thus enrich'd, they set in the Night on 
Havana,
 but found their Expectations frustrated, for all the Houses were empty, the 
Spaniards
 (being so often Plunder'd) having remov'd all their Goods to their Countrey Houses, which lay scattering about the Island. Whilest the 
French
 were searching the Houses, two 
Spaniards
 came under pretence of agree∣ing with them, but their Design was chiefly to take an Account of their Enemies Forces. The 
French
 demanded six thousand 
Ducats
 of them: to which the two 
Spaniards
 reply'd, That all their Goods would not raise so much: then going to their Party, inform'd them of the number of the Enemies, and their Demands; whereupon Consulting, some judg'd it best to comply with a forc'd Necessity, and

if they could not get any thing abated, to pay the demanded Sum: but most of them were of another opinion, alledging, That the number of the 
French
 was not equivalent to their Demands, and that it would not be for their Credit, to yield up their Estates so tamely, without trying their Title by the Sword: This being judg'd fittest, they march'd to Engage them with a hundred and fifty Men, which about Midnight fell on the 
French,
 and at the first Onset slew four of them; but up∣on the firing of the Gun they were all alarm'd, and after a small Skirmish, put the 
Spaniards
 to flight. The Conquerors enrag'd at this treacherous Plot of the 
Spani∣ards,
 set fire on 
Havana,
 in which at that time was a good quantity of Pitch and Tarr; with which the Gates, Windows, Roofs, and Pent-houses being all bedaub'd over, were in few hours all in a light Flame; after which the Churches in order for their firing, were also going to be over-laid with the same combustible Matter; at which a 
Spaniard
 boldly desir'd, that the Temples erected for Gods Service might be spar'd: to which he was answer'd, That People who keep not their Promise, nor had any Faith, had no need of Churches to profess their Faith in. The 
French
 not satisfi'd with burning, pull'd down the Walls, and utterly demo∣lish'd the Fort.


The Haven 
Xagua
 also is not inferior to any, the Mouth thereof being a Bowe∣shot wide, and within, ten Leagues: The Ships are securely shelter'd behind three Islands, and also the Mountains, which rise along the Shore.


Moreover, the Inlet 
Matanca
 is not onely eminent, by reason of the round Moun∣tain 
Elan de Matancas,
 which rises from a low Ground;
 but chiefly for the Expediti∣ons of Admiral 
Peter Peterson Hein,
 who being sent out by the 
West-India
 Com∣pany, to Cruse up and down before 
Havana
 with one and thirty Sail, was from thence by a strong Current driven down to 
Matanca;
 where he stood from the Shore, when ten Ships came just running amidst his Fleet, and were all taken but one: About Noon they discover'd nine Ships more, which Sailing along the Shore, got into the Inlet 
Matanca,
 where they ran aground; whither 
Hein
 follow∣ing, came up to them the next Morning by Break-of-day, and after a small Resi∣stance took them, being valu'd to be worth above a hundred and fifteen Tun of Gold, besides the Musk, Ambergreece, and 
Bezoar
 with which two other Ships were laden, and another rich Prize.


This large Island 
Cuba
 (as we have before observ'd) formerly divided into so many populous Territories, is now in a manner desolate; for according to the 
Spaniards
 Relation to the Admiral 
Henry Jacobson Lucifer,
 when he was before 
Ha∣vana, Cuba
 had upon it not above sixty thousand Persons in all, in 
Anno
 1627. But who-ever Reads that which Bishop 
Bartholomeo de las Casas
 hath written in his Book, (Printed first in 
Sivill
 in the 
Spanish
 Tongue, and afterwards, with the King of 
Spain
's leave, in 
French
 at 
Antwerp
) will easily find the reason, why 
Cuba
 and many other 
Indian
 Countreys lie so desolate; and how sensible the 
Indians
 were of the 
Spaniards
 usage, appears by this following Story, related by the said Bishop, of a 
Casique
 call'd 
Hathuey,
 who before the 
Spaniards
 approach'd his Countrey, 
Anno
 1511. fled from 
Hispaniola
 to 
Cuba;
 where afterwards he was taken by the 
Spaniards,
 and condemn'd to be burnt alive with green Wood: whilest he was tying to a Stake, a 
Franciscan
 Monk Preach'd to him the Mysteries of the 
Christian
 Religion, of which he had never heard; and likewise that he should ascend up to Heaven if he dy'd in that Belief; but if not, burn perpetually in Hell: Whereupon 
Hathuey
 asking the 
Franciscan,
 If there were any 
Spaniards
 in Heaven? and being told there were, an∣swer'd, 
I will rather converse amongst the Devils in Hell, than amongst the
 Spaniards, 
whose Cruelty is such, that none can be more miserable than where
 Spaniards 
are.




Before we conclude the Description of 
Cuba,
 it will be material to add some Passages of a Letter from Major 
Smith,
 Governor of the Isle of 
Providence,
 who was taken there in the Year 1665. which will give light to the knowledge of the pre∣sent State, not onely of 
Cuba,
 but of some other parts of 
America,
 belonging to the 
Spaniards;
 which is as followeth:


CUba
 is a very good Island, and in it is generally the best Land, for so large a Countrey, as I have seen in 
America,
 although I have travell'd the main Conti∣nent in several places, and have cross'd from the North Sea to the South Sea, as also the North side of 
Hispaniola,
 and most parts of 
Jamaica.


This great Island is easie to be conquer'd, and would make the best Plantation, besides the prejudice it would be to the 
Spaniard,
 and the great advantage to our Nation; for instance, Had we the Port and City of 
Havana,
 which might in all probability be reduc'd with two Regiments of good Soldiers from 
Jamaica,
 carry∣ing with them two or three Sloops or Shallops for Landing Men, fitted with good Arms and other Necessaries for an Assault, presently after their Armado hath pass'd out of the 
Indies,
 which is once in two years, towards the latter part of the Summer. There is good Landing on the West side of the City, where it lies open; and you need fear no Ambuscado's: but not on the East side on the Harbor, for there you will be gawl'd by the strong Castle of the 
Moare,
 until the City be secur'd; but when that is once taken, you may easily reduce that Castle also, there being no danger of their re-taking it, until the next Armado arrives there, which will be al∣most two years, against which time you will have Planters enough from other of our Islands, to Manure the Land, and assist the Soldiers in defence thereof: This once effected, would utterly ruine the 
Spaniards,
 for these Reasons: Our Ships lying both here and at 
Jamaica,
 would be at all times ready to gather up their stragling Fleet, which it is difficult to keep imbodied without the help of that Port of 
Ha∣vana,
 it being impossible for their great unruly Ships to turn up to Windward from the Bay of 
Mexico,
 or 
Puerto Bello,
 without separation; and on the other side, to pass the Gulf of 
Florida,
 is for them as impossible, where they always Rendezvouz, Victual, Water, and provide all things necessary for their Return into 
Spain;
 after all which they diligently wait for a convenient Season of Winds and Weather (be∣ing much observ'd from the Changes of the Moon) when to pass that dangerous 
Straight:
 for to say truly, the 
Spaniards
 are neither very fit for Sea nor Land-Service, excepting some Officers and Soldiers bred in 
Flanders
 for Land-Service, and a few 
Biscainers
 for Sea-Affairs. They are so sensible of their Weakness, and jealous of their Riches in those Parts, that it is very difficult for any ingenious Man to get his Liberty, being once taken, fearing he might give such Intelligence, as to be thereby the cause of their ruine, witness their blind-folding of all Strangers, when they pass their Cities and Castles; for they much dread an old Prophecy amongst them, 
viz. That within a short time the
 English 
will as freely walk the Streets of
 Havana, 
as the
 Spa∣niards 
now do;
 which indeed had been easily perform'd with a third part of the 
English
 Army sent to 
Jamaica,
 and a far geater advantage to the Nation: for I esteem that Port and Harbor of 
Havana
 in the 
West-Indies,
 equivalent (against that Nation) to 
Tangier
 in the 
Straights
 of 
Gibraltar;
 and if we were at once Masters of both, it would without doubt so straiten the 
Spaniards,
 as absolutely to admit us a free Trade into their Ports of 
America,
 where they impart our Commodities, and sell them for ten times more than they first cost in 
Spain,
 by reason of the great plenty of Silver: which Trade would not onely be of infinite advantage to us, but also prevent them of their future enslaving of our Nation in Chains as now they do;







map of Jamaica


Novissima et Accuratissima JAMAICAE DESCRIPTIO per JOHANNEM OGI
UIUM Cosmographum Regum.






for being employ'd about their Fortifications, they are worse us'd, all things con∣sider'd, than if they were taken by the 
Turks.


I have seen other parts of the 
West-Indies,
 where the 
Spaniards
 might be fleec'd of considerable quantities of Riches, as at 
Panama,
 where their Silver Bars lie pyl'd up in Heaps in the open Streets Day and Night without Guard for five or six Moneths together, waiting the arrival of the Armado; which when arriv'd in 
Puerto Bello,
 they Transport it thither with so slender a Guard, for so great a Treasure, as would be an easie Prey to a thousand resolv'd Men (although of extraordinary value for so small a Charge;) but here is no resting, nor long remaining, they being so numerous (as in all other places of the main Land) though of great Wealth, and easily gotten with a Catch and away: But to my purpose,


This Island of 
Cuba
 hath adjacent to it great Conveniences of Salt and Fishing; and in it are very great plenty of Horses, Neat, Sheep, and Hogs, both wild and tame, of a far larger and better breed than any other parts of 
America:
 It hath also many very rich Mines of Copper already open, and is the onely Place that sup∣plies all the 
West-Indies
 with Metal for the infinite number of Ordnance they have in all their Ports and Castles, both in the North and South Seas; but whether it hath any Mines of Silver or Gold, I know not; but if there were any such, they would not adventure their opening and discovery, fearing the Invasion of that Island, whereunto is so easie access by Sea, and of so great import to their whole Interest in 
America:
 for which reason also they refuse to work any Mines in 
Flo∣rida,
 that are nigh the North Sea, (although they have there very many) but do ra∣ther employ themselves about others farther up in the Countrey, although with greater Labor and Cost, for conveyance of the Product by Land to 
Mexico.
 And lastly, (for its full praise) this Island hath many very good Ports and Harbors of great advantage to Ships, for safe passing the Gulf; and should the 
Spaniards
 keep three or four Frigats always plying between the Western end of 
Cuba
 and that of 
Havana,
 off and on, it were impossible for any Ships of ours that came from 
Jamaica
 to escape them; the Scales turn'd would be their Case to all 
America.
 Neither wants it great Sugar-works, which have Water-mills and Horse-mills, and very many large 
Cocoa
 Walks, the most and best Tobacco: and in short, it produceth all other Commodities, that any of our 
American
 Islands have knowledge of.






CHAP. XVI. Jamaica.


THe Island of 
Jamaica
 lieth North from the Southern Continent of 
America,
 in the Sea call'd 
Mare del Nort;
 and South from the Isle of 
Cuba
 about twelve Leagues; and West from 
Hispaniola
 twenty, in eighteen Degrees of Northern Latitude; and beareth from 
Rio de Hacha
 North-West, a hundred and fifty Leagues; from 
Santa Martha
 North North-West, a hundred and thirty five; from 
Rio Grande
 North-West, a hundred and thirty; from 
Carthagena
 North, four∣teen; from 
Porto Bello
 North-East and by North, a hundred and ninety; from the Bay of 
Darien,
 North and by East, a hundred and seventy; from the Bay of 
Mexico,
 a hundred and fifty. It is of Form something nearly resembling oval, being in length from East to West, about fifty four Leagues, or a hundred and seventy Miles;

from North to South in the broadest and middlemost part, about three and twenty Leagues, or seventy Miles over, and so groweth narrower and narrower towards each Extream; in circumference about one hundred and fifty Leagues, or four hundred and fifty 
English
 Miles.


This Island is well water'd with Springs and Rivers, and is all over, especially in the Western parts, full of high Hills and Mountains: It is also well Wooded; for the North and South parts chiefly abound with tall and large Woods: Nor are there wanting every where 
Savanas,
 or Pastures, which are thought to have been Fields of 
Indian Maiz,
 till the 
Spaniards
 arriving here, brought in Horses, Cows, Hogs, and 
Asinego's
 to feed.


The Air in this Place is more temperate, and the Heat more tolerable, than in any of the rest of the 
Barloventi,
 by reason of the cool Breezes which constantly blow from the East, and the frequency of Showers of Rain, and refreshing Dews which fall in the Night.


This is also the onely Island of the 
Barloventi,
 which is not subject to violent Storms and Hurricanes; and the Diseases which are predominant here, are onely bred by Intemperance, as Surfets, Feavers, and Agues, or occasion'd by ill Diet or Slothfulness.


The Commodities of this Island are very many; and first for Vegetables, the Sugars are so good, that they now out-sell those of 
Barbado's
 5 
s.
 
per Cent.


Cocoa,
 of which there are many large Walks; and greater plenty by improve∣ment may easily be produc'd.


Tobacco, so good, that the Merchants give Six pence a Pound for it, and buy it faster than the Planters can make it.


Indigo is producible in great abundance, if there were Hands sufficient em∣ploy'd about it.


The Cotton of this Place is accounted very firm and substantial, and preferr'd before any that grows in the neighboring Islands.


Of Tortoise-shell there is also good store, by reason that much of that sort of Tortoise is taken on this Coast.


Here are also great variety of Dye-woods, as 
Brasiletto, Fustwick,
 Red-wood, a kind of Log-wood, and several others, besides divers of those that are accounted the most curious and rich sorts of Woods, as Cedar, 
Mohogeney, Lignum-vitae,
 Ebony, 
Granadilla,
 and others, which are frequently Exported.


Moreover, there are very probable testimonies, that there are Mines of Copper here, since both there have been those who affirm to have seen the Oar wrought out of one of them, and the 
Spaniards
 report the Bells that hang in the great Church, to have been Cast out of this Island Copper. As for Silver, the 
English
 are said to have been shew'd a Silver-Mine behind the Mountains, West of 
Cagway.


Ambergreece the 
Spaniards
 report to have been often found on this Coast.


Salt might be made here in great abundance, there being three good Salt-pans; and Salt-petre hath been found in many Parts.


Ginger is reported to grow better here than in most of the 
Caribbee
 Islands; and Cod-pepper very plentifully; and also a certain kind of Spice call'd 
Piemete,
 being in the form of 
East-India
 Pepper, of a very aromatical and curious taste, partaking as it were of divers species together: it grows wild in the Mountains, and is very highly valu'd amongst the 
Spaniards.


Of Drugs and medicinal Plants there is here a very great abundance, as 
Guaia∣cum, China
-Root, 
Cassia-Fistula, Veuillard, Achiotes, Tamarinds, Contrayerva, Ciperas, Adi∣antum Nigrum, Aloes, Cucumis Agrestis, Sumach, Acacia, Misselto,
 with several others, both Drugs, Balsoms and Gums.




Cochinele
 is produc'd by a Plant that grows in this Countrey, but it is not made without much care and curiosity, and the 
English
 are not yet well experienc'd in the Husbanding thereof, besides that the Growth of the Plant is much obstructed by Easterly Winds.


There is here greater store of Cattel than in any of the rest of the 
English
 Plan∣tations in 
America,
 as Horses, which by reason of the great number of them, are bought very cheap.


Cow's, of a large size, and of which vast numbers are yearly kill'd.


Asinego's
 and Mules, both wild and tame, being a very serviceable sort of Cattel in those Countreys.


Sheep, large and tall, and whose Flesh is counted exceeding good, but the Fleece worth little.


Goats in great abundance, being a sort of Cattel very peculiar to that Countrey.


But of all other Cattel, Hogs are here in the greatest plenty, both wild in the Mountains, and tame in the Plantations; and they are more in request for Food than any of the rest, their Flesh being counted both of a better rellish, and more ea∣sily digestible than the Hogs-flesh of our Parts.


The Fish that is very plentifully caught in these Coasts is of infinite variety,
 and quite of another kind from what we have in this part of the World, the principal whereof is the Tortoise, which is taken in great abundance both on these Coasts, and in the Islands 
Camavas.


The tame Fowl in this Place, are chiefly Hens, Turkies, and Ducks;
 but of wild Fowl infinite store, as of 
Guinee
 Hens, 
Flamingo's,
 Teal, Ducks, Wigeon, Geese, Pigeons, Snipes, Plovers, Parrots, Turtles, Parachites, Machaw's, with divers others.


Choice and excellent sorts of Fruits are here in great abundance, as 
Cocao
-Nuts, 
Mannes, Maumees, Supatas, Suppotillias, Avocatas, Cashuds,
 Prickle-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Sower-Sops, 
Custud
-Apples, and many others.


For Timber-Trees, 
Platanes
 and Pines.


And for Garden-Herbs, Radish, Lettice, Parsley, Cucumbers, Melons, 
&c.


The antient Inhabitants us'd two sorts of Bread, the one made of stamp'd Roots, and the other of Corn, which is Reap'd thrice every year, and grows with such success, that one Pint sow'n yields two hundred.


They had a strange way to make their 
Cazari
 Cakes of the Root 
Juca,
 which keep good a year: They first press'd out the Juice with great Weights, which if drunk raw, occasions sudden Death; but boyl'd, is pallatable and good.


Potato's are here in great abundance, and grow like Artichokes in a moist Soil, and shoot forth Leaves of a dark-green Colour, like Spinage; they spread upon the Earth by Stalks, and bear a Flower like a Bell, at the end of which grows the Seed: the Roots are generally White, but sometimes Red, Marble-colour'd, Yel∣low, and Violet; they are not onely pleasing to the Pallat, but accounted very wholsom when stew'd in a close cover'd Pot, with a little Water.


But much daintier are the 
Ananas,
 which grow on a Stalk of a Foot long, sur∣rounded with sixteen large sharp Leaves, between which grows a Fruit like a Pine-Apple, but much bigger, with an uneven Rind, of a pale Green, and inclining to a Carnation on a yellow Ground; on the top shoots out a red Bunch of Leaves and Flowers; the innermost Pulp melts on the Tongue, and is of so delicious a taste, that it exceeds all other Dainties; the Seed produces Fruit once.


Of this Fruit there are several sorts, the chief whereof is accounted a special Re∣medy against a bad Stomach, Gravel, Poyson, and Melancholy.




The Drink made of 
Ananas
 is no way inferior to 
Malvasia
 Wine.


Here you may observe a remarkable Secret of Nature in a certain ever-green Plant, which grows either on the Bodies of old Trees, on the Rocks, or in the Woods; the Stalk whereof surrounded with Leaves, full of dark red Spots, bears a sweet-smelling Violet-colour'd Flower, the Leaves whereof as soon as touch'd, close up together and die, and according as they are held in the Hand a shorter or longer time, this strange alteration continues.


Since the 
Spaniards
 planted Ginger on 
Jamaica,
 it hath grown there in great abun∣dance; the Male Plant (for it is divided into Male and Female) hath generally bigger Leaves than the Female; the Stalks, which are without Knots, have more Leaves upwards than downwards, and spreads along the Earth, still take Root anew; when the Leaves wither, then the Ginger is commonly ripe, but it hath not that poinancy whilest green as when dry'd.


The Cotton of this Island (of which the Clothes and Hammocks that are made,
 are vended in most parts of the Western World) grows on a Tree of equal heighth with a Peach-Tree, with a straight Stem or Body, out of which shoot Boughs of an equal length, and at equal distance; between the Leaves, which are narrow and long, grow red Flowers, and from them, oval Gods, which when ripe, inclose the Cotton, and a Seed like Pepper.


Of hurtful Creatures here, besides the 
Manchonele,
 and a sort of Snakes call'd 
Guaana's,
 wherein 'tis thought there is little or nothing of a poysonous quality; the most observable is the 
Alligator,
 with which many Rivers and Ponds abound; it is a very voracious Creature, but is seldom known to prey upon a Man; it moves swiftly and strongly forward, but turns slow; the biggest of them are about twenty Foot long, their Backs scaly and impenetrable, so that they are hardly kill'd but in the Belly or Eye; they have four Feet or Fins, with which they go or swim indif∣ferently; are observ'd to make no kind of noise; their usual course for getting their Prey, is to lie on their Backs as dead, then with a sudden onset to surprize what-ever Fowl or Beast comes fearlesly near them; the best caution other Crea∣tures have of them is from the strong smell that flows from their Bodies: to re∣quite the harm done by them, they have something of vertue, for the Fat or Oyl of their Bodies hath been experienc'd to be an admirable Ointment for all kinds of Pains and Aches; they Lay Eggs no bigger than a Turkies by the Water side, still covering them with Sand, which heated by the Sun-beams, hatcheth the young ones, who naturally creep into the Water.


In some parts of the Countrey there are also a sort of stinging Flies, call'd 
Mus∣chilli
 and 
Merrywings,
 but the 
English
 Quarters are little infested by them.


Hugh Linschot
 writes, That the antient Natives of this Place were a subtile and sharp-witted People, skilful in Handicrafts, and expert in warlike Affairs, above all the 
Americans
 besides.


The Island was discover'd by the 
Spaniards
 under the Conduct of 
Columbus,
 who first built there the Town of 
Mellilla;
 which disliking, he remov'd again to 
Oristana;
 and finding that an incommodious and unhealthy Situation, he remov'd again to another Plantation, where he built a very fair Town, first call'd 
Sevilla,
 afterwards 
St. Jago de la Vega,
 consisting of about seventeen hundred Houses, two Churches, two Chappels, and an Abbey, being the chief, if not the onely Seat of the 
Spaniards
 be∣fore the arrival of the 
English,
 for their 
Estanchas,
 or small Plantations, were com∣mitted wholly to the custody of their Slaves.


Diego,
 the Son of 
Christopher Colonus,
 (or, as he is vulgarly call'd, 
Columbus
) was the first that was constituted Governor of this Island, and sent 
Juan de Squibello







Commander, who upon their first arrival here committed such horrid Cruelties and Massacres, that (as the fore-mention'd 
Bartholomeo de las Casas
 writes) five thou∣sand Inhabitants were in a short time reduc'd to less than three hundred, multitudes being put to death in a most inhumane and barbarous manner, some roasted alive, others torn in pieces by the 
Spanish
 Dogs, besides many other studied ways of But∣chery, too dreadful to be read with patience; nor were they free from Civil War amongst themselves, which first began in this Island.


The first and onely Attempters upon this Island since the 
Spaniards
 made them∣selves Masters thereof, have been the 
English,
 who in the Year 1592. under the Con∣duct of Sir 
Anthony Shirley
 Landed upon it, & got clear possession thereof, none of the 
Spaniards
 that were then upon the Place daring to make the least resistance; but not thinking it worth the keeping, they soon deserted it, and made Sail back again for 
England:
 after which they remain'd unmolested for a long time, till in the Year 1654. a Fleet of 
English
 was set out for 
Hispaniola
 by 
Cromwell,
 under the Command of Colonel 
Venables,
 with a Design for the taking of 
St. Domingo;
 but meeting with ill success in the Enterprize, and being forc'd to quit that Island with loss of Men, and frustration of their hopes, they steer'd their Course for 
Jamaica,
 and on the tenth of 
May
 in the Year abovesaid, with little opposition possess'd themselves of it. Upon their approach to 
St. Jago
 the Inhabitants thereof deserted it, and betook them to the Mountains, gaining time by a pretence of Treaty, to secure their Wo∣men and Goods; and oftentimes making Incursions upon the stragling Parties of the 
English,
 slew and took many Prisoners by surprize: but being weary of this wild and irregular kind of living, they betake themselves at last to the Isle of 
Cuba,
 where many of them, the Grandees especially, were permitted by favour to con∣tinue, the rest being by the Vice-Roy commanded back, with promise of speedy and considerable Supplies; by that time this remnant of the 
Spaniards
 was near tir'd out with hardship and necessity, some being very much discourag'd and driven to utter despondence of Mind, others destroy'd out-right, part of the long promis'd and expected Supply arrives, the greatest part being to follow soon after; but

finding the Islanders so few in number, and in so sickly and necessitous an Estate, they would not joyn with them, but maugre all the Governor's Perswasions or Commands, retreat to the North part of the Island, and there fortifie at a place call'd 
Chireras,
 expecting every day fresh Recruits; which not coming time enough, and their Quarters being discover'd, they were set upon by the 
English,
 and most of them either slain or taken Prisoners: not many Moneths after the rest of the 
Spanish
 Forces Land, being in all about thirty Companies, with Ordnance and good store of Ammunition; who falling presently to make strong Fortifica∣tions at 
Rio Novo,
 are nevertheless in a short time utterly defeated by the 
English:
 Upon which, and several other ill Successes, despairing to re-gain the Island, they Ship off their Women and the richest of their Goods; and the 
Negro
 Slaves grown Masterless, by the general either slaughter or departure of their Pa∣trons, shake off their Obedience to the 
Spaniards,
 and constitute a Governor of their own, a 
Black,
 yet submit themselves, and own Subjection to the 
English
 Govern∣ment, the 
Spaniards
 from 
Cuba,
 both by their Perswasions and monethly Contri∣butions, in vain endeavoring to reduce them; onely some few there were that stood out, whom the rest not onely made it their business to discover, but help'd the 
Eng∣lish
 to take them, insomuch that at last the 
Spanish
 General not having above fifty Men left him, was forc'd to seek for Peace, and offer'd Terms of Accommodation; which the 
English
 General would not be drawn to accept of, unless upon Condi∣tion that he should deliver up to Justice as many as were left of those that had barbarously murder'd any of our Men, either in time of Treaty, or after Quarter given.


The 
English
 in this Island are setled for above a hundred Miles along the Coun∣trey from the Eastward.


Their chief Towns are 1. 
St. Jago,
 (built by the 
Spaniards,
 as afore mention'd) which lieth six Miles within the Land, North-West from the Harbor of 
Cagway.
 Here the 
English
 have built a small Fort.


2. 
Passage,
 a small Town, built also by the 
English
 six Miles from 
St. Jago,
 for the convenience of going to 
Cagway,
 consisting of about fifty Houses and a Fort, whence cross this Harbor, about three Leagues distant is the Town of 3. 
Cagway,
 seated on the Extream end of the Point, containing in it above six hundred Houses, all built by the 
English,
 besides the Governor's Palace, and the Houses where the Stores for the Army are kept.


This is counted the most healthful Place in all the Island, and the very Scale of Trade, where all Merchants, Strangers, and Sailors reside.


Here, upon the utmost Angle of the Point towards the Sea, is a round Tower, built of Lime and Stone; about which is rais'd a strong and regular Fort, contain∣ing sixty pieces of Ordnance.


This Town is now call'd 
Port Royal,
 and is thought to contain about sixteen thousand Inhabitants.


A Mile from hence is another Fort,
 call'd 
Landward,
 which runs from the Har∣bor to the Sea, to defend the Town from any Attempt by Land.


Off the Mouth of the Harbor towards the Sea, lie divers small Islands, the most Western of which being within half a League of the Fort, and between which and the Fort every Ship that comes into the Harbor is necessitated to pass: It is call'd 
Little Island;
 where a Fort is likewise rais'd, to defend the Mouth of the Har∣bor, containing eight pieces of Ordnance.


Another Fortification is at 
Portmorant,
 which we shall make mention of amongst the Harbors.




The chief Harbors of this Island, are 1. 
Port Anthony,
 on the North, a very safe Land-lock'd Harbor, onely the coming in is somewhat difficult, the Channel being narrow'd by a little Island that lies off the Mouth of the Port.


2. On the East of the Island is 
Portmorant,
 a very capacious Harbor, where Ships do conveniently Wood and Water, and Ride safe from all Winds.


3. On the South is 
Port Cagway,
 a Harbor wonderfully convenient, secure and capacious, being five Leagues over in some places, in others four, and at the nar∣rowerst, three; it is Land-lock'd by a Point of Land that runs twelve Miles South-West from the Main of the Island, having the great River that comes by 
Los Angelos,
 and 
St. Jago
 running into it, and divers Springs about it, where Ships do conveni∣ently Wood and Water. Here is every where good Anchorage, the Road being so deep, that a Ship of a thousand Tun may lay his sides to the Shore of the Point, and load and unload with Planks afloat.


4. On the West is 
Point Megrill,
 a Port very convenient and secure; to Wind∣ward from which, a little North-West, is the Seat of the old Town of 
Mellilla,
 founded by 
Columbus,
 as afore mention'd.


The chief Plantations of this Island, are 1. 
Portmorant,
 above the Harbor be∣fore mention'd, and by the two Rivers that run into it. Here are good Plantati∣ons of Sugars, Cottons, Tobacco's, 
&c.


2. Hence about ten Miles lieth 
Morant,
 where a thousand Acres of Land have been taken up for my Lord 
Willoughby,
 and a Company of Merchants.


3. Hence farther Leeward lieth 
Yallow,
 having good Plantations of Cotton, To∣bacco, and other Provisions, excellent 
Savana's,
 and some store of tame Cattel.


4. Thirty Miles hence, on the North side of 
Cagway
 is 
Ligonce,
 where are excel∣lent Plantations of Sugar, Cotton, and Tobacco, very pleasant 
Savana's,
 and some store of wild Cattel.


5. Twenty Miles farther West, nines Miles from the Harbor of 
Cagway,
 is 
Los Angelos,
 having some Plantations of Sugar, 
Cacao,
 and Tobacco, all which were old 
Spanish
 Plantations, and are less considerable than those made by the 
English
 in other places.


6. Eight Miles from hence, North-West, is 
Guanaboa,
 where likewise were some 
Spanish
 Plantations, since improv'd by the 
English,
 who have very many excellent Plantations of Sugar, 
Cacao,
 &c.


7. Hence West South-West lieth 
Guatabacoa,
 a most pleasant rich and fertile part of the Countrey, abounding with Cattel, and excellent 
Savana's.
 Here the 
Negro's
 setled that revolted from the 
Spaniards,
 who are endeavouring to make some Plan∣tations of Tobacco's and Provisions, and with them are setled some few 
English,
 who have divers Walks of 
Cacao.


The several Governors of this Island since the taking of it by the 
English,
 are as followeth: General 
Robert Venables
 staid upon the Place about three Moneths af∣ter the taking of it, and at his coming away for 
England
 he left the chief Command to Major General 
Richard Fortescue,
 who liv'd Governor about three Moneths; af∣ter which Lieutenant General 
Edward Doyly
 was by the Army elected President; but upon his coming away soon after for 
England,
 Lieutenant General 
William Brain
 was sent over Governor in his room; who living in the Government about three quar∣ters of a year, did as it were bequeathe it again to 
Doyly,
 for he was chosen by ver∣tue of a Blank Commission, wherein 
Brain
 had inserted his Name whom he would have succeed, and remain'd Commander in Chief both by Land and Sea till His Majesty's Restauration, and then by His Majesty's Letters Patents was confirm'd in the Government, and so was the first that was Governor there for His Majesty:

The next that succeeded was the Lord 
Windsor,
 upon whose coming away Sit 
Tho∣mas Muddiford
 was sent Governor, and after him Sir 
Thomas Linch,
 who remains Governor at present.






CHAP. XVII. The Islands call'd the Lucaies.


HAving done with the four Islands of 
Barlovento,
 as they are term'd, 
viz. Hi∣spaniola, Cuba, Porto Rico,
 and 
Jamaica,
 we come next to the 
Lucaies,
 so call'd, as some think, from 
Lucaioneque,
 one of the biggest of them; they lie over against 
Florida,
 Westward from the 
Bermudas,
 South-West and North of 
Hispaniola,
 and the rest of the 
Barloventi;
 and because they are but small ones, and lie so near the Continent, Geographers sometimes describe them as a part, or appertaining to the Continent. The chiefest of these Islands are 
Lucaioneque
 afore-mention'd, 
Bahama,
 and 
Guanahani; Lucaioneque
 is accounted the biggest of them all, and lieth in twenty seven Degrees between 
Bahama
 and 
Guanahani. Bahama
 lies nearest to the Coast of 
Florida,
 and gives Name to the 
Straights
 so call'd, which run between the 
Cape
 of 
Florida
 and it, with such a violent Course and Torrent, that although it be above sixteen Miles broad, yet many times neither Wind nor Oars, can prevail against it; that though the Winds be prosperous, Ships cannot enter it; and if it be cross, they go with the Current; yet those 
Straights
 the 
Spanish
 Fleet must pass in their Return from the 
Havana
 towards 
Spain. Guanahani
 was the first piece of 
American
 Ground discover'd by 
Christopher Columbus,
 and therefore by him call'd 
San Salvador,
 or 
St. Sa∣viour,
 because that thereby he was deliver'd from the mutinous rage of the Sea∣men, who threatned to throw him over-board, if they discover'd not Land in such a time. There are besides a number of small Isles scatter'd up and down, which are generally comprehended in the number of the 
Lucaies;
 one is 
Little Island,
 encom∣pass'd with a company of Shelves call'd the 
Bimini,
 so that it is hardly accessible: there goes a Tradition, that it hath been inhabited by very beautiful Women, the fame of whom drew many to attempt to Land there and take up their Habitation; in which Attempt many were cast away: There is said to be a Fountain in the midst of it, of such a Vertue, that whosoever drank of the Waters of it, had their Youth renew'd. Also three Islands, or rather Rocks, call'd 
Los Martyres,
 lying to the South-East of 
Cape Florida,
 and cover'd for the most part with a whitish Sand and a few Bushes growing on them: they seem at a distance to bear a resemblance of Men, impal'd, or bound to Stakes, as the Martyrs in the primitive Times usu∣ally were, which occasion'd the 
Spaniards
 so to Name them; 'tis very dangerous to come too near them, but to have sight of them is of great use to Men at Sea; for by passing these Rocks, and leaving them on the South-East, they certainly know, that they are now entred the 
Straights
 of 
Bahama,
 that is, that they have left the Ocean, and are fall'n in amongst those many Islands, which do, as it were, Barracado and Block up the Eastern Coasts of 
America,
 towards 
Nombre de Dios
 and 
Terra Firma,
 as they call it, through which the Continent is sometimes dangerous, by reason of con∣trary Winds; and always such, that it requires the skill and care of an experienc'd Pilot to conduct the Ships well thither. The rest are 
Abacoa,
 twelve Leagues long; 
Yuma,
 twenty Leagues in length, and eight in breadth, between twenty four and

twenty five Degrees; 
Yumeata,
 fifteen Leagues in length, between twenty three and twenty four Degrees; 
Jamana,
 seven Leagues every way; 
Yabague,
 ten Leagues like∣wise, and lying between twenty two and twenty three Degrees; 
Magaguana,
 twenty Leagues long, and ten broad; 
Quagua,
 ten Leagues every way, and lying between twenty and one and twenty Degrees; 
Caycos,
 five Leagues in length, and in the one and twentieth Degree; 
Mackre,
 in the twentieth Degree, encompass'd with Shelves; 
Abreo,
 environ'd also with Shelves, and fifteen Leagues long; also 
Gua∣tao, Cigateo, Guanima, Jabaka, Triangulo,
 and several others.


On these Islands are no Inhabitants; those that did live there were a harmless simple People, and therefore the easier taken and carried away by the 
Spaniards
 that have made them so desolate: Many of them seem of a good Mold, and the Lati∣tude promiseth much fertility. The Air is certainly good and wholsom, and not so extream hot as other Parts of that heighth. There is scarce any Beast on them, save a Coney that hath a Tail like a Rat, but Pigeons and other Birds in great numbers.


There is the Gum 
Benjoin,
 of the best and worst sort; 
Guaiacum, Sasaparilla,
 and 
Sassafras;
 and on some of them Red-wood and Ambergreece.


Our 
English
 Sea-men are little acquainted with these Islands, though they Sail round them yearly.


In the time of the Rebellion one Captain 
Sail
 and others, obtain'd a Patent, ma∣king thither on the Coast of an Island, which was call'd 
Illutheria;
 his Ship was wrackt, but the People recover'd the Shore with a few Necessaries.


The Coasts of most of them are dangerous, and bad to make, and that Ship that shall be near or amongst them, must keep the Lead always going; but with a wary Pilot, and care in giving the Islands a fair Birth, they are easily recover'd.


The 
Spaniards
 know this Place well, and have a yearly Trade thither for the aforesaid Commodities, and amongst the Islands are Wracks of divers of their Ships.






CHAP. XVIII. The Caribby Islands.


THe 
Caribbee Islands,
 as they are generally call'd, are a Row or Ridge, as it were, of lesser Islands, which extend themselves almost in fashion of a Bowe, from the Coast of 
Paria
 as far as 
St. John de Porto Rico;
 they are otherwise call'd 
The Caraibes,
 sometimes 
The Camercanes,
 and by some 
The Islands of Cannibals,
 or 
Man-eaters,
 (though this Appellation cannot in reality be more appro∣priated to these Islands, than to many other, either Islands, or Parts of the Conti∣nent of 
America;
) lastly, whereas all the Islands between 
Florida
 and 
New Spain,
 and 
Southern America,
 are by some comprehended all under the Name of 
The Antilles;
 yet the 
Caribbees
 and the 
Antilles
 are most generally, and, we conceive, most pro∣perly accounted the same; and they are so call'd, either as lying like a Bar before the greater Islands, or 
Quasi Ant-Isles,
 i. e. 
Opposites Isles;
 they lie all under the 
Torrid Zone,
 between the eleventh and nineteenth Degrees of Northern Latitude, and are twenty eight in number: but before we come to treat of each of them in particu∣lar, we shall take notice of the most observable of those things which are common to them all in general.




The Air of all these Islands is of a good temperature and healthy, and the Heat not so excessive in them at any time of the year, as might be conjectur'd from their Situation under the 
Torrid Zone,
 by reason of a gentle East Wind, which rising in the Morning, continues most commonly till towards the Evening, allaying the scorch∣ing heat of the Sun, and refreshing the Air; but the Nights are commonly very cold; and it is observable, that by how much the hotter any Day hath been, so much the colder the Night following happens to be; whereof this reason is given; That the Vapors rais'd in the Day-time by the Sun, and falling down condens'd at Night, do very much cool the Air; but it is never so cold as to Freeze.


For half a year together Day and Night are equal in these Parts, and the rest of the Year the Day fourteen hours long, and the Night ten.


From 
April
 to 
December
 there commonly fall here great Rains, and all that Season is accounted Winter, and the Drought and Heat of the other Moneths is taken for Summer; but the Woods of these Parts looking ever green, make as it were con∣tinual Summer.


The Soil is generally as fertile as in most places of 
Europe,
 and each Island fur∣nish'd with fair Rivers, Brooks, Lakes, Springs, Wells, and other Sources of fresh Water, besides in many places Mineral Waters, which are us'd with good success in the cure of several Diseases; also out of some Mountains store of Brimstone is digg'd, and it is conjectur'd that there are not wanting Mines of Gold and Silver, if they were well look'd after; and there hath been often found Crystal upon the Sands by Rivers sides.


The Vine, though wild, and naturally growing in the Woods, yet yields a very large fair Grape; and those which are cultivated in their Gardens or Vineyards, bear excellent Grapes twice a year, but very little Wine is made of them, in regard they find it will keep but very few days.


Wheat in the 
Caribbees
 grows up no farther than the Blade, and the reason is judg'd to be, because through the rankness of the Soil, and for want of Winter, this Grain springs up fast, and hath not substance enough left in the Root to supply it up to maturity; but no doubt but Barley, Rye, and those other Grains, to the ripe∣ning of which more Heat is requir'd, would thrive there very well.


Besides Lemmon-Trees, Orange-Trees, Citrons, and Pomegranates, and other Fruit-Trees growing in 
Europe,
 there are very many sorts of Trees, Herbs, Pulse, and other Plants, of a different kind from those amongst us, and peculiar for the most part to these Islands.


Of Fruit-Trees, the most observable are the 
Goyavier,
 somewhat resembling the Laurel, onely having a softer Leaf, and of a brighter Green; its Fruit about the bigness of a Pearmain, but full of little Kernels like a Pomegranate.


The 
Papayer,
 which is of two kinds, one generally growing in all the Islands, the other proper to 
Santa Crux;
 the first hath a Leaf not much unlike that of the Fig-Tree, and the other bears a Fruit about the bigness of a Melon, which by the 
Por∣tuguese
 is call'd 
Mamao,
 from its resemblance of a Womans Breast: the Tree is hol∣low and spungy within, and grows up sometimes to the heighth of twenty Foot.


The 
Monick,
 call'd by the Islanders 
Corsot,
 from the Name of an Island from whence the Seeds were first brought by the 
Dutch,
 and bearing a Fruit like a small Cucumber not perfectly ripe.


The 
Junipa,
 or 
Jenipa,
 by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Jenipapo;
 and by the 
Brasilians, Jeni∣paba;
 having Leaves like those of the Walnut-Tree, Flowers like the 
Narcissus,
 and a Fruit like a bak'd Apple, which when it falls from the Tree makes a noise like the Report of a Gun discharg'd, which is said to proceed from the bursting

forth of the Seed out of the thin Skin enclosing it, and breaking with a violence; the Juice, of it Dyes of a Violet-colour, and the Swine and Birds that feed upon it, are said to have their Flesh and Fat of the same colour.


A sort of Vine commonly call'd 
The Raisin-Tree,
 and by the 
Caribbeeans, Ouliem;
 whose Fruit being like a large Violet-colour'd Grape, hath in stead of the several small Grain-stones which are inclos'd in the Husks of common Grapes, one hard Stone, like that of a Plumb.


The 
Acajou,
 bearing for Fruit a kind of Chesnut, in form of a Hares Kidney, which serves for a Crest to a very fair Apple that by degrees grows under it, of which the Islanders make a Drink, very much in esteem amongst them, being of an excellent taste.


The 
Icaco,
 a kind of small Plumb-Tree, so much coveted, and held for a Deli∣cacy by some People that live near the Gulf of 
Hondures,
 that they are from thence call'd 
Icacos.


The 
Monbain,
 which Fruit being a kind of yellowish Plumb, is chiefly made use of to mix in the Drinks of 
Ouicon
 and 
Maby,
 to make them taste the better.


The 
Courbury
 is by some reckon'd to be but a species of the 
Monbain,
 onely more full of Leaves, and growing higher and bigger; but the Fruit of the 
Courbury
 is suf∣ficiently different from that of the 
Monbain.


The 
Indian
 Fig-Tree, differing in Leaf from the common Fig-Tree, but whose Fruit both in figure and taste is not much unlike the Fig growing in these Parts: This Tree is commonly of such a vast Bulk, that the Branches of some of them have been seen to afford shelter to two hundred Men.


A kind of Service-Tree, differing from ours, by its exceeding heighth, fair Leaves, and pleasant Fruit.


The Prickly or Thorny Palm, so call'd from its being arm'd all over with Prickles, both Trunk and Leaves; by incision into its Branches a sort of Wine is made, and it is conjectur'd to be the same Tree which the 
Brasilians
 call 
Ayry.


The 
Franc
-Palm, an exceeding high and streight Tree, bearing on the top of its Trunk a whitish marrowy substance, by the 
French
 call'd 
Choude Palmiste,
 or 
Palm-Cabbage;
 for being boyl'd with the thin Leaves that incircle it, and well sea∣son'd, it is reckon'd amongst the Delicacies of the 
Caribbees.


Latanier,
 another kind of 
Palm;
 and 
Cocoa,
 which is also reckon'd amongst the se∣veral sorts of Palms; this last is a Fruit-Tree famous all over 
America,
 and hath been at large describ'd elsewhere.


There are also many other Trees fit for Dying, Joyners Work, and Building, (besides the 
Acajou
 before mention'd, of the single Trunks whereof are made those long Shallops call'd 
Pyrages,
 which are able to carry fifty Men) as


The 
Acomas,
 of the same bulk and heighth with the 
Acajon,
 and equally esteem'd by Joyners and Carpenters, and of the Fruit whereof the Woodquists grow fat at a certain time of the year.


The Rose-wood, to be rank'd amongst the chiefest of those Trees that are made use of by Work-men.


Indian
 Wood, a very precious and useful Tree for several sorts of Materials, and of a very fine scent.


The 
Iron-Wood,
 so call'd from its hardness, weight and solidity, above all that have hitherto been spoken of, and beyond either Cypress or Cedar for incorrupti∣bility.


Brasile-Wood,
 so call'd as growing most plentifully in 
Brasile.


Yellow-Wood,
 denominated from its Colour, and much esteem'd for its usefulness

in Dying green Ebony, easily taking the lustre of the true Ebony, and being very useful for the making of Cabinets and other curious Pieces of Work; It also Dyes of a very fair Grass-green.


The 
Roncon,
 by the 
Brasilians
 call'd 
Urnex,
 in the Husks, succeeding the Flowers whereof, which grow in little Bushes at the end of the Branches, is enclos'd a most rich Vermilion Dye, of a very soft and viscous Matter.


Here are also many other Trees, either useful in Medicine, or other ways ad∣vantageous, as the 
Cassia
-Tree, of the bigness and figure of a Peach-Tree; the long Pipes or Cods whereof, containing the Medicinal Fruit, are well known amongst us by the Name of 
Cassia-Fistula,
 and to be had at every Apothecaries.


Medicinal Nuts, each Nut containing three or four Stones in so many Cells, every one of which is inclos'd within a thin white Pellicle, pleasant enough to the taste, and out of which is extracted an Oyl, us'd by the 
Portuguese
 in several both Culina∣rie and Physical occasions.


The Cinamon-Tree, so noted for its aromatick Bark; also 
Sandal-Wood, Guaia∣cum,
 and 
Sassafras.


Cotton-Tree and Soap-Tree, whose Uses the very Names imply, and which Trees have been touch'd upon elsewhere.


The arch'd 
Indian
 Fig-Tree, the Bodies of which Trees have been antiently the sculking Holes and Retreats of the Inhabitants from their Enemies; the Bark is useful for Tanners.


The 
Gourd
-Tree, of the bigness and heighth of a great Apple-Tree, and of which are made most of the Houshold Vessels and Utensils, which are in common use at present amongst the Inhabitants.


The 
Mahot
-Tree, of the Bark of which are made Laces and Points.


The 
Manyoc,
 or 
Mandioque,
 of whose Root the 
Cassava
 Bread is made, and which growing in several places of 
America,
 hath been already taken notice of; as likewise the 
Banana
-Tree, and that call'd 
The Apple-Tree of Paradice,
 otherwise 
Adam's Fig-Tree,
 the Fruit being reported to be of a very delicious taste.


Other Trees not known in 
Europe,
 are the 
Maposu,
 divers kinds of Thorny Wood, the Milky Tree, being of a venomous quality, the 
Mancenilier,
 and that whose Root beaten to Powder, and thrown into Rivers, intoxicates the Fish, with several others of less note.


Innumerable sorts of Shrubs might here in like manner be reckon'd up, but the chiefest are, That remarkable Plant, anciently known by the Name of 
Ricinus,
 and commended for its Vertues by 
Galen
 and 
Dioscorides.


Coral-Wood, so call'd from its little Seeds, which being as red as any Coral, are us'd for Bracelets.


The 
Jasmin,
 bearing a Flower of an admirable sweet scent.


The 
Candle-Wood,
 so call'd from its combustibleness, by reason of an aromatick Gum which is within.


The Herbs, Flowers, Roots, and Pulse which grow here, are some of them com∣mon in all parts of 
Europe,
 as Cabbages, Onions, Chibols, Melons, all sorts of Millets, Cucumbers, Citruls, Parsnips, 
&c.


Others, if not peculiar to this Island, yet growing chiefly there, and in some few parts of 
America
 besides, as the 
Raquettes,
 so call'd from the resemblance its Leaves have with a Racket, a thorny-spreading Bush, whose Fruit being of a Ver∣milion colour, makes the Urine of those that eat of it as red as Blood. Some liken this Plant to the 
Tunas,
 already describ'd, which yields that rich Scarlet Dye call'd 
Cochinele.




The 
Torch,
 so call'd by the 
European
 Inhabitants; by the Native Islanders, 
Akou∣lerou;
 a great Thistle, or thorny Bush, putting forth from the middle of it long streight Stalks like Torches, and bearing Fruit like a great Fig, not unpleasing to the taste.


The 
Lienes,
 creeping upon the Earth, and spreading up and down like Ropes, and bearing brown Husks of a Foot long, wherein are enclos'd a Fruit call'd 
Sea-Chestnuts,
 of which are made Boxes to keep Snush, Tobacco, or the like.


A sort of 
Sempervivum,
 which runs twisting upon Rocks, Trunks of old Trees, like Misseltoe, and sometimes on the Ground.


A sort of sensitive Plant, call'd by the Inhabitants 
Haestiel,
 or 
The Living Herb;
 of which kind of Plant something hath been already touch'd upon, and which be∣ing transplanted, is kept in several Gardens of the 
Curiosi
 as a Rarity.


The 
Sweet-Rush,
 whose small Root dry'd, and reduc'd to Powder, helps Women in Travail.


The 
Balisier,
 whose Leaf apply'd, mollifies and cools inflammations of Wounds.


The 
Dart-Herb,
 whose Root bruis'd and apply'd, draws away the Venom of empoyson'd Darts; besides 
Scolopendria,
 a sort of Aloes, several kinds of Maiden∣hair, and other medicinal Herbs.


The 
Granadilla,
 or 
Passion-Flower,
 growing in several other parts of 
America,
 and describ'd elsewhere.


There is also a sort of Pease in some of these Islands, differing from ours, and call'd 
The Pease of Angola,
 as first brought from thence. Likewise a sort of Beans call'd 
The Seven-years Beans,
 by reason the same Stalk bears seven years one after another.


The Herb call'd 
The Musk-Herb,
 from the dusky colour of its Flower, and the sweet scent of the Seed, grows also in these Parts very frequent.


The 
Pyman,
 or 
American
 Pepper, is the same with that before describ'd under the Name of 
Axi.


Their 
Potatoe
 is a Root not unlike the 
Topinambous,
 or 
Jerusalem-Artichokes,
 other∣wise call'd 
Saligots,
 growing plentifully in our Gardens, but more wholsome, and of a better taste.


The 
Anana's,
 or 
Pine-Apple,
 accounted a most delicious Fruit, of an admirable sweet scent, and very pleasant to behold, grow not onely plentifully in these Islands, but in most places of 
America;
 besides the Sugar-Canes here, and in many other places, but not so generally.


The Plant from which is got the Dying Material call'd 
Indico,
 is very different from that which grows in 
Madagascar,
 which bears small odoriferous Flowers, of a white and purple Colour mix'd together.


Of these Trees, Herbs, and other Plants, which are produc'd in these 
Caribbee Islands,
 some are more peculiarly of the Growth of one Island, some of another; so that we shall have occasion to speak more largely of some of them, when we come to speak of each Island in particular.


The four-footed Beasts found in these Islands, are chiefly the 
Opassum,
 the 
Javaris,
 the 
Tatan,
 the 
Agouty,
 and the 
Musk-Rat,
 which being all of them no less known in other Parts of the 
New World,
 have been already taken notice of, and of which we may have also occasion to treat more at large in the particular Islands, we shall therefore onely name the other Animals, whether Birds, Reptiles, Insects, or Fishes, as partly having been heretofore treated of, and partly to be describ'd hereafter.


The Birds are, the 
Fregates, Fauves, Craw-fowl,
 or 
Grandgawsiers, Flammans, Swallows of America, Arras, Canides, Parrots, Parroquito's, Tremblo's, Sparrows of America, Eagles

of Orinoca, Manstenys, Colibrys,
 besides what are common amongst us, as 
Herons, Coots,
 or 
Moor-bens, Black-birds, Feldivars, Thrushes, Turtles, Woodquists, Pintado's,
 &c.


The Reptiles are,
 
Anotis, Zoquets,
 and 
Maboujats
 (of which farther mention will occur in the Isle of St. 
Christopher
) 
Globe-mouches,
 nam'd by the 
Caribbeeans,
 Oulleouma, 
Scorpions,
 and several sorts of 
Lizards,
 call'd by the 
Caribbeeans,
 Ouamayaca; by the 
Brasilians,
 Senembi; and by other 
Indians,
 Jaquanas.


The Insects are,
 besides these common with us, as 
Glow-worms, Palmer-worms, Spi∣ders, Bees,
 &c. the 
Cucuyos,
 mention'd in 
Hispaniola,
 and the 
Flying Tyger.


The Fishes are,
 
Sea-Parrots,
 the 
Dorada,
 by some call'd 
The Sea-Bream,
 by others, 
The Amber-fish;
 the 
Bonite,
 the 
Needle-fish,
 the 
Epadon,
 or 
Sword-fish,
 the 
Marsovin,
 the 
Requiem,
 the 
Remora,
 the 
Lamantin,
 the 
Becune,
 the 
Sea-Urchin,
 the 
Sea-Woodcock,
 be∣sides 
Whales,
 and a certan Fish call'd, for its hideous shape, 
The Sea-Devil,
 and lastly, the 
Sea-Unicorn,
 with a particular Description of which we shall conclude, as ha∣ving it from Monsieur 
du Montel,
 who was an Eye-witness thereof.


This 
Unicorn
 (saith he) was pursuing a 
Carangue,
 or some other lesser Fish, with such earnestness and impetuosity, that not considering that it needed a greater depth of Water than the other, it stuck with half the Body dry on a Sand-bank, whence it could not recover the deeper Waters ere it was destroy'd by the Inha∣bitants: It was about eighteen Foot in length, being at the largest part of its Body about the bigness of a Barrel: It had six great Fins like the ends of Galley-Oars, whereof two were plac'd near the Gills, and the other four on the sides of the Belly at equal distances; they were of a Vermilion red colour: All the up∣per part of the Body was cover'd with great Scales, about the bigness of a Crown-Piece, which were of a blue colour, intermix'd with several Spangles of Silver; near the Neck the Scales were closer, and of a dark colour, seeming as it were a Collar; the Scales under the Belly were yellow, the Tail forked, the Head somewhat bigger than that of a Horse, and near the same figure: It was cover'd with a hard and dark-colour'd Skin; and as the Land-
Unicorn
 hath one Horn in his Fore-head, so this Sea-
Unicorn
 had a very fair one issuing out of the fore-part of his Head, about nine Foot and a half in length; it was as streight as could be, and from the place whence it came out it grew smaller and smaller to the very Point, which was so sharp, that being thrust hard, it would enter in∣to Wood or Stone, or some more solid Substance; it was at the place where it came out of the Head, about sixteen Inches about, and from thence to two thirds of the length it was like a Screw, or, to say better, made waving like a wreath'd Pillar, save that the Channels grew smaller and smaller, till they gently ended in a Point, which was two Inches beyond the fourth Foot: All the lower part had over it an Ash-colour'd Skin, which was all over cover'd with a small soft Hair, short as Plush, and of the colour of a wither'd Leaf, but under that it was as white as Ivory: As to the other part, which seem'd naked, it was naturally po∣lish'd, of a shining Black, mark'd with certain small white and yellow Strokes, and of such solidity, that a sharp File could hardly get a little small Powder from it: It had no Ears standing up, but two spacious Gills, as the other Fishes; the Eyes were about the bigness of a Hens Egg; the Ball, which was of a Skye-colour Enamell'd with Yellow, was encompass'd with a certain Vermilion, which had beyond it another as clear as Crystal: The Mouth was wide enough, and fur∣nish'd with several Teeth, whereof those before were extreamly sharp, and those towards the Throat in both Jaws were broad, and a little knobbed: The Tongue was of a length and thickness proportionable, and cover'd with a rough Skin of a Vermilion colour. What was further remarkable, is, that this Fish

had upon the Head a kind of Crown, rising above the Skin about two Inches, and made oval-wise, the Extremities whereof ended in a Point. Above three hundred Persons of that Island did eat of the Meat of it, and that plentifully, and thought it extreamly delicate; It was interlarded with Fat, and being boyl'd it came up in flakes like fresh God, but it had a much more excellent taste.


Those who had seen this rare Fish alive, and had with great Levers broken the Back of it, affirm'd, That he had made prodigious Attempts to thrust them with his Horn, which he turn'd with an inexpressible dexterity and nimbleness, and that if he had had as much Water under him as would have born him up, he would have been too hard for them all. When the Entrails were taken out, it was found that he liv'd by Prey; for there were within him the Scales of several kinds of Fish.


What could be preserv'd of this miraculous Animal, especially the Head, and the precious Horn fastned in it, hung up near two years at the Guard-house of the Island, till Monsieur 
Le Vasseur,
 the Governor of it, presented one Monsieur 
Des Trancarts
 (a Gentleman of 
Xaintonge,
 who had given him a Visit) with the Horn. Not long after, coming over in the same Ship with the Gentleman, who had that precious Rarity put up in a long Chest, our Ship was cast away near the Island of 
Payala,
 one of the 
Assores,
 and all the Goods were lost, but nothing so much regretted as the loss of that Chest.


The Natives call themselves 
Cubao-bonon,
 that is, 
Inhabitants of the Islands,
 and 
Ca∣ribbeeans;
 which last Denomination was not onely receiv'd amongst the 
American
 Isles, but also on the Main Continent of the 
Northern
 and 
Southern America,
 long before the 
Spaniards
 coming thither.


Concerning the original of these People, there are several Opinions;
 for those who make them to be Extracted, from the 
Jews,
 have no other testimony, but that they abstain from Swines-flesh: Those that take them for a People fled from the great Islands, 
Hispaniola, Jamaica, Cuba,
 and 
Porto Rico,
 to save themselves from the 
Spaniards
 Cruelty, dispute against a known Truth; for who knows not, that the 
In∣dians
 who escap'd the 
Spanish
 Slaughter, have not the least resemblance either in Language or Customs with the Cannibals? nay more, they are mortal Enemies to them; besides that, the Cannibals at that time when 
Columbus
 first arriv'd, possess'd those Places which they now inhabit. The Cannibals seem ignorant themselves in this Point: for they affirm their Extraction to be from 
Guyana,
 where the 
Cali∣bites
 speak the same Language, and also observe the same Customs and Religion: The occasion of their removal they ascribe to the King of the 
Arovages,
 who made all the adjacent People about his Court, Slaves to him; which to prevent, they first went to 
Tabago,
 where being strengthned by new Comers, they resolv'd to take revenge on him; and Engaging with him in a Field-Battel, utterly defeated him, and spat'd none of his Party alive, except the Women; whence it proceeds, that the 
Arovage
 Women have the same Customs and Language with the 
Caribbeans.
 But 
Bristock,
 an 
English
 Knight, by long Conversation experienc'd in the severall 
Ameri∣can
 Tongues, saith, That the 
Caribbeeans
 have their Original from the 
Apalachites
 in 
Florida,
 who being a valiant People, destroy'd many of the Natives that inhabited 
Mexico,
 that so they might Settle themselves there; to which purpose they built a City like that of 
Apalache.
 The 
Cofachites
 inhabiting Northerly, and spred over a barren and Rocky Countrey, made use of this opportunity to conquer their deserted Habitation: for on a set-time they set fire to all the Villages, and spoyl'd all things which they could not carry away with them, that not the least hopes of return∣ing might be left them; therefore they must either Conquer or Die: which re∣solv'd

upon, they fell unawares on the 
Apalachites,
 whose King had nevertheless so much time, that he Guarded the usual Paths which directed to the inhabited Vil∣lages: But the 
Apalachites
 leaving the common Roads, climb'd over almost inac∣cessible Mountains, and so got into the heart of the Countrey, which exceedingly amaz'd 
Paracousis
 (for so that King was call'd) who lay Encamp'd at the Foot of a Mountain, whether the Van of the 
Apalachites
 were marching: whereupon he send∣ing his Army to meet them, they began a most fierce Combat; when at last both Parties wanting Arrows, they fell upon one another with Clubs till the Night parted them;
 and neither could boast of the Victory. At last this War was turn'd into Peace, and the Articles of Agreement were these, 
viz.


That the
 Cofachites 
should for ever possess the Province
 Amana, 
and become one People with the
 Apalachites, 
and acknowledge the King of
 Apalache 
for their Chief Governor.


After which the 
Cofachites
 were call'd 
Caribbeeans,
 which signifies 
Accidental Sub∣jects:
 But these two sorts of People did not long agree;
 for the 
Caribbeeans
 sleighted the Customs of the 
Apalachites
 in the Countrey 
Bemarin,
 and at the same time threw off their Obedience to the King, chose one 
Ragazin
 for their Governor, sub∣du'd the neighboring Province 
Matika,
 and at last defi'd the 
Apalachites;
 who infe∣rior to them in Strength, and making use of subtilty, suppos'd it the best way to make a Difference amongst the 
Caribbeeans
 themselves; to which the Priests freely proffer'd their Assistance, and their Design prov'd also successful; for the 
Caribbee∣ans
 regarding no Religion (onely dreading the angry Deity 
Mabouya
) the 
Apalachite
 Priests call'd 
Jaova's,
 took great pains to perswade their Neighbors to the worship∣ping of the Sun; which so prevail'd, that a considerable number of them ascending the Mountain 
Olaimi,
 fell down and shew'd Reverence to that celestial Luminary; which Opportunity 
Paracousis
 taking notice of, caus'd the 
Jaova's
 to publish amongst the 
Caribbeeans,
 That in the beginning of the 
Maairims,
 or 
March,
 a great Feast should be held in Reverence to the Sun on the usual place, where the King would Enter∣tain, and give Presents to all the Worshippers thereof.


How great a Religion this Sun-worship was antiently amongst the 
Gentiles,
 ap∣pears from the Writings of several authentick Authors.


The 
Syrians,
 whose Idolatry the 
Israelites
 learn'd, honor the Sun by the Name of 
Bahal,
 which signifies 
Lord.


The 
Phenicians
 call'd the Sun 
Beel-samen, Lord of the Heavens;
 and the Citizens of 
Accaron,
 Baal-zebahim, 
Lord of the Offerings;
 but God chang'd the Name to 
Baal∣zebub,
 or 
The God of Flyes.


Moloch,
 or 
Milcom
 also signifi'd the Sun amongst the 
Ammonites;
 in honor of which Children were carried by their Parents, and set between two great Fires, or else by the Priests, upon pretence of cleansing them; and sometimes parch'd to death in an Image of 
Moloch,
 which had seven Cavities heated like Ovens.


Macrobius
 tells us, That the 
Assyrians
 ascrib'd the supream Command to the Sun, under the Name of 
Adad,
 and to the Goddess 
Adargatis,
 representing the Image of 
Adad
 with Beams darting downwards, and 
Adargatis
 with those that shot upwards: by the first they express'd, that the celestial Power consisted in Sun-beams, which shooting downwards warm the Earth; and by the second, that all things by those Beams were cherish'd and enliven'd.


The most magnificent Temple which Syria 
Apamena
 boasted, was Consecrated to the Sun.


The 
Arabians
 Offer'd Myrrhe on the tops of their Houses at the Rising of the Sun; who also was the 
Chamos
 and 
Baal-Peor
 of the 
Moabites
 and 
Medians.


Near the 
Red-Sea,
 lay the City 
Baisamsa,
 which signifies 
The House of the Sun,
 fa∣mous for the many Feasts which were kept there in honor of this Planet.




The 
Persians
 accounted this Luminary for the greatest God, and Consecrated to him three several Feasts, looking upon him as the Author of Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, and is express'd by three several Operations, 
viz.
 Warmth, Light, and Distinction of Time.


The 
Egyptians
 honor'd the Name of 
Ofiris,
 whom some will have to be the same with 
Misraim,
 or 
Chamszoon,
 the first Founder of the 
Egyptian
 Monarchy.


In 
Egypt
 also was famous amongst many other Cities that of 
Heliopolis,
 which signifi'd 
The City of the Sun;
 where the Ox 
Mnevis
 or 
Menapis
 being Consecrated to the Sun, was religiously worshipp'd. This Image is describ'd by 
Macrobius.


The 
Moors
 made likewise great Offerings to their 
Assabin,
 for so they call'd the Sun; and allow'd their Priests onely the priviledge to gather Cinamon, and that with this 
Proviso,
 That they should first Offer forty four Oxen, besides Goats and Rams, to 
Assabin,
 nor should fetch the least Stick of Cinamon either immediately before or after Sun-set: The Cinamon brought altogether, was to be divided by the Chief Priest, and the rest having each their Portion assign'd, that which re∣main'd was sold to the Merchants, to Trade with into Foreign Parts; but if the Sun chanc'd to set the Cinamon on fire, then they concluded they had not dealt justly.


The 
Greeks,
 according to 
Proclus,
 hung a long Pole full of Laurel and Flowers on every seventh day of the Moneth; on the top thereof was a great Copper Ball, from which hung others still lesser and lesser; about the middle of the Pole hung three hundred and sixty five Garlands; and the bottom thereof was cover'd with a Womans Garment of a yellow colour; The uppermost Ball represented the Sun, the lesser the Stars, and the Garlands the Days of the Year; in which manner they worshipp'd the Sun.


The same Luminary the 
Massagetes
 and old 
Germans
 ador'd in antient times; and to this day the People in the utmost North, 
Japanners, Chineses, Tartars,
 and the 
East
 and 
West-Indians,
 pay their chief Devotions to the Sun;
 the reason of which may easily be made out: for it is the common Opinion of all Men, as 
Aristotle, Simplicius, The∣mistius,
 and other Heathens witness, to place the Omnipotent Godhead in the up∣permost Orb, which surrounds the Earth; wherefore those that Pray, lift up their Hands to Heaven: but because the rest of the Heavens appear not so resplendent as the Sun, therefore they take the Sun for the onely chief God, whether for its ex∣ceeding lustre and glory, or for its being a hundred and sixty times bigger than the Earth; or for its swift Course, in running ten hundred thousand Leagues in so short a time, or for its-nourishing and genial Warmth, which gives Life to all things, or for its necessary Light, by which all worldly Affairs are manag'd, or for its measuring the Days by its moving from East to West, and the Seasons of the Year, by a Course from the South to the North; for all these excellent qualities being well consider'd by the most Learned 
Heathens,
 or observ'd by those of lesser Judgment, have made them shew that Honor to a visible Creature, which is onely due to the invisible Creator.


These and such like Arguments induc'd the 
Caribbeeans
 to go to 
Bemarin,
 where the Feast of the Sun was to be kept.


The 
Apalachite
 King also Entertain'd the neighboring People exceeding courte∣ously in the chief City 
Melilot;
 from whence he was carried in a Chair on the Shoul∣ders of four Men, with sound of Pipes and Drums, and an innumerable company People, to the top or the Mountain 
Olaimi,
 where he made a stately Offering to the Sun, and afterwards Feasting and Caressing the 
Caribbeeans
 with Gifts, he sent them home all well contented and satisfi'd with their Entertainment. This Cu∣stom

was yearly observ'd,
 when at last they began to neglect their Duty, wherefore 
Toltlabin
 resolv'd to proclaim War against the 
Caribbeeans,
 if they did not continue paying their Devotions to the Sun: which Injunction was differently receiv'd; some judg'd it to be inconsistent with their purchas'd Freedom, to receive Laws for Religion from a neighboring King, alledging, That if any Reverence was due to the Sun, it might as well be given on the Mountains of 
Amana
 as within 
Toltlabin
's Realm: others, who lov'd Peace, and had a zeal to the 
Olaimi
 Religion, would not be against the Proposals, which occasion'd a Contention amongst themselves, and every one apply'd himself to those that were of his Opinion; nevertheless those that stood upon their Freedom, were of the greatest Party; wherefore the Worshippers of the Sun clos'd with the 
Apalachites,
 who going out with their Forces, routed the other Party, And receiv'd those 
Caribbeeans
 that joyn'd with them in Religion into Co-partnership also in the Government, so that they united into one People: But those that were routed rally'd again, and not without thousands of Inconveniences made towards the Sea, where Embarquing, they Landed first on the Isle 
Ayay,
 now call'd 
Sancta Crux,
 and in process of time grew very populous; for from thence by degrees have been peopled all the little Isles which lie before 
America,
 and grew so considerable, that they were sought to by the 
Calabites,
 to side with them against the 
Arovaces, Yaos, Sappayos,
 and other People their Enemies on the Main Conti∣nent, where they have taken many large Countreys, extending as far as 
Brasile,
 where they are greatly respected and fear'd for their Valor and Policy in warlike Affairs.


But because the memory of antique Passages hath no firm foundation in Books, having been onely taken by Tradition from time to time amongst the 
Caribbeeans,
 therefore we cannot give you an exact Account of their Removal from 
Florida;
 yet it remains without contradiction, that it hapned above five Ages before the 
Spaniards
 Arrival, which time at least was requir'd to the peopling of so many great Islands and Kingdoms.


Concerning the Original of the 
Apalachites,
 they themselves affirm, that they cannot certainly determine the time when they first Setled here: however, they report that they have peopled the Provinces 
Bemarin, Amana,
 and 
Matika,
 many Ages ago. That they are Extracted from the 
Tartars,
 appears not obscurely, by their Customs, Idolatry, and Language. Amongst other things, they have learn'd from the 
Tartars
 religiously to remember those Kings which perform'd any grand Ex∣ploits in the Service of their Countrey. Amongst others, the 
Apalachites
 make men∣tion in their 
Areitos,
 or Songs, of a King call'd 
Maydo,
 eminent for his noble At∣chievements, and prudent Governing of his People.


They believe that the Sun many Ages since was Darken'd or Ecclips'd twenty four Hours together, during which time the Waters over-flow'd the highest Moun∣tains, except that of 
Olaimi,
 where there stood a stately Temple, built in honor of the Sun; in which all those that fled thither were preserv'd, and dispers'd after∣wards into several parts to re-people the World as soon as the Waters were abated, and the Sun appear'd in his full lustre again: whereupon they imagine, that to this day their Bird 
Tonatzuli,
 at the Rising of the Sun congratulates his appearance with great joy, and at his Setting, requests his speedy return from under the Horizon.


The 
Tonatzuli
 is a Bird like a Bull-Finch, onely its Belly and Wings are of a Golden colour, the Back and Tail blue, its Head adorn'd with divers colour'd Fea∣thers, its Claws and Bill like Ivory, and it Sings like a Nightingale.


As for 
Olaimi,
 it is a perfect round Mountain; the Way which leads to the top

thereof runs winding two Leagues long, and is planted on each side with Cedar, Pine-Trees, 
Cassine,
 and 
Sassafras;
 the top of which is a fair Plain a League in circum∣ference; Eastward from it is a Cavern, to which Nature hath afforded more Con∣venience and Ornament than could be given to the same by Art and Charges: The first Beams of the Rising Sun dart into the Cavern, which being oval, appears like a white Vault, which on the top hath a great Hole for the Air to go in at: The bottom is like the purest Marble; on the Floor stands a Stone Cistern to receive the Moisture which drops out of the Rocks. Whilest the People Danc'd on the fore-mention'd Plain, Feasted and Sung, the Priests Offer'd Myrrhe, and all manner of Perfumes.


The Clothes, which the Rich gave to the Sun, were distributed amongst the Poor, according to a List which was taken of them.


But in process of time the 
Apalachites
 have most of them embrac'd the 
Christian
 Religion; the first occasion thereof was this: When 
John Ribauld
 had brought a 
French
 Colony to 
Florida,
 and gain'd a Fort, (which from King 
Charles
 the Ninth he nam'd 
Charles-Fort
) the 
Spanish
 Commander 
Peter Melendez
 fell unawares upon him, and so far impower'd his Men, who had of themselves a natural hatred against the 
French,
 that they spar'd neither Man, Woman, nor Child; onely ten Men escaping the bloody Banquet, fled to the 
Floridan
 King 
Zaturiona,
 where they were kindly re∣ceiv'd, and hearing of the Civility and Power of the King of 
Apalache,
 desir'd that they might go thither; which 
Zaturiona
 not onely granted, but also furnish'd the seven 
French
-men (for the other three were dead) with good Guides, who visited 
Zaturiona
's Relations, living in several Villages along the pleasant Stream 
Selay,
 over which they pass'd on large Boughs artificially joyn'd together, and travell'd through Woods, Marshes, and Mountains full of ravenous Beasts, and sometimes Engag'd with the stragling 
Floridans
 which lurk'd in the most desolate Wilder∣nesses: having travell'd two days Journey, by an Ambuscade of King 
Timago
's People, they lost two of their Guides, the rest being dangerously wounded, and through many Difficulties came at last to 
Avoeka,
 and from thence to the King of 
Apalache
's Court, who receiv'd them all with great kindness: Whereupon they re∣solv'd, being induc'd thereto by their courteous Reception, fruitfulness of the Soil, and good Customs of the Inhabitants, to Settle themselves, all but two of them, who return'd with the Guides to 
Zaturiona:
 the rest that stay'd there, endeavor'd by promulgating the 
Christian
 Religion, to reduce the 
Pagans
 to the belief thereof; which-many embrac'd, and also learn'd the 
French
 Tongue, notwithstanding their Priests 
Jaova
's oppos'd the same. After the death of the 
French
 (which the 
Apalachites
 much bemoan'd) their Idolatry had like to have gotten the upper hand again, had not some 
English
 Families, fleeing from 
Virginia
 from the Cruelties of the 
Indians,
 and notable to reach 
New England,
 Landed at 
Florida,
 with intention at first onely to get fresh Provisions, but Rowing up the River 
Selay,
 and taken with the plea∣santness, they chose the Province 
Bemarin
 for their Habitation, where accordingly they Setled 
Anno
 1621. Amongst them were several Learned Men, which so effe∣ctually perswaded the 
Heathens
 to embrace the 
Christian
 Faith, that in twenty eight years time the King and most of his Nobles were Converted and Baptiz'd by them in the chief City 
Melilot.


But since our Design is onely to give you an exact Account of those People which inhabit the Islands lying before 
America,
 it is sufficient that we have shew'd you how they are Extracted from the 
Cofachites
 and the 
Apalachites.


As to the Customs of the 
Caribbeeans,
 since they are very much alter'd by their long Conversation with the 
Europeans,
 we cannot better inform our selves of their

antient Gustoms, than from those which to this day are observ'd on 
St. Vincent,
 and some parts of the Main Continent, where the 
Caribbeeans
 have learn d nothing from any Strangers.


The 
Caribbeeans
 are a well proportioned People with broad Shoulders and Hips, round Faces, without Beards, wide Mouthes, white Teeth, little Eyes like the 
Tar∣tars,
 Feet so hard, that they are almost Dart-proof, flat Noses, so made by squeezing them down in their Infancy, and long black Hair. There are few or no deformed People amongst them; all of them go stark naked, and paint their Bodies Red witlr a Plant call'd 
Rocou,
 and Oyl; about their Eyes they draw a black Circle with the Juice of the Apple 
Junipa.
 This their Painting serves them both as an Ornament, and to make them strong. Others anoint their Bodies all over with a glewy Stuff, on which they stick all sorts of Feathers. Others use Gum and Flowers. Moreover, they adorn their Head with Plumes, their Ears with Fish-bones, or Scales of the 
Caret,
 or pieces of Crystal, which they also hang in their Lips and Noses. The Men wear Armlets near their Shoulders, and the Women about their Wrists; about their Legs they tie for Garters Strings of Seeds: others take a pride in wearing the Bones of their slain Enemies, and the Teeth of the 
Agouty,
 Tygers, wild Cats, or Cockle shells. When they appear in greatest lustre, then they wear Armlets under their Arm-pits, and also Scarfs of Feathers, which either hang over their Shoulders, or are girt about their Middle, so that one end thereof tou∣ches their Thighs. They set an exceeding value on certain pieces of Copper call'd 
Caracolis,
 the least of which they hang in their Ears, and the biggest before their Breasts: and because they are fetch'd out of the Province of the 
Arovages
 their Ene∣mies, they are esteem'd as Marks of true Valor, and he is highly esteem'd that wears them.


The 
Caribbeeans
 which Converse with the 
Europeans,
 speak two sorts of Langua∣ges, the oldest of which is smooth, acceptable, fluent, and for the most part spoke between the Lips. According to the several pronunciations one word hath divers significations: but the Mystery of their oldest Language they will discover to none. It is very observable, that the 
Caribbeean
 Men speak several words, which though the Women understand, yet are never spoken by them: and also the antient People use several Sayings which the younger never mention, and the Youths such likewise as are never spoken by the Antient, which being spoken apart by each in the time of War, are understood by none but their Soldiers, that so their Designs may the better be kept secret. But their mix'd Language hath many of the 
Euro∣pean
 words, especially of the 
Spanish,
 which they speak whensoe're they converse with the 
Europeans.
 Moreover, though the 
Caribbeeans
 on the least occasion laugh aloud, yet they are of a dull Spirit, stubborn, and nothing to be got out of them but by fair means.


Their Employment is Hunting,
 Fishing, Tilling, Building of Houses, and the like. Theft is not known amongst them, so that no Man is suspicious of his Neigh∣bor; wherefore they leave their Huts open both Night and Day. They are also seldom at Variance one with another, but generally Love sways amongst them; yet if a Quarrel doth happen, then the injur'd Person revenges himself to the heighth. Persons that profess Chastity are much honor'd amongst them; and here Youth bears great respect to Age.


They are also very ignorant in natural Knowledge,
 insomuch that when the Moon is Eclips'd, they suppose that it is devour'd by 
Maboya;
 and wheresoe're they smell any ill scent, they believe the Devil to be not far from thence. Gun∣powder they suppose to be a Grain, and are very fearful of Fire-Arms: Though

they have many brave Salt-pits, yet they use no Salt, nor eat any Swines-flesh, though all those Islands abound in that sort of Animal, fearing that if they should eat the same, it would cause them to have little Eyes, which they account very homely, though it is a property generally incident to them; neither will they eat any Tortoise, because they would not be so gross as that Creature. Lastly, they know now no greater Number than they reckon on their Fingers and Toes, for what exceeds twenty is to them innumerable: They hold that good Spirits, whom they call 
Akamoue,
 residing in Heaven, never trouble themselves with Earthly Affairs.


Their Offerings consist in 
Cassave
 and the first of their Fruits, which are set at the end of their Huts in Vessels on small Tables, cover'd with Leaves or Rushes, without uttering any Prayers; for they never Pray but in publick in company of the 
Boyez
 or Priests, and that either for revenge against Injuries, or for recovery from Sickness, or that they may know the Events of War, or for Protection against the 
Maboya.


Each 
Boye
 hath his peculiar God which, Singing with a conjuring Verse, he calls to him in the Night whilst he Smoaks a Pipe of Tobacco.


Some have been of Opinion, that this Conceit of the 
Maboya
 proceeds from the phlegmatick Nature of the 
Caribbeeans,
 who in their melancholy Dreams imagine themselves to be grievously beaten by the said 
Maboya.
 But there are sufficient testi∣monies to prove, that these 
Heathens
 have often really suffer'd much by this 
Maboya,
 often appearing to them in such horrid shapes, that the poor 
Caribbeeans
 would sweat and quake at the sight thereof, and inflicting such sad Pinches and bloody Stripes all over their Bodies, that they liv'd in perpetual fear of this evil Spirit: and yet notwithstanding these cruel Sufferings, they shew'd no manner of Worship to 
Ma∣boya,
 onely they believ'd that they had some ease, when they wore little Pictures about their Necks, made resembling the Shapes in which 
Maboya
 appear'd to them; but their best Remedy was to flye to the 
Christians.


They believe their 
Boyez
 able to resolve any Question they ask of them; parti∣cularly, when any one dies, the nearest ally'd to him asks the 
Boye
 this Question, 
Who is the occasion of his Death?
 to which if the 
Boye
 names any one, they never rest till they have dispatch'd him to the other World. Concerning their original brutish way of living, they give much credit to an antient Fable, which is to this effect:


The most antient 
Caribbeeans,
 living under no other Roof than the Canopy of Heaven, fed on nothing but what the Fields naturally produc'd, which salvage Life an old Man much beamoan'd; when a certain Deity clad in white Apparel descending down on the Earth, said, 
That he would have come sooner to have shew'n them the way of a civil Life, had they requested it before.
 Moreover, the Angel shew'd them a place along the Shore where there lay sharp-cutting Stones, with which he told them they might cut down Trees, and with the Timber build themselves Houses, and cover them with the Leaves of the Palm-Tree to keep out the Rain; which said, he broke his Staff into three pieces, which being Planted, soon after produc'd the Root 
Manioe,
 which stamp'd and dry'd, made good Bread.


The 
Caribbeeans
 have also a strange Opinion concerning the Soul, that is to say, That every one hath as many Souls as he hath Pulses, but the chiefest is the Heart it self, which after Death removes with 
Jeheizi,
 (that is every ones peculiar God or Genius) to the Company of the other Deities, where they live after the same man∣ner as here on Earth; wherefore those that are Persons of Quality give Charge at their Deaths, that their Servants may be kill'd and buried with them, that so they may serve them in the other World; That the other Souls, which are the Pulses,

are of two sorts, whereof the first call'd 
Maboya's,
 range through Woods and Wil∣dernesses; and the other call'd 
The Oumekous,
 reside along the Sea, and over-turn the Ships that Sail by; That the Souls of Heroes remove to pleasant and delightful Islands, where they are serv'd by the 
Arovages;
 That Cowards at their Death go behind a high Mountain, where they become perpetual Slaves to the 
Arovages.


So soon as they hear a clap of Thunder they run into their Huts, and place themselves on little Stools round the Fire, cover their Faces, and laying their Heads on their Knees, make a doleful noise, as supposing that 
Maboya
 is exceedingly enrag'd against them.


Their Huts, for the most part built near Rivers and Streams, are of an oval fashion, their Roofs made of Palm-Tree Leaves or Sugar-Canes, the Walls nothing but Boughs set in the Ground and pleited together, and the Floor of sifted Earth or Sand, ramm'd in and kept very even and smooth; besides a Room wherein they Sleep and Entertain their Friends, they have also a Kitchin to dress their Meat, and a place to lay their Bowes, Arrows, Clubs, and the like, in; they use Mats in stead of Walls, to separate one Apartment from the other. Their Hous∣hold-stuff is little; the richest of them have Hammocks in stead of Beds; the meaner sort use Sticks laid cross one another, and cover'd thick with the Leaves of the 
Banana
-Tree, made fast at the four corners with Cords. Hollow 
Calabashes;
 and Earthen Ware call'd 
Canaris,
 serve them for their Kitchin Utensils. In the little 
Canaris
 they prepare their 
Tumalis,
 or 
Pepper-pottage,
 and in the biggest their Liquor 
Ovicou.


Their Cleanliness may appear by this, that when they go to ease Nature, they make a Hole in the Ground with a Stick, and after they have done, stop it up again, burying their Excrement that it may not be seen.


Round about their Huts feed many Hens and Turkies, which they breed not so much for their own use, as to exchange for Iron.


They remove their Habitations very often, either out of fear of being haunted by the Ghost of some deceased Person, or to avoid some Smell which they find noisom and offensive, or because their Hut hath been set on fire by Lightning.


The Women are always employ'd to keep their Families in good order, to pre∣pare Venison and Fish for the Mens Tables, to spin Cotton, Comb their Hus∣bands, and paint them Red. The Men spend their time in the Wars, Hunting or Fishing. They have also learn'd of the 
Europeans
 to burn Train-Oyl in Lamps in the Night, when as before they burnt Twigs of a gummy Shrub before mention'd, which for that reason the 
Hollanders
 call'd 
Candle-Wood.
 Each hath a little Stool, and a Table call'd 
Mantoutou,
 on which he eats his Meat when he pleases, having no set-Meals. The broad 
Banana
-Leaves serve them for Napkins and Table-clothes. Their chiefest Dainty is Crabs roasted in the Shell with the Juice of Lemmon and 
Pyman.
 At great Feasts they dress their Meat with the Fat of their Enemies, being the 
Arovages.
 Their usual Drink is 
Mabby,
 made of 
Potato's,
 which refreshes, and is good against the Phlegm; also another Liquor call'd 
Oko,
 made of steep'd 
Cassa∣dar,
 and is like Beer in taste, strength, and colour. They also by making an incision into the Palm-Trees, tap a Liquor from the same in 
Calabashes,
 like White-wine. They use little of the Drink 
Couscou,
 because it swells the Body, notwithstanding it is pleasing to the Palate; But the Liquor which is most esteem'd amongst them, is the Wine made of the Sugar-Canes, which are squeez'd in Mills made for that purpose, and then boyl'd in great Kettles. During the dressing of their Meat (which being done leisurely, is sometimes half a day before it is ready), they Sing, and Dance to the Time, which one keeps with a 
Calabash
 fill'd full of little Stones, in

which they believe the greatest happiness they shall enjoy in the other World con∣sists: But the 
Caribbeeans
 never Dance more antique than when they meet in the 
Carbet,
 which is a publick House of Entertainment; whether the Women carry a Drink made of 
Cassave,
 which makes Drunk as soon as Wine: The Men bring Fish and Hedge-hogs; all of them painted with 
Roucou,
 and adorn'd with Plumes of Feathers, commit all manner of Debaucheries. At other times they also keep Feast-days, which is either when they are preferr'd to some Office, or Place of Ho∣nor, or when they have defeated their Enemies, or when they mourn for the Death of one of their nearest Relations.


Their Boats, which they call 
Periaquo's,
 are made of single hollow Trees,
 full of Benches, and painted with several strange Shapes, and are able each to carry fifty or sixty Men.


Their Musical Instruments in which they take most delight; are Drums, Strings of Silk-grass stretcht upon 
Calabashes,
 and Flutes made of the Bones of their Enemies.


They keep Watches on high Hills, to descry the Ships off at Sea, and no sooner have they espy'd one, but they immediately give notice to one another; whereupon those that are most valiant put off to Sea in their 
Canoos,
 and know by the Lan∣guages to distinguish between a 
Spaniard, French
-man, 
English
-man, and 
Hollander.
 If they find that 'tis an Enemy who Lands on their Coasts, they guard all their Avenues, lie in Ambuscades, and gather together in by-ways, and where they see any advantage they shoot thousands of Arrows; which done, they fall in amongst them with great Clubs: but if they chance to be defeated, then they lurk behind Bramble-bushes, or climb up inaccessible Mountains, or else, if near the Sea, they save themselves by Diving and Swimming under Water above two hundred Paces before they appear again; and if a Party of them chance to meet together after∣wards, they venture a second Engagement:
 But if those that come on their Coasts are Friends, they Swim, or go in their Boats to meet them, climb up their Ships, and carry the Sea-men on their Shoulders ashore, where the 
Casique
 in the Name of the whole Island bids them welcome, and conducts them to the 
Carbet,
 where an antient Man salutes the old Men, and a Youth the young Men; after which asking their Names, the 
Couban
 calls himself by that Name ever after, and desires the Strangers to accept of his Name; during which their changing of Names they use many Ceremonies of Friendship: this done, they proffer them Cotton Ham∣mocks to rest themselves in, and pleasant Fruit to eat, till they have prepar'd other Meat; which is no sooner Ready, but a little Table is set before every one of them, and a Dish of Meat consisting of boyl'd Hedge-hogs, boyl'd Crabs, and Pot∣herbs; which if the Guests do not eat heartily, or drink up all the Liquor which they give them, they take it as a great Affront; but if they eat and drink heartily, they take it kindly, and shew great sorrow at their departure.


Their Offices of Government have been usually three; the meanest belong'd to the 
Tiouboulihauthe,
 whose Place was to Govern over the 
Carbet,
 a House where Stran∣gers were Entertain'd, Matters of War disputed of, and publick Feasts kept. 
Tioubou∣tonti
 Commanded the 
Canoos
 in the time of War, that is, under the 
Nahalene,
 who Commanded the whole Fleet: But the chiefest Officer of all was the 
Ouboutou;
 to which degree of Honor none attain'd, unless he had kill'd several 
Arovages,
 or at least a Governor.


When the 
Caribbeeans
 drew all their Forces out of the Islands to a Battel, then they chose one out of the 
Ouboutou,
 who during their March Commanded the Army as General, which his Office ended with the War, and extended no farther than his own Island.




Their warlike Consultations were no less observable, for the 
Ouboutou
 ap∣pointed a Day, on which the Islanders met at a Feast in the 
Carbet,
 whither they accordingly came all at the time appointed, and having Eat and Drunk, and Danc'd a considerable time, an antient Woman with tears in her Eyes, and mourn∣ful Countenance, enter'd the 
Carbet,
 and desir'd Audience; which being granted her, and every one silent, she began to relate the Damages which from antient times the 
Arovages
 did to the 
Caribbeeans;
 and that in the last Engagement so many va∣liant Men were slain, and afterwards devour'd by them; therefore it would be a shame not to take Revenge; which being seconded by the 
Ouboutu,
 put Valor into the Hearts of all that were present: Whereupon the following day Messengers were sent to the other Islands to acquaint them with their Intentions, that they might prepare their Clubs, make sharp and poyson their Arrows, String their Bowes, prepare Provisions, and fit out their 
Canoos:
 They poyson'd their Arrows with the Juice of 
Manchenillo's,
 which made the least Wound mortal. Their Pro∣visions and Arms they laid up in their 
Canoos,
 so to preserve their 
Periaguo's
 (which are Boats that can carry fifty Men), if they should chance to over-set, which often happen'd, though they were soon turn'd up again. They went from one Island to another, where they not onely stor'd themselves with fresh Provisions, but increas'd their Fleet with new Assistants; with which approaching the Main, they hal'd their Boats ashore in the Evening, and driving four Stakes into the Ground under the Trees, made fast their Hammocks to the same, in which they slept till Mid-night, and then fell on their Enemies, but if discover'd by them, they retrea
ed to their Boats and return'd home; but if they were not discover'd, they fell upon the Huts of the 
Arovages;
 who resisting, they shot Arrows with burning Cotton into them, and so setting them on fire, forc'd the 
Arovages
 to venture a Battel in the open Field; where having spent all their Arrows, they Engag'd one another with great Clubs, with which at one Blow they broke either Arms or Legs, or knock'd out their Brains. If the 
Caribbeeans
 chanc'd to be defeated, then those that remain'd of their Party made a lamentable noise, howling for those that were kill'd, and mix'd their Tears with the Blood of their slain Friends, whom not without the greatest danger they fetch'd from amongst their Enemies, and carried them aboard of their Boats: But returning Victors, they were wont to insult over their Prisoners with all the bitter Taunts imaginable, and then taking advantage of those sharp Upbraidings which their cruel usage extorted from them, to put them to death with most inhu∣mane Tortures, and then to Feast themselves upon their mangled Bodies, all claiming a Right to their several Prisoners, as to so many Beasts appointed to the Slaughter; But of late Ages they have contented themselves to dispatch them spee∣dily with their Clubs, and so assign them to their Shambles.


As the 
Arovages
 had been formerly, so the 
Spaniards
 at length became the Object of the 
Caribbeeans
 irreconcilable Hatred, insomuch that oft-times being Invaded by them, they gave them such rough Entertainment, that they were glad to save them∣selves by flight; for the 
Caribbeeans
 not regarding their Guns, press'd upon them, and many times took Vessels richly laden from them, till of late years that a Peace hath been concluded between them; wherein nevertheless those of the 
Caribbeeans
 re∣fuse to be concern'd, that inhabit 
St. Dominico
 and 
St. Vincent,
 who cannot to this day forget the cruel Outrages committed by the 
Spaniards.


To come to their Marriages,
 they were allow'd as many Wives as they pleas'd to have, insomuch that their Governors were in esteem according to the number of their Wives; nor were degrees of Consanguinity so regarded, but that an Uncle might take his Neece; whom he no sooner had carried to his House, but the Mar∣riage

was finish'd. They seldom Divorc'd their Wives after they had bore them Children, but otherwise the Man would break the Bond of Matrimony when he pleas'd. A young Man that had no Relation might court a Stranger, and if her Parents allow'd of it, the Match was made. One that had behav'd himself vali∣antly against the 
Arovages
 was sure of several good Matches, for he was refus'd by none whom he Courted; and the abundance of Wives was the greatest testimony of their Valor. Each Wife had a peculiar Dwelling, so to prevent all Dissentions: So soon as one of them was with Child, her Husband Lay not with her till after Delivery. If any Woman committed Adultery, her Husband was permitted to knock out her Brains, or rip open her Belly; which done, he acquainted her Fa∣ther with the Deed, who return'd him thanks for the same. Murderers were ei∣ther burnt or cut in pieces. Children were born here with little trouble, for the Women were no sooner Deliver'd, but they carried the Infant to wash at the next Brook; which done they return'd home to their Houshold Labor, whilest the Man on the contrary kept his Bed, and ate nothing but a piece of 
Cassava
 Bread, which he hollow'd out in the middle, and left the edges till the Feast, which was kept at the Naming of the Child: Moreover, he fed on all manner of Dainties for a whole year after. But this Custom was observ'd onely at the Birth of the first Son, at which time they scratch'd the Father's Shoulder with a sharp Curry-combe, at which if he flinch'd not, it was accounted a good Omen of the Childs future Valor. At fifteen days old they made Holes in the Childs Ears, Lips, and Nostrils, through which they put a String for the tying on of what-ever Ornamentals. With the like Ceremonies the Child receiv'd a Name, taken from his Predecessors, Trees, Fishes, or some remarkable Passages during the Mothers bearing of the Infant in her Womb, or of the Father's Lying-in: But this Name was chang'd so soon as they went to War, or kill'd a Commander of the 
Arovages,
 whose Name they exchang'd for their own: After which the Mothers took special care in bringing them up, and at six Moneths the Children were able to run alone: When they attain'd to the age of two years, they cut off their Hair, at a great Feast made for that purpose; from which time forward they exercis'd them in Shooting with Bowes and Ar∣rows; to which purpose they hung up pieces of Meat for them to shoot at, which they must either hit down, or Fast.


Their Ceremonies to make Soldiers were very strange, 
viz.
 The Father con∣ducted his Son to the 
Carbet,
 where he told him the Duties of a Soldier, beat him with a Bird of prey, call'd 
Mans-fenis,
 till he had bruis'd the Head of the Bird, and scratch'd his whole Body all over with a Curry-combe till the Blood came, and then put Lemmon Juice into the Wounds, afterwards put him in a Hammock, and hung him up for several days without giving him any Meat; all which Torments and Trials if he endur'd with patience, then he was accounted a good and appro∣ved Soldier.


Few bred up their Children to be 
Boyez,
 or Priests; yet those that were brought up to it, abstain'd from certain Food from their Infancy, and before they could be receiv'd into the Order of Priesthood, they were forc'd to draw Blood from every part of their Bodies.


The 
Caribbeeans
 attain to an exceeding great Age: 
Charles de Rotchfort
 witnesseth, That in his time there liv'd Men who remembred the first Arrival of the 
Spaniards
 under the Command of 
Christopher Columbus,
 which consider'd, they could not be less than each of them a hundred and sixty years old. Many Women also were found thcre, who bare Children after they were eighty years of age: yet nevertheless they are not free from Sicknesses and Distempers, which cannot justly be attributed to the









Climate, that being extraordinary healthful, but to their ill Diet. Besides the trou∣blesom Disease call'd 
Pyans,
 which makes their Bodies swell full of great Knobs, they have been much troubled with pestilential Sores, occasion'd by the eating of Crabs, and poysonous Tortoises, 
Lamantins,
 and Hedg-hogs. Against which Evils they wanted not Medicines, consisting of Herbs, Roots, Gums, and Oyl. The bit∣ter Bark of the 
Chipiou
-Tree, steep'd in Water, and mix'd with 
Lanbys,
 hath a sove∣raign operation. The like vertue is in the Juyce of the 
Myby
-Tree, which they us'd to take inwardly: and for outward Means, they us'd a Salve made of burnt Cane∣ashes, temper'd with a Water press'd out of a certain Tree. To draw the Matter out of the Sores, they us'd the Juice of 
Junipa.
 Letting Blood was never customary amongst them, but to cut and scratch the sore part was to them in stead of Phlebo∣tomy. But if all the fore-mention'd Medicines would not help them, they fled for aid to the 
Boyez,
 who immediately order'd the Hut wherein the Patient lay to be made clean, the Table call'd 
Matoutou
 to be over-spread with 
Cassave, Ouycou,
 and Garden Fruits, for an Offering to the evil Spirit 
Maboya,
 and as many Stools to be plac'd about the same as there were People to be present at the Ceremony; and af∣ter that all the Fire and Candles were put out, the 
Boye
 enter'd into the Hut about Midnight with a Lighted Roll of Tobacco, then muttering some words to himself, stamp'd with his left Foot, and blew the Smoak of the Tobacco up into the Air, which done, and tearing the Tobacco in pieces, he threw the same over the Hut, and call'd up his Spirit, who shaking the Roof of the House, made a terrible noise; then the 
Boye
 drew near to the Patient, suck'd his Sores, and anointed them with the Juice of 
Junipa;
 after which if the sick Person recover'd, he made a great Feast, and an Offering to the aforesaid Spirit: But if the Distemper were mortal, then the 
Boye
 inform'd the Patient's Relations, That his Spirit had compassion up∣on the Sick, and was resolv'd to carry him above the Stars, to accompany the other Gods which reside there.


Thus much in general of the Inhabitants of the Isles that lie before 
Northern America;
 it will next be requisite to give you an Account of them in particular.


There are generally reckon'd of these Islands twenty eight by Name, though there are many more in number; for besides that there are a multitude of small ob∣scure Islands that are not nam'd, there are of the more considerable sometimes two or three that go under one Name;
 the twenty eight are these following: 
Anegada, Sombrero, Las Virgines, Anguilla, Saba, St. Crux, St. Martin, St. Bartholomew, Barbouthos
 or 
Barboude, Rotonda, Nevis, Eustathius, Antego, Montserrat, Guadalupe, Deseado, Mariga∣lanta, Todos Sanctos, De Aves, Dominco, Martinego, St. Lucia, Barbados, St. Vincent, Bekia, Granada, Tabago, St. Christopher.




SECT. II. Anegada and Sombrero.


TOwards the North-East of 
Porto Rico,
 at eighteen Degrees and thirteen Mi∣nutes, lies 
Anegada,
 seven Leagues long, surrounded with Shoals and Banks, as also the neighboring 
Sombrero,
 being in the same Latitude with the other, and so call'd by the 
Spaniard,
 because it appears like a Hat: Both of them being uninhabited,
 harbor abundance of Birds, amongst which is the 
Mansfeny,
 a little Eagle, and the remarkable 
Colibry,
 whose Body being a little bigger than a 
Wren,
 is adorn'd with divers colour'd Feathers, resembling a Rain-bowe; about its Neck is a Carbuncle red Circle; the Belly and ends of the Feathers are of a

Golden colour, the Sides of an Emerauld green, the Bill and Legs black like po∣lish'd Ebony, the Eyes glittering like Diamonds, on the Head a curious green tuft of Feathers: the Cocks far exceed the Hens in beauty; they flie swifter than any Bird whatsoever, and the fluttering of their Wings makes a noise like a Whirl∣wind: they live upon the Juice of Flowers, and especially of Cotton-Flowers; they smell like Amber, and build their Nests amongst the thick Leaves of a little Bough, where they cannot easily be found; the Nest it self open towards the South, is curiously made of the fine Fibres of the Plant 
Pite,
 surrounded with pieces of Bark, and within fill'd with Cotton, douny Feathers, and Silk; the Eggs oval, are somewhat bigger than an ordinary Pearl.


In the Moneth of 
May
 that sort of Crabs call'd 
Painted Crabs
 (for some have Violet-colour'd Shells, others yellow, full of purple Specks, and others tawny,
 with red Streaks) come creeping down the Hills in good order, eat up all the Herbs and Plants, and go four times one after another into the Water to wash themselves, which done they return to the Woods; but the Females at a set-time betake them∣selves to the Sea, in which they Lay their Eggs, which afterwards being cast on the sandy Shore, and warm'd by the Beams of the Sun, produce young Crabs in a short time, which no sooner come out of the Shell, but creep towards the Woods, when grown somewhat bigger they climb up the Rocks, where the old ones keep in vast multitudes, and stop up the Entrance of their Holes in such a manner, that they cannot be found out, whilest they cast off their Shell, creeping out backward through an opening at the Tail scarce discernable; thus for a certain time they lie bare, and stript of their Shells, being onely cover'd with a thin Skin, which grow∣ing harder and harder, becomes at last a firm Shell like the former.


These Crabs are a wholsom Meat, unless they feed under the 
Mancheneel.
 Trees, which commonly are poysonous.






SECT. III. Las Virgines.


NEar 
Sombrero,
 at eighteen Degrees, lie also the two Isles 
Las Virgines,
 sur∣rounded by ten others (and flat Shelves), without Trees or fresh Water; but the Sea thereabouts abounds with Fish, and chiefly with the 
Perroket,
 which hath Scales like a Carp, but greenish; the Eyes surrounded with Silver Cir∣cles shine very bright; in stead of Teeth they have strong Jaw-bones, wherewith they Grind all manner of Shell-fish, which are their Prey. These Fish have an ex∣cellent Rellish, and weigh generally twenty Pound.


Here is likewise great plenty of the 
Dorade,
 which is a very large Fish, and about five Foot long, full of little Scales, with a prickly Back, two Fins at the parting of the Head, and as many under the Belly. This Fish swimming very swift, often∣times follows the Ships that Sail that way.






SECT. IV. Anguilla.


SOuthward at eighteen Degrees and twenty Minutes, on this side of the Line, appears 
Anguilla,
 inhabited by the 
English,
 containing ten Leagues in length; It makes a pleasant Prospect, because of the many 
Junipa
-Trees which grow

upon the same, whose Boughs bend towards the Ground; the Leaves are not un∣like those of an Oak; the Flowers both in smell and shape come near the 
Narcissus;
 the Wood firm and grey, may be neatly Plan'd; the Tree bears fresh Leaves every Moneth, and a Fruit like Apples, which generally crack in their fall from the Tree, because of their thin Shell, as hath been already describ'd.


The 
Oculiem,
 or Vine, makes the Shore also very pleasant; the Leaf round and thick, hath a mixture of Red and Green; the Bark incloseth a Violet-colour'd Wood; the Boughs whereof are loaded with Violet Grapes, which in stead of Ker∣nels contain hard Stones.






SECT. V. Saba.


VVEstward from 
Anguilla,
 at seventeen Degrees and thirty five Minutes, lies 
Saba,
 which shews at a great distance like a Rock. The Inhabi∣tants of 
St. Eustathius
 going thither, found a pleasant Valley, able to maintain many Families.


The Sea about this Island is so clear, that a Stone may be seen lying on the bot∣tom of it.


Amongst many other sorts of Fish, the 
Bonito
 is the most remarkable, which is thick and fleshy, two Foot long, with a dark green Back, and white Belly without Scales; It devours greedily all manner of Carrion.






SECT. VI. St. Crux.


NOrth of 
St. Christophers,
 in eighteen Degrees and some Minutes, lies 
St. Crux,
 which the 
Caribbeeans
 who were beaten by the 
Apalachites,
 first inhabiting, call'd 
Ayay,
 where 
Columbus
 found great opposition, for the Women them∣selves shot poysonous Arrows at the 
Spaniards;
 and before the Islanders submitted to them, they took many 
Spanish
 Ships, burnt their Villages, and flay'd many of the 
Spaniards
 alive. The Soil, though Hilly, is rich and fruitful.


The 
English
 Landing here 
Anno
 1587. found a standing Pool, whose Water made swell the Faces of those who wash'd themselves with the same before Sun-rising, in such a manner, that they were not able to see for several days after; but they at last found a Fountain of wholsom Water.


Since the 
Spaniards
 destroy'd the Inhabitants of this Island, it lay desolate for a considerable time, notwithstanding it hath fourteen Leagues in length, and little less in breadth, till at last the 
English
 and 
Hollanders
 took possession of the same, each in a peculiar place; but not agreeing together, the 
English
 fell upon the 
Hollanders,
 and made themselves Masters of the Island in 1649. and not long after they were serv'd in the same kind; for the 
Spaniard
 judging them to be weakned by the 
Hollan∣ders
 removing from the Island, set Sail thither from 
Porto Rico,
 burnt all the Houses, slew the Inhabitants, and brought 
St. Crux
 again under the 
Spanish
 Government. Mean while the Lord 
Poincy
 fitted out two Sail of 
French
 Ships, to drive the 
Spani∣ards
 from 
St. Crux,
 and succeeded in his Enterprize; for the 
Spaniards
 immediately fled to their Ships, left at liberty some 
Holland
 Prisoners whom they had taken, and the Island in possession of the 
French;
 who straightway sent Captain 
Auger
 thither







view of St. Martin


DE STADT S
t
. MARTIN




URBS MARTINI


A. 
.


B. 
.


C. 
 vigilune


D. 
Mons Calvariae.


E. 
Littus, in quod Hollandi descendant.


F. 
Area, abi in ordines distrituti milites.


G. 
Vit, per quam urbem invadem.


H. 
Stutiones Hollandoram.


I. 
Templum cathedrale.


K. 
Domus Prafecti urbis.


L. 
Templum Nosocomii.


M. 
Templum Dominici.


N. 
Monasteriam Franciscanorum.


O. 
Sacellum.


P. 
Littus, quo appellabantur cijmba Hollandic
.


Q. 
Sinus irgens


R. 
Thevius aquae recontis.


S. 
Statis navium ante arcem.








as Governor, who design'd to build a Fort to secure the Harbor, but died before the same was finish'd. 
Poincy
 succeeding him, made an end of the Fort, and stor'd the Island with Ammunition and Provision. The Cross-Church built there by the Or∣der, and at the Cost of a Company of 
Flushing
 in 
Holland,
 was deliver'd also to the 
French.


The Trees which grow here are of four beneficial kinds,
 serving for four seve∣ral uses; some yield Fruits of a pleasant taste, and wholsom to eat; some excellent Medicines; others Timber for Building; and others Stuff to Dye with.


Granates, Oranges, Lemmons, and Citrons, grow better here than in any place of the World.


But the 
Papaye
-Tree is particularly worthy of our Description;
 It grows twenty Foot high, without Boughs, thick and streight, hollow and spungy within, bears three-corner'd Leaves hanging on long Stalks, hollow in the middle, and of a Fin∣gers thickness; on the top round about the Body of the Tree, grow a sort of Fruit like Quinces.


This sort of 
Papaye
-Tree grows on most of the 
Caribbee Islands;
 but the second sort call'd 
Mamoa,
 is to be found no where but on 
St. Crux;
 it hath more Leaves than the first, and a yellow Bark with green Streaks, within full of round and sharp biting Grains; the Blossoms thereof yield a sweet smell; every Moneth the Tree produces new Fruit, not unlike a Womans Breast (whence it hath its Deno∣mination as before observ'd,) and rellishing incomparably well.






SECT. VII. St. Martin.


NOt far from 
St. Crux,
 at eighteen Degrees and sixteen Minutes, lies 
St. Martin,
 which hath seven Leagues in length and five in breadth, and is famous for many excellent Salt-Mines; to preserve which, the 
Spaniards
 built a City and Fort there.


Adrian Peter
 and 
Martyn Thyszoon,
 sent with eleven Sail of Ships from the 
Texel
 by the 
West-India
 Company, to Cruse for the 
Spanish
 Plate-Fleet before the 
Flemmish
 Isles, finding their labor lost, Steer'd to the Inlet of 
Todos los Sanctos;
 where finding no Enemies Ships, they Sail'd along the Coast of 
Pernambuck,
 and from thence (meeting with no Prize) to the 
Caribbee Islands;
 and Landing on 
Granada,
 receiv'd some damage from the Inhabitants: thence going to 
Blanca,
 they got above a thou∣sand Goats, and ten thousand Lemmons from 
Hispaniola;
 near 
Cuba
 they were sur∣pris'd with continual Thunder, Showers, and Storms, which forc'd them to stand to and again off the Island a considerable time, where they thought to wait for the 
Spanish
 Ships that came from 
Nombre de Dios;
 but being defeated of their aim, by reason that Fleet was re-inforc'd with a considerable Supply, they set Sail 
Anno
 1629. towards the City and Fort of 
St. Martin,
 where coming to an Anchor they found the Place in this condition: On the right side of the City glides a fresh-Water River, with many meandring Streams from the Mountains; on the left side the Ocean makes a great Opening or Bay, which for a little space growing narrow∣er, becomes at last an Inland Lake; from the Countrey opposite to the City on the other side of the fore-mention'd Inlet, runs a Ridge of Hills toward the Sea; on the utmost Point thereof stands a square Fort, defended from the force of the Water with great Stones, pyl'd up at the Foot thereof, cover'd like a House, having on the top of it a Watch-tower, and not far from it a Chappel; moreover, the Mountain



Calvaria,
 rises on each side and behind the City, with high Precipices; not far from the Mouth of the River appears a strong Castle with several Bulwarks, and thereon great Guns; along the Inlet is a fair Market-place; in the middle of the City stands a Church Consecrated to 
Dominicus,
 near which there is a large Hospital, which fronts the Sea; the Cathedral stands at the farther end of the City, and on the declivity of a Mountain a fair Chappel; near the great Fort the Gover∣nor hath a pretty Palace; nor are the 
Franciscan
 Cloysters much inferior to any of the other Structures of this City, which taken altogether bears a good Form, by reason of the uniformity of the Streets.


But 
Anno
 1648. the 
Spaniard
 totally deserted this Island, which 
Michael Adriaenszoon Ruiter
 hearing of, brought several People from 
St. Eustathius,
 and took possession of it in the Name of the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands:
 Yet they enjoy'd not long the entire Propriety, for the 
Spaniards
 again went and claim'd those Places which were theirs upon the first gaining of the Island; which the 
Hollanders
 allowing them, they liv'd peaceably and quietly together, each having their own Churches, Store-houses, Land, and 
Negro's.
 The 
Dutch
 Plantation was maintain'd by the 
Zealand
 Lords, 
Lamsen
 and 
Van Ree.


There are divers Pools of salt Water in this Island, which afford the Inhabitants store of Fish, and especially Tortoises.


The Woods produce wild Hogs, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, and Parraquito's re∣sembling a Parrot, and which though much smaller, are more apt to be taught.


Near the Salt-pools also breed Birds call'd 
Flammans,
 not unlike a Jack-daw, onely differing in Feathers, for they are first white, next ash-colour'd, and at last turn red; they seldom flye or sit alone, but for the most part in great Flocks in open places, and Moorish Grounds; when some of them seek for their Food under Water, one of them stands Centinel, and on the least noise or appearance of a Man, gives notice by Chirping to the rest, who hereupon immediately flee away; those that shoot them lie commonly hid under an Ox Hide.


About the same Pools breed likewise the 
American
 Swallows,
 with crooked Bills, Feet like Ducks, black Bodies, white Bellies, and long Tails.












SECT. VIII. St. Bartholomew.


NEar 
St. Martin,
 at sixteen Degrees, lies the Island 
St. Bartholomew,
 which be∣ing about five Leagues in circumference, is surrounded with Rocks, and was first Planted by 
De Poincy:
 It makes a delightful Prospect, because of the many Trees which grow on the same; amongst which the most noted are the Soap-Trees, whose Wood makes the Water Lather, and washes as well as Soap; but they are of two sorts, for in some this soapy Quality is contain'd in a round yellow Fruit, not unlike a Plumb; in others a white soft Root supplies the office.


The little Tree 
Canopia,
 out of whose Bark drops a Gum,
 grows also very plea∣sant, the Body being divided into several Branches; the Leaves are discolour'd, be∣ing underneath of a dark Green, and of a brighter at the top; the Flower consists of five Leaves, and closes at last into a kind of Cherry, full of yellow Juice, and white Pulp; it blossoms generally in 
October
 and 
December,
 and bear ripes Berries the two following Moneths: a Fire being made about the Tree causeth the Bark to crack, whereby it yields abundance of Gum, chiefly us'd in Medicine for its opening and loosening Quality.


Likewise the 
Paretuve
-Tree, which grows along by the Sea-side and by Pools,
 sufficiently remarkable, for the Boughs thereof grow downwards, twin'd and plei∣ted together so thick, that in time of War they serve for Bulwarks, and are the Re∣cesses of wild Swine.


Moreover, on this Island, as on all the other hereabouts, grow 
Calabash
-Trees,
 which have thick Boughs and oval Leaves joyn'd one to another, and bear every Moneth fresh Flowers and Fruit, grey Flowers, mark'd with green Streaks and black Spots, and Fruit with hard Shells, full of juicy Meat and flat Seeds, which being taken out serve for Boxes, Cups, or little Dishes.




Along the Shore is also found a sort of Fish call'd the 
Sea-Star,
 which is a yel∣lowish Fish, whose hard Skin full of little Knots shoot forth five Darts or Beams; in stormy Weather they fasten themselves to the Rocks.


No less wonderful is the Fish call'd the 
Sea-Apple,
 whose brown Skin is full of Prickles, which when the Fish dies fall off, nothing remaining but a white Shell, curiously embroider'd with little Holes.


On the Banks, and near the Rocks, grow also Sea-Trees, whose thickest Boughs putting forth still lesser and lesser Branches, are pleited together very wonderfully, and being all glaz'd as it were with Salt-petre, seem greyish.






SECT. IX. Barboude.


BArbouthos,
 which some call 
Barboude,
 others 
Barbada,
 being five Leagues in length, lies at seventeen Degrees and thirty Minutes, and North-East from 
Monserrat,
 in a shallow Sea.


Here the 
English
 Planting, have from their first Arrival been much molested by the 
Caribbeeans
 of 
Dominico,
 who for a great while us'd twice a year to Invade them in the Night, killing and destroying whom and whatsoe're they met with, onely Women and Children, with some other Booty, they carried to 
Dominico.






SECT. X. Rotonda.


THe Isle 
Rotonda,
 which is much lesser, hath receiv'd that Denomination from its round Form, for it rises in the middle into a Hill, which at a distance appears like a Steeple; It lies at seventeen Degrees and ten Mi∣nutes. The Sea about the same being very deep, makes a good coming to the Island with Ships.






SECT. XI. Nevis.


 IN sight of 
Rotonda,
 at seventeen Degrees and nineteen Minutes, lies 
Nevis,
 which hath six Leagues in circumference. Out of the middle of the Island rises a Mountain all over wooddy; round about which the 
English,
 who Setled there 
Anno
 1628. have their Plantations, and have increased from a small number to above three thousand, and make a good Advantage of their Sugar, Ginger, Cot∣ton, and Tobacco, which they Plant there.


They are Govern'd by a peculiar Governor and a Council, who punish Thieves, and all manner of Deboshes very severely.


There are also three Churches, which on the Sabbath-Day are all throng'd with People, who resort thither for the Worship and Service of God.


The Harbor call'd 
Bath-Bay,
 and the Store-house built about the same, are secu∣red by a great Fort full of great Guns.


Several Springs on this Island afford the Inhabitants good Water. Here is also a Mineral Spring, a place to Bathe in, which hath been found to cure the same Di∣stempers which the Waters at 
Bourbon
 have done.




Moreover, this Island abounds with the 
Pistacie
 or 
Pistick
-Nuts,
 which grow on small Trees, with soft long Leaves, round at bottom, and ending in three Points: These Trees being commonly full of thick Boughs, serve commodiously for Hedges; the Wood and Leaves sweat a milky Juice, dropping out of the same with the Rain; the yellow Flowers which grow on the same are like glittering Stars, and the taste of the Nuts like a Hazle; but if the Skin which covers the Kernel be not pull'd off before they are eaten, they purge to Death.


But the great Profit which 
Nevis
 receives by Nature is attended with some In∣conveniences,
 which trouble this and all the other Islands: amongst many may be reckon'd the 
Musticho's,
 a sort of little Bugs, whose poysonous Sting causes such in∣tolerable Itching, that those who are stung by them cannot forbear to scratch them∣selves till the Blood comes, by which their Sores festering, prove often very dan∣gerous.


Also the 
Muringoins,
 who are so much the less dangerous,
 because they make al∣ways a great noise before they sting.


Wasps likewise are here very troublesom, but their Stings are cur'd with Rue, as the Stings of Scorpions are with the Juice press'd out of the same Animal.


The Wood-Lice, which are here in great abundance,
 have a soft and white Bo∣dy, onely the Head, which is mark'd with a black Speck; their Mouthes are so very hard, that in two hours time they eat through thick Chests. And no less da∣mage do the 
Banettos.


But the 
Chigos
 are a kind of small Fleas, that breed in Dust, Ashes, and the like,
 and are of all the most pernicious; they first get in under the Nails of the Toes, and from thence run over all the Body, but especially the bottoms of the Feet, where they first occasion an Itching, and then eat Holes through the Skin; they make Bli∣sters as big as Pease in the Flesh, wherein a swarm of young ones breeding, cause Ulcers and rotten Flesh, which must be eaten away with 
Aqua-fortis
 and burnt Allom.






SECT. XII. Eustathius.


EUstathius,
 which is rather a Mountain, rising out of the Ocean like a Sugar-Loaf, than an Island, lies at seventeen Degrees and forty Minutes: It hath scarce five Leagues in circumference, yet receiv'd some while since a Colo∣ny of above sixteen hundred People, sent thither from the 
States
 of the 
United Ne∣therlands,
 under the Command of the Lords 
Lampsen
 and 
Ree.
 Besides the natural Strength of the Place, whereby a few are able to keep off a great number, it is for∣tifi'd with a strong Fort, which Commands the Harbor. The Inhabitants are very industrious, and make great profit of the Tobacco which they Plant.


In the midst of this Island is a Mountain over-grown with Trees, which seems to end in a Point, and hath about it a pleasant Plain.


The abundance of Fowls, Hogs and Goats, afford the Inhabitants store of Pro∣visions; for their Store-houses are never so empty, but that they can supply their Neighbors Wants.


The want of fresh-water Brooks they supply with Rain-water, which they pre∣serve in Cisterns.


Though the Air of the Island be wholsom, and the Soil fruitful, yet it is subject to many great Inconveniences; for besides the terrible Thunder-claps and Earth∣quakes,

that rend the Ground,
 the Inhabitants are exceedingly troubled in 
August,
 and 
September
 with the Winds, which in twenty four hours blow from all Points of the Compass with such mighty Gusts, as if they would turn all things into their first 
Chaos.
 The 
Caribbeeans
 call these Tempests 
Hurricanes,
 which formerly us'd to happen but once in seven years, but of late every two years, and sometimes twice in a year. What damage these Winds cause is scarce to be express'd; the Sea rai∣sing its turbulent Waves up to the Skyes, casts the Ships on the Shore, which though in Harbor, are certain to be wrack'd, whilest the Land seems to labor under a ge∣neral Ruine, whole Woods being rooted up by the same, or at least bereav'd of Boughs and Leaves; the Corn is beaten down, the Plants blasted, Houses turn'd topsie-turvy, Mountains rent asunder, and sometimes pieces of Rocks blown into the Sea. Before the Hurricanes there are several fore-runners, which give notice of their sudden approach, 
viz.
 the Sea on a sudden is so calm, that the least motion is not perceiv'd; the Birds flye from the Mountains into the Valleys, where they lay themselves flat on the Ground; and the Rain which falls is bitter and salt.


Charles de Rochfort
 observ'd, that in his time some Ships laden with Tobacco be∣ing lost in a Hurricane before 
St. Christophers,
 soon after the Tempest ceased, thou∣sands of Fishes were seen swimming with their Bellies upwards, intoxicated no doubt with the Tobacco.






SECT. XIII. Antego.


BEtween 
Nevis
 and 
Montserrat,
 at sixteen Degrees and eleven Minutes, lies 
Antego,
 being seven Leagues long, and about six broad; It is dangerous to come at with great Ships, because of the many Rocks which lie before it, and remain'd the longer uninhabited, because of the want of fresh Water; yet at last the 
English
 taking possession of it, digg'd Pits, and made Troughs to catch and preserve Rain-water in, so that it is now inhabited by at least eight hundred Peo∣ple, who live on Plants, Venison, and Fish.


Upon the Sea-shore appears often-times the Sword-fish,
 which hath no Scales, but a grey Skin, and white Belly, rough like a Fyle, a flat Head, two Fins on each side, two on the Back, and one in stead of a Tail, with which it makes a swift mo∣tion: the Sword of it is a long Bone, arm'd on each side with twenty seven white and strong Teeth. This Fish striving to be Chief of the Sea, Encounters with all other Fishes whatsoever, even with the Whale himself, whose Belly he often rends open; near his Eyes are two Nostrils, out of which he blows the Water he drinks into the Air.






SECT. XIV. Montserrat.


MOntserrat,
 lying just at the seventeenth Degree, is so call'd from a 
Spanish
 Hill beyond 
Barcellona,
 whose shape this Island represents off at Sea; It is about three Leagues in length, and almost as much in breadth, and is very Mountainous, except a little towards the East, and as much Westward.


The 
English
 have a Church here, lin'd in the in-side with Cedar, which this Island produces in great abundance.




Also the 
Acajou
-Tree, which grows an exceeding heighth,
 with mighty Boughs, under which many judge it very wholsom to sleep: But there are two sorts of the 
Acajou
-Tree, the one differing from the other in tallness of Body and Colour; of which the most esteem'd is the red and sweet-smelling, which is not subject to any decay; for that which is white, and yields Gum when cut, is of a less value.


The 
Acomas
 is also no way inferior in bigness to the 
Acajou,
 which bears long swarthy Leaves, and yellow Fruit not unlike a Plumb; but because of their extra∣ordinary bitterness they are not eatable, onely the wild Pigeons at a certain time of the year feed on them, after which their Flesh becomes bitter also; from the Bark when cut, runs a milky Juice.


The Cypress-Trees when plan'd, yield a pleasant Marble colour to the Eye, and a delightful fragrance to the Scent.


The Iron-Tree, with sharp-pointed Leaves, crack'd near the Stalk, blossoms in 
March
 and 
September;
 after the Violet Blossoms follow a black kind of Fruit like a Cherry, being an excellent Food for Birds; the Wood whilst flourishing is red, but cut down changes its colour, yet is so hard that it never decays.


Moreover the Musk-Herb yields a sweet smell,
 and grows like Brambles with∣out Thorns; between long dusky Leaves hang yellow Flowers, which afterwards become Cods full of Seeds, that smell exactly like Musk.






SECT. XV. Guadalupe.


GUadalupe,
 or 
Gardelupe,
 formerly call'd 
Carricueira,
 lying at about sixteen De∣grees, and containing sixty Leagues in circumference (for it is the biggest and noblest of the 
Caribbee
 Islands,) is divided in two by a narrow Chan∣nel; wherefore one part is call'd 
Grand-Terre,
 and the other properly 
Guadalupe;
 whose Eastern Point, nam'd 
Cabes-Terre,
 and its Western, call'd 
Basse-Terre,
 are both inhabited by the 
French.


Several high Mountains, especially towards the Center,
 start up from very low Grounds, with their barren Crowns towards the Skye, some whereof are over∣grown with Trees.


At the Feet of some of the Mountains are large Plains, 
ter'd by sweet Streams which formerly invited the 
Spanish
 Fleets thither to water.


There is also a sulphurous Mountain, which smoaking continually gives the taste of Sulphur to the Streams which flow about the same.


This Island boasts likewise several boyling Springs which cure the Dropsie, and all other Distempers proceeding from Colds.


Towards each of the two fore-mention'd Points,
 are large Gulphs that produce abundance of Tortoises, and all manner of Fish, and amongst others one sort not known by Name, which is generally about four Foot long, having a sharp and big Head, with glittering Eyes, a Back streak'd with blue and green, and a Belly half white and half red, eight yellow Fins, and a broad Tail, with which it swims ex∣ceeding swift.


Near the Shore swim the Sharks, an ugly Sea Monster,
 which bites a Man asun∣der in the Middle at once; their Head is hard and prickly, their flat Mouthes open∣ing discover three rows of Teeth.


After this Fish swims generally the 
Pilot
-Fish,
 which is so curiously speckled, that Nature seems herein to excell what-ever can be represented by the

artificial Pencil) and move either swifter or slower, according as the Shark leads. The Brain of this Fish is judg'd exceeding good against the Gravel and Stone.


Guadalupe
 was first discover'd in the Year of our Lord 1635. by the 
French,
 under the Command of the Lords 
Du Plessis
 and 
De Olive,
 and after them one of the Cap∣tains of 
St. Christophers:
 Since which the Champain Ground being Till'd and Ma∣nur'd, brings forth in great plenty, Rice, 
Maiz, Manicock,
 and Potato's.


Father 
Raymond Breton
 got possession of the fruitfullest part of the Island for the Reformed 
Jacobines,
 or 
White-Fryers,
 and since the present Governor Monsieur 
De Howell
 sent also for the 
Jesuits
 and 
Carmelites,
 to build Cloysters in a new City, which lies in 
Basse-Terre,
 and which is also built full of Store-houses and Dwelling-houses two Stones high:


The Castle, which lies near the City, hath four Bulwarks, with great Guns.


The next neighboring Mountain is also crown'd with Garrison'd Fort.


The Countrey hereabouts bears 
Moubane
-Trees, which produce yellow oval Plumbs with great Stones, wherewith the Hogs are exceedingly fatned.


The 
Corbary,
 which grows higher than the 
Moubane,
 hath a hard shelly Fruit, in which lies a douny Pulp of a Saffron colour: The Gum which drops out of the Tree is hardned by the Sun, and becomes very clear, wherefore the 
Caribbeeans
 make use of it for Arm-rings, and other Ornaments.






SECT. XVI. Deseado.


TEn Leagues to the North-West of 
Guadalupe,
 and at sixteen Degrees and ten Minutes, appears 
Deseado,
 or 
Desirado,
 like a Galley, of which the North-East end hath a low Point; to the Northward lie Sand-Hills full of red Veins: It was so call'd by 
Christopher Columbus
 in his second Voyage, from obtain∣ing of his Desire, it being the first of the 
Caribbees
 which he discover'd, as 
St. Salva∣dor
 the first Land in all 
America.


The Soil is wholly barren, and destitute of Trees, and breeds the amphibious Creatures call'd 
Guano's,
 which in stead of Fins to swim withal, have four Feet; the biggest of them are fifteen Inches long; their Skin full of little Scales shines like Silver, and in the Night they make a loud and shrill noise from the Holes in the Rocks.


On this desolate Island are an innumerable company of Fowls, call'd 
Frigates,
 which have a Body like a Duck, but larger Wings, and flye swifter; so soon as they perceive a Fish in the Water, they falling upon the same, catch them in their Claws, and especially devour abundance of flying Fish.


But the 
Fauves,
 which are much leaner, are no way so swift; they resemble a Moor-Hen, have Feet like Ducks; Bills like a Snipe, and in rainy Nights rest on the Ships in stead of Rocks, so that many times they become an easie prey to the Mariners.






SECT. XVII. Marigalante.


NOt far from hence, at fifteen Degrees and forty Minutes, appears 
Marigalante,
 like a Wood in the Water.


On the South-East side, about half a League from the Shore, lie black 


full of white Specks. Westerly the Shore is very plain, whither the Governor Monsieur 
De Howell
 sent some People from that Island, of which twenty were kill'd by the 
Caribbeeans,
 who had Gardens and Fish-ponds thereon: Not long af∣ter which 
Howell
 built a Fort here, and Garrison'd the same with 
French
-men.


The Woods afford a delightful sight to the Eye, as also the Cinamon-Trees, whose Leaves never wither, a sweet smell to the Nose.


The Ocean hereabouts produces plenty of 
Lamantins,
 which are dry'd like Ha∣berdine. This Fish grows eighteen Foot long and seven thick; the Head thereof is like a Cows, with little Eyes, and a thick brown Skin, rough and speckled in some places, and hath two little Feet in stead of Fins; it feeds on Weeds, which grow on the Rocks and Banks; the Females bring two young ones at a time, which suck for some days; their Flesh palatable and wholsom, is streak'd with Fat, which when melted never putrifies; they are oftner taken in the Mouthes of Rivers than in the Ocean.


About this Isle, as well as the rest of the 
Caribbees,
 are Fishes call'd 
Sea-Devils,
 four Foot long, and proportionably thick, their Skins rough, their Heads flat, their Backs arm'd with Prickles, little black Eyes, wide Mouthes full of Teeth, and two Tusks that stick out of the same, four Fins, a long slit Tail, with which they swim exceeding swift, above their Eyes stick broad sharp Horns turn'd towards the Back; the Flesh is deadly poyson.


The 
Becune,
 which is eight Foot long, falls upon a Fish like a mad Dog, biting great pieces of the Flesh out of the Body, which occasions present Death; its Flesh is likewise poyson.






SECT. XVIII. Todos Sanctos.


SOuthward from 
Guadalupe,
 and at the same Latitude with 
Marigalante,
 lie four desolate Isles, call'd 
Todos Sanctos,
 and on their Shores a sort of Shell-fish call'd 
Lambis,
 from the resemblance of a Tongue;
 the Shells whereof the 
Indians
 Sound in stead of Horns when they give an Alarm; as also another sort call'd 
Por∣celenes,
 of which the most esteem'd are without of a Carnation, and within of a Silver, or Skye-colour mix'd with Golden Beams. The next are the Black, mix'd with a pale Blue, and little Veins. But the most remarkable Shells are those, whose Back Nature hath mark'd in such a manner with Musical Notes, that one might almost express a Tune by them.


Moreover, it would amaze the Beholder, to see the Mother-of-Pearl Oyster mo∣ving at the Foot of a Rock; for at the Rising of the Sun they appear above the Wa∣ter, and gape for the Dew, of which they have no sooner receiv'd a Drop, but they close their Shells, and fall to the Ground again.






SECT. XIX. De Aves.


VVEstward from 
Todos Sanctos,
 at fifteen Degrees and forty five Minutes, lies the Isle 
De Aves.


Besides Ducks, Pluvers, Moor-hens; Geese, and the like Fowls (that suffer themselves to be catch'd by the Hands of Men, which are very strange

to them) there are here also many rare sorts of Birds, as the white Birds call'd 
Aigrettos,
 which are somewhat bigger than Crows, with red Bills and Feet, and curious Plumes on their Heads; they often flye a great way off at Sea.


The large Bird call'd 
The Craw-fowl,
 which feeds on Fish, hath a thick Head, a long flat Bill, hollow Eyes, and a short Neck, under which hangs the Maw, big enough to contain a Pail full of Water: On the Trees along the Sea-side they watch for Fish which swim near the top of the Water, and by their attentiveness on their Prey, are easily shot themselves.


Here is likewise the Bird 
Arras,
 of the bigness of a Pheasant, but more resem∣bling a Parraquito: their long Tail consists of divers colour'd Feathers, some have shining skye-colour'd Heads, Backs, and Necks, their Bellies and Wings of a pale Yellow; they are so stout, or rather so simple, that if they are not hit with the first Shot, they will stay for a second: They also learn to talk, but not so di∣stinctly as the 
Canides,
 which are no way inferior in beauty to the 
Arras,
 nay exceed them very much: Monsieur 
du Montell
 above mention'd, seeing one at 
Corassao,
 de∣scribes it after this manner:


It deserves to be numbred (saith he) amongst the most beautiful Birds in the World: I took so particular notice of it, having had of them in my Hands ma∣ny times, that I have the Idea's of it still fresh in my Memory. Under the Belly, Wings, and Neck, it was of a waving 
Aurora
-colour, the Back, and one half of the Wings, of a very bright Skye-colour, the Tail and greater Feathers of the Wings were mix'd with a sparkling Carnation, diversifi'd with a Skye-colour, as upon the Back a Grass-green and shining Black, which very much added to the Gold and Azure of the other Plumage: But the most beautiful part was the Head, cover'd with a Murrey Doun, checquer'd with Green, Yellow, and a pale Blue, which reach'd down wavingly to the Back: The Eye-lids were white, and the Apple of the Eye yellow and red as a Ruby Set in Gold: It had upon the Head a certain Tuft or Cap of Feathers of a Vermilion Red, sparkling like a lighted Coal, which was encompass'd by several other lesser Feathers of a Pearl∣colour.


If it were recommendable for all these extraordinary Ornaments, it was much more for its Familiarity and Innocency; for though it had a crooked Beak, and that the Claws with which it held its Meat and brought it to its Beak, were so sharp as to take away whatsoever it fastned upon, yet was it so tame as to play with little Children and never hurt them; and when one took him into his Hand, he so contracted his Claws, that the sharpness of them could not be felt: He had this Quality of a Dog, That he would Lick with his short and thick Tongue those who made much of him and gave him something he lik'd, put his Head to their Cheeks to Kiss and Caress them, and expressing his Acknowledgments by a thousand pretty Insinuations, he would suffer himself to be put into what po∣sture one would, and took a certain pleasure in diverting those he thought his Friends: But as he was mild and traceable to those who were kind to him, so was he mischievous and irreconcileable to such as had injur'd him, and he could distinguish them from others, and make them feel the sharpness of his Beak and Claws.


He pratled in the 
Dutch, Spanish,
 and 
Indian
 Languages, and in the last he sung Airs as a natural 
Indian:
 He also imitated the Cries of all sorts of Poultrey and other Creatures about the House; he call'd all his Friends by their Names and Sir∣names, flew to them as soon as he saw them, especially when he was hungry; if they had been absent, and that he had not seen them a long time, he express'd

his joy at their return by certain merry Notes; when he had sported himself till they were weary of him, he went away, and perch'd himself on the top of the House, and there he talk'd, sung, and play'd a thousand tricks, laying his Fea∣thers in order, and dressing and cleaning himself with his Beak. He was easily kept; for not onely the Bread commonly us'd in that Island, but all the Fruits and Roots growing there, were his ordinary Food; and when he had more gi∣ven him than he needed, he carefully laid up the remainder under the Leaves wherewith the House was cover'd, and took it when he had need. In a word, I never saw a more loving or more amiable Bird; 'twas a Present for any Prince, if he could have been brought over the Sea. This Bird had been brought from the 
Caribbee
 Islands to Monsieur 
Rodenborck,
 then Governor of the Fort and 
Dutch
 Colony, which is in the Island of 
Corassao.






SECT. XX. Dominico.


AT fifteen Degrees and thirteen Minutes, lies the Island 
Dominico,
 so call'd be∣cause it was discover'd on a 
Sunday,
 about thirty Leagues long, and not much less in breadth, and diversifi'd with high Mountains, and exceeding deep Valleys; of which the 
Caribbeeans
 that dwell there relate, That formerly in one of the deepest of them, a huge and monstrous Serpent had an Army of Ser∣pents to defend an invaluable Carbuncle which he had in his Head; which being cover'd with a thin Skin, was onely discernable when he drank or play'd, for then the lustre thereof lightned the whole Valley.


When first the 
French
 approach'd this Coast with their Ships, the Islanders go∣ing Aboard in their 
Canoos,
 bartered Provisions for Coral, Crystal, and other Trifles.


On this Isle also grows the famous 
Manchenile
-Tree, which bears long Leaves, and sweet smelling Fruit, streak'd red, and tasting like a Hazle-Nut, but bringing a deadly Sleep upon those that ea
 of it; it seldom rots though it fall into the Sea, or any fresh Rivers, but is crusted over with a Shell resembling Salt-petre, and poy∣sons the Water in such a manner, that all the Fish dying, are seen floating upon it; in the Trunk and Boughs thereof is a milky Juice, which dropping upon the Body, causes it to break out in Scabs, and if it chances to touch the Eyes, it takes away the Sight for nine days: and not less hurtful is the Moisture which drops from the Tree.


The 
Caribbeeans
 dip their Arrows in this poysonous Juice, against which Nature hath provided an excellent Medicine, being as followeth:


There are amongst the other Reptiles of 
America
 a sort of Snails, which creep into the Legs of dead Crabs, to keep themselves from the Weather; when taken they make a noise, and being laid before the Fire they come forth; the Water squeez'd out of them, or the Oyl drawn from them by the Sun, cures the Parts poyson'd by the 
Manchenile
-Tree.








SECT. XXI. Martinico.


OPposite to 
Dominico
 lies 
Martinico,
 by the 
Indians
 nam'd 
Matunina,
 which lying at fourteen Degrees and thirty Scruples, is forty five Leagues in circumference; It appears at a distance like three Mountains, the highest whereof resembles a Hat, and is seen in all parts of the Island, which, on the North where three Rocks deny access for Landing, seems to be divided into three Isles.


The 
Caribbeeans
 have been forc'd, after many bloody Battels, to surrender up this Island to the 
French:
 But before they were well setled, the 
Caribbeeans
 marching over exceeding high Mountains, deep Concavities, and thick Woods, fell upon them with all the Rage imaginable: the Reasons of which some attribute to 
Du Parquet,
 who in prejudice of the 
Martinican Caribbeeans,
 sent 
French
-men over to 
Gra∣nada
 and 
Alouzia:
 others suppose, that they took up Arms to revenge the Death of their Countrey-men on St. 
Vincent,
 who were destroy'd by the 
French
 with poyson'd Brandy. But the 
French
 furnish'd with new Supplies, took sufficient Revenge; for they drove the 
Caribbeeans
 out of their Houses, and chac'd them into Woods and Deserts.


The Hills that are over-grown with Trees, are Receptacles for wild Beasts, especially Hogs and Serpents. The other Hills are Till'd and Sow'n, though not without great trouble.


The Tobacco which grows on the steep Ascents much exceeds that which grows in the Valleys, or in the Tracts of Land shaded with Trees.


Since the 
French, Anno
 1635. (being sent from 
St. Christophers
 by the Lord 
Des∣nambuc
) Setled themselves on this Island, under the Command of his Deputy 
Du Pont,
 they divided it into five Wards, separated from that part of the Isle which was inhabited by the antient Natives: Each Ward hath a Church, or at least a Chappel, Armory, Store-houses, and Dwelling-houses, like an intire Village.


The first Ward is call'd 
Pyloot,
 from a 
Caribbeean
 Captain, who was very familiar with 
Du Parquet,
 and inform'd him of his Peoples Designs.


The second, nam'd 
Capot,
 is wash'd by a River of the same Denomination, and hath many fruitful Plains.


The third retains the 
Caribbeean
 Name, being 
Carbet,
 signifying a Publick Stru∣cture, to which they us'd to resort to Feast, or hold Councils of War; not far from which the Governor dwelt in a Stone House: Near the Harbor stood also an Ar∣mory in a Valley, water'd by a fresh River which falls out of the Mountains, shaded with Trees and Gardens full of Rarities: But since the Governor gave this and many other fair Buildings to the 
Jesuits,
 he remov'd to the fourth Ward, call'd 
St. Peter,
 where he built a Castle, and furnish'd the same with Brass and Iron Guns to defend the Harbor.


A Stones-throw from the Governor's House lies the 
Jesuits
 Cloyster, on the Banks of a pleasant Stream, built very artificially of Marble and Free-stone, and having a pleasant Prospect over the River, and adjacent Gardens, beautifi'd with the choicest of Flowers, Fruits, and Trees; and also a Vineyard, out of which they press a considerable quantity of Wine.


The last Ward, call'd 
Preacheur,
 extends East and West, some parts whereof swell into high Mountains, at the Feet whereof stand fair Structures; others sink into low Valleys or 
Savannas.








map of Barbados


Novissima et Acuratissima BARBADOS. DESCRIPTIO per JOHANNEM OGILUIUM. Cosm ographum Regium








Between the 
French
 Settlements and the 
Caribbeeans,
 runs an Arm of the Sea, along whose Shores grows abundance of the 
Mahot
-Tree, which is full of Boughs from the top down to the Ground. The Bark of this Tree serves in stead of Ropes, and is also us'd to tie up Tobacco; the Wood it self is durable, and good for Building, wherefore most of the Houses built on Hills are of this Timber.


The best Harbor for Ships is between the Wards 
Carbet
 and 
St. Peter,
 defended from the Winds by high Hills.


Not far from the Inlet of the Salt-pits, appears about half a League off at Sea, a Rock call'd 
The Diamond,
 being a Receptacle for an innumerable multitude of Birds, and especially wild Pigeons.


Besides the Streams that in the rainy Seasons run through the Dales and 
Sa∣vana's,
 there are ten Rivers, which falling from the Mountains, glide through the Valleys into the Sea. Sometimes they swell in such a manner, that over-flowing their Banks, they wash down the Trees and Houses; which Inconvenience hath taught the 
French
 to build their Houses on Hills or rising Grounds.


The good Situation of this Island hath invited many Families thither.






SECT. XXII. St. Lucia.


ST. Lucia
 (by the 
French, Alouzie
) is so call'd because it was discover'd on the thirteenth of 
December,
 Dedicated in the Kalendar to the Virgin Martyr 
Lucia,
 who was burnt at 
Syracuse:
 It lies Southerly from 
Dominico
 at thirteen De∣grees and forty Minutes, and is ken'd at a great distance by two fiery Mountains; the most Easterly of which is higher than the other.


At the Feet of these two Mountains lie pleasant Valleys, shadow'd by close Woods, and moistned by clear Springs; near which heretofore a small number of 
Caribbeeans
 dwelling, maintain'd themselves with Fishing; they went stark naked, and painted their Bodies with red Oker, and drew a Vermilion Stroke from their Ears to their Noses.


An 
English
 Ship sent to 
Guinee
 to supply the Plantations there, Landed sixty six mutinous Persons here, who were all kill'd by the Inhabitants; but when 
Henry Jacobson Lucifer
 putting into the Bay of 
Lucia
 to Water there, 
Anno
 1627. Landed to discover the Island, he found neither Man nor House, nor any thing but a barren Soil; yet notwithstanding 
Du Parquet
 sent his Deputy 
Rosselan
 with a Colony to Plant in this Island.






SECT. XXIII. Barbados.


THe Island 
Barbados,
 which was Planted by the 
English, Anno
 1627. lies be∣tween thirteen and fourteen Degrees, and hath twenty five Leagues in circumference, and somewhat more in length than breadth, and is supply'd with a fresh-Water River, and several Pools. The Ground being fruitful in the producing of Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, and especially Sugar, invited many Peo∣ple to Settle there, insomuch that in a short time it could shew twenty thousand Inhabitants besides 
Negro
 Slaves.


The Trees which grow on this Island, are not onely delightful, but profitable;

amongst which the 
Roucou
 is one, with sharp Leaves, white Carnation Flowers like Stars, which hang by Clusters at the end of the Boughs, and after a while turn to a Cod full of vermilion Kernels: The Juice dry'd in the Sun and kneaded into Balls, is of a great value. Of the Bark of this Tree they make strong Ropes; and the Root is very wholsom, and of a pleasant taste.


Moreover, amongst the Insects that breed here, there are a sort of Flyes worthy of a short Description; the 
Caribbeeans
 call them 
Cayouyou,
 being about the bigness of a Beetle; they have two strong Wings, and under them thinner, which they ne∣ver spread abroad but when they flye, and then they carry such a lustre in them, that they give as much Light in the Night as a lighted Candle, (their Eyes also at the same time glittering like Fire) making no noise when they flye; they feed on the Juice of Flowers, and are so smooth, that they are very apt to slip through ones Fingers, and when they find themselves to be taken, they hide their glittering Wings under the other.


The 
Indians
 tie these Flies to their Hands and Feet, so to have the benefit of their Light in the Night; and anoint their Bodies all over (at certain Solemnities where∣in Candles are forbidden) with the Juice squeez'd out of them, which causes them to shine like a Flame of Fire: They catch them with a piece of Wood which they move in the Air, whereupon the Flyes going to sit, are taken with a Hat; but their Light vanishes if they are kill'd.


But as to what may farther be added concerning this Island, being one of the chief of our Plantations, we cannot better satisfie the curiosity of those who desire a true Information of all things that concern that Place, than by inserting 
verbatim
 a Letter from an intelligent Person who hath been long resident there, 
viz.
 Colonel 
Robert Rich,
 of no older Date than 
May
 31. 1670. by which the present State and Condition of the Island, the Buildings and other Improvements made there by the Planters since they first possess'd it, in what Commodities of the Growth of the Countrey their chief Trade consists, their Strength, 
Militia,
 Government, and flou∣rishing Commerce, and what-ever else is material to be imparted, may be clearly understood.




SIR,


I
 Have lately seen your 
Proposal
 concerning an 
English Atlas,
 and having read Dr. 
Hey∣lin
's Book of Chorography and History of the whole World, his third Edition Corrected and Enlarged, Printed 
Anno 1666.
 1 find him very short and erroneous in his Description of the 
Caribbee
 Islands, especially of this Island of 
Barbados,
 wherein I have been an Inhabi∣tant more than eleven years. He saith,


1. The Island is seventeen or eighteen Miles in compass.


2. On the South 'tis furnish'd with a large and commodious Harbor.


3. The chief Commodities are Tobacco, and a kind of course Sugar, call'd
 Bar∣bados Sugar, 
which must be quickly spent, or 'twill melt to nothing.


4. That this Island is worth all the Plantations made by the
 English, 
and yet that we hold it at the Courtesie of the
 Spaniard, 
without whose Leave and Liking, not of Force to hold it.


This Description of Dr. 
Heylin
's, in it self very false, is also much to the Dishonor of the 
English
 Nation, which makes me presume to trouble you with my own Observations, wherein ha∣ving onely aim'd at the Truth, you shall not have cause to doubt of being misguided.


This Island of 
Barbados
 is seated in thirteen Degrees and twenty Minutes, in longth twenty two Miles, and in breadth fourteen and an half; It is na
urally fortifi'd with Rocks and Shoals on the North and East side of it, where no Ship may safely Anchor, onely in two or three places

small Boats may go out and in to Fish. On the South-East and Westerly part, it is all along a Road where Ships may Ride at Anchor, but more especially in four chief Places, Roads and Bays thereof.


The principal Road or Bay is call'd 
Carlisle Bay,
 and lieth on the South-West part of the Island near its Center, and is a good Road, where five hundred Ships of any Burthen may Ride safely from all but South and Westerly Winds, which seldom in these Parts happen, they ge∣nerally blowing Easterly, whence it is that we call the East parts 
Windward,
 and the West parts 
Leeward.
 Here lies also the chief Town for Trade, call'd formerly the 
Bridge-Town,
 but now 
St. Michaels,
 and having two Forts, answering each other, and a Platform between, which Commands the Road, and Defends the Town; the first and chiefest Fort is call'd 
Charles Fort,
 standing on 
Nedhams Point,
 lying out in the Sea to Windward of the Bay and Town, so that an Enemy keeping out of Command of this Fort, cannot (probably) come to do the Ships or the Town injury, for that they must come full in or against the Wind. This Fort is built strong with Stone and Lime; the Platform joyns to the Windward part of the Town; also the other Fort joyns to the Leeward part of the Town, all which are well fortifi'd and stor'd with great Guns. The Town consists of several Streets and Lanes, being about thirty Chain in length, and fif∣teen in breadth, and hath many fair and large Buildings, whereof the most are of Stone and Lime.


The second Road and Town is lately call'd 
Charles-Town,
 situate on 
Oysters-Bay,
 and lies about two Leagues to Windward of 
St. Michaels,
 having also two Forts and one Platform; the two Forts stand the one to Windward, and the other to Leeward of the Town and Road, and the Platform in the middle, all well furnish'd with great Guns. And although this Town be not a Place of much Resort for Shipping, yet here are many considerable Store-houses for Trade, wherein Monethly are kept the Court of 
Common-Pleas
 for that Precinct, and Weekly Markets.


The third Road and Town is lately call'd 
St. James's,
 formerly the 
Hall,
 and is about two Leagues to the Leeward of 
St. Michaels,
 hath one very large Platform, and is otherwise well for∣tifi'd with Breast-works; and although few Ships come to Ride here, yet in this Town is main∣tain'd a great Trade with the Inhabitants adjacent; here also is kept Monethly the Court of 
Com∣mon-Pleas
 for this Precinct.


The fourth Road and Town is lately call'd 
Little Bristol,
 but formerly 
Sprights-Bay,
 which lieth about four Leagues to Leeward of 
St. Michaels,
 and hath two Forts well built, and strongly fortifi'd. To this Place come many Ships, especially from the City of 
Bristol,
 the which here Ride, unload and re-load, it being the next greatest Place of Repute to 
St. Michaels
 in the whose Island.


This Island is divided into eleven Parishes, and hath in it fourteen Churches and Chappels, and being subdivided into divers Plantations, small and great, hath Sugar-works accordingly, with fair and large Buildings made of Stone and Brick, the which generally are pleasant Habi∣tations, and delightfully situated, most having pleasant Prospects to the Sea and Land.


The Inhabitants of this Island are 
English, Scotch,
 and 
Irish,
 and some, but very few of the 
Dutch
 and 
French
 Nation, who formerly liv'd here a time of Servitude, and now dwell as Free-men, some by their Trades, and others on Plantations; also some few 
Jews
 live here and Trade as Merchants, they having obtain'd Licence from Hit Majesty so to do; besides 
Mulat∣to's
 and 
Negro's
 which are here kept, and accounted for Slaves, the number of which some years since, upon search, were found to be sixty thousand Persons, 
viz.
 forty thousand 
Whites,
 and twenty thousand 
Blacks.


The standing 
Militia
 of this Island that are in readiness to meet together on all occasions, and which at other times are often and well Disciplin'd, consist of two Regiments of Horse, and five Regiments of Foot, wherein several Companies have near two hundred in a Company, and in some Troops more than a hundred Horse in a Troop; by all which you may easily apprehend how little of truth there is in that Saying, 
That we hold this Island at the Courtesie of the Spani∣ards,
 when those few 
English
 in 
Jamaica
 give the 
Spaniards
 such work to defend themselves.




The Growth and Manufacture of this Island and parts adjacent, is Sugars of all sorts, 
viz. Muscovado,
 Clay'd, and Refin'd; (I suppose I have seen here as good Sugar made as any is in the World) Gingers, Indico, and Cotton-wool; also Tobacco, Logwood, 
Fustick,
 green and yellow, and 
Lignum-vitae:
 Of these four last heretofore much, but now no quantities to be had in this Island, onely to the Leeward great store. The first four mention'd Commodities receive prejudice to their Product by abundance of Rains or Droughts not happening in their proper Seasons: also violent Winds lodge the Sugar-Canes, thereby the quantity and goodness is lessned. The chief time for Expectation is from 
January
 to 
September,
 when comes in the wet Season, that makes the Roads not Cartable, and usually puts an end to Making and Transportation of them. We have two Crops of Corn in a year, Planted usually when the Rains first come in, in 
May
 and 
November,
 which is gather'd in about 
October,
 and in 
March
 and 
April
 following. Wines of all sorts are here Imported, but of 
Portuguese
 and 
French
 the greatest quantities, 
viz.
 of 
Madera,
 upwards of fifteen hundred Tun yearly; of 
Spanish,
 upward of two hundred Tun; of 
French-Wines,
 upward of seven hundred Tun; besides Brandy and 
English
 Spirits; but of these latter now no great quantities Imported or spent, by reason of the general use of the Spirit of Sugar-Cane, call'd 
Rum,
 which the meaner sort, as Servants and Slaves, do not onely drink in great abundance, but much also is hence Transported into 
Virginia, Bermudas,
 and 
New-England.
 Here is also Imported great store of Provisions of all sorts, 
viz.
 Beef, Pork, Fish, 
&c.
 from 
Ireland, New-England, Virginia, Bermudas, New-found Land,
 &c. also Pease, Flour, Butter, Cheese, and Bisquet; likewise Timber, Boards, Pipe and Hogshead, Staves, 
&c.
 also 
Negro
-Slaves from 
Guinee,
 and live Cattel, as Bulls, Cows, 
Asinego's,
 and Horses, from the 
Cape de Verd
 Island, 
New-England;
 and from 
England,
 Servants, and all other Commodities for Plantations, and for Apparel; of all which great quantities are hither brought and sold.


The Shipping that comes to Trade to this Island belongs generally to 
England;
 some few Vessels are here built, and pass to and fro to the Leeward Islands; and some belong to 
New-England, Bermudas,
 &c. The number of Vessels which come hither to Trade in one year is found upon search to be about two hundred of all sorts, (some years more, some less) as Ketches, Sloops, Barques, &c. containing in Burthen fifteen thousand five hundred and five Tun, accord∣ing as they were here Entred, which is at the least a third part less than their true Burthen, by reason every Ship pays one pound of Powder 
per
 Tun, the means ordain'd by this Country for storing the Magazine; the greatest part of which Ships re-load with Sugars for 
England,
 and many go for 
New-England, Bermudas, Virginia, Tangier,
 &c. not always full loaden with this Countreys Growth. The usual Rate for Tunnage from hence to 
London,
 is from 
4 l.
 to 
5 l. per
 Tun; sometime when Ships are very plentiful, it is at 
3 l.
 and less, and at other times when scarce, from 
6 l.
 to 
7 l.
 in the late War with the 
Dutch,
 it was at 
10. 11.
 and 
12 l. per
 Tun.


The Government is Constituted by the Laws of 
England,
 and Laws not repugnant to them, onely some particular Laws are here made, proper for this Place, by the Governor (or Deputy) and his Council, (which usually are from seven to twelve in number) and an Assembly that consists of twenty two Persons, chosen by the Free-holders, two out of every Parish.








SECT. XXIV. St. Vincent.


THe Island of 
St. Vincent,
 South-West from 
St. Lucia,
 and having sixteen De∣grees of North-Latitude, was so call'd by the 
Spaniards,
 as having disco∣ver'd it on that Saint's Day, being the fifth of 
April:
 It is accounted eight Leagues long and six broad, and rises round about with high Grounds and several Mountains, which are seen at a great distance.




This Island hath a very fruitful Soil, and for the bigness of it hath been long since well peopled with 
Caribbeeans
 before the arrival of the 
Spaniards,
 possessing here several. Villages, to whom they are still sworn Enemies, but Truck'd with the 
Hollanders
 for Provisions, Horns, Axes, Knives, and other Trifles. At the West and South sides are convenient Bays to lie at Anchor and take Water in.


The Inhabitants highly esteem the 
Momen,
 growing to the bigness of an Apple-Tree; the Fruit which it bears resembles a green Cucumber, and is of a pleasant Juice, the Skin always green and prickly; the Seed which is in the same about the bigness of a 
French
 Bean, is generally black, and streak'd with Golden-colour'd Veins.


Here is also that Plant mention'd elsewhere, by the 
Spaniard
 call'd 
Granadilla,
 by the 
Dutch Rhang-Apple,
 and 
La Fleur de la Passion
 by the 
French;
 and it is so call'd, as being fancied to represent the thorny Crown of our 
Saviour,
 together with the Cross, Nails, Hammer and Pillar; the Plant runs along the Ground, unless it meet with a Pole by which it runs up.






SECT. XXV. Bekia.


NOt far from 
St. Vincent
 lies the Island 
Bekia,
 which reckons twelves Leagues in circumference, and lies at twelve Degrees and twelve Scruples of Nor∣thern Latitude: It hath a secure Harbor against all Winds; but because it is without fresh Water, is is onely frequented by the 
Caribbeeans
 that dwell on 
St. Vincent,
 who come hither to Fish, and visit certain little Gardens which they have there for their pleasure.


The Soil produces store of Water-melons, whose red juicy Pulp yields, when squeez'd, a great quantity of sweet Liquor, which is very refreshing, and good to create an Appetite; their white Flowers, notch'd at the end of the Leaves, afford a delightful smell.


Anno
 1633. Captain 
John Johnson Van Hoorn
 putting in to 
Bekia
 to catch Tortoises, found a fine Inlet on the West, and Eastward a Ridge of Rocks, Cotton growing wild in the Fields, and upon the Shore a kind of Snails call'd 
Burgun,
 under whose first Shell appear'd another of a Silver colour with black Specks.






SECT. XXVI. Granada.


GRanada,
 lying at twelve Degrees and sixteen Scruples, like a Half-moon, from the North to the South, is full of Woods. Towards the South-West runs a fresh River into the Sea. The Shore very low affords good Anchorage at twelve Leagues distance. The Current grows exceeding strong here, and the Water also ebbs and flows in a few hours. 
Dirick Simonszoon Witgeest
 Sailing from 
Tobago,
 was amaz'd to see with what force the Current drove him to 
Granada.


Hither 
Du Parquet
 at his own Charge sent three hundred Men from 
Martinico,
 who scuffled with the Inhabitants six Moneths before they could possess the same in Peace; and scarce had they obtain'd it at last, but by telling them that the 
French
 Assistance would be very advantageous unto them against the 
Arovages.


The Duke 
Seryllac
 in 
Paris
 inform'd of the Fertility of this Island, bought it

of 
Du Parquet
 for a considerable Sum of Money: And inded 
Granada
 is none of the meanest of the 
Caribbees,
 the Soil producing very good both Fruit and Timber-Trees, amongst which is the 
Latine
-Tree, of a tall Body, but ordinary thickness, and in stead of Boughs, hang Leaves like Fans in long Stalks, which being ty'd toge∣ther, serve for Roofs of Houses.


There is also the Tree 
Cocoa,
 which yet grows not so high here as in other parts of the 
West-Indies.






SECT. XXVII. Tabago.


THe next which comes in view is 
Tabago,
 (so call'd, as some think, from the quantity of that Drug there Planted) eight Leagues long and four broad, lying in the eleventh Degree and sixteen Minutes of Northern Latitude, and hath many high Mountains full of Wood, out of which glide eighteen Streams, which watering the Plains fall into the Sea.


Captain 
Vitgeest
 coming to an Anchor here, found a convenient Inlet on the East, and fresh Water to fill his Casks. Half a League from the Shore rise five Rocks, through which he Sail'd with his Ships. Within the Cliff opens a Bay, in∣to which runs a River well stor'd with Fish. More Westerly lies a larger Inlet, which receives two delightful Streams. From the Western Promontory runs also a Cliff Northward into the Sea.


This Island is easily known by high Coasts which rife on the East side, and so grows lower by degrees. It is likewise made pleasant by many Walks of Trees.


The Sea produces abundance of those sorts of Fish which are common amongst us, besides Tortoises, that lay their Eggs in the Sand.


The Cra-fish thereabouts are not much unlike Lobsters,
 have white and well tasted Flesh, but hard to digest; they catch them in the Night on sandy Shelves with lighted Torches.


The Crabs get their Food very wonderfully here;
 for when they observe the Mussles or Oysters to Gape for fresh Air, they put Stones between their Shells, so that they not being able to shut them, they pull out the Fish with their Claws.


The Woods feed an innumerable company of Beasts somewhat resembling Hogs, (whose Navels are on their Backs) 
Opassums, Javaris's,
 and 
Tatows,
 as also the 
Agoutys's
 and 
Musk-Rats.


The 
Agoutys's
 are of a dark brown colour,
 and have little Tails, two Teeth in their upper, and as many in their lower Jaw; they make a noise as if they spoke, crying 
Couye;
 if hunted by Dogs, they run into hollow Trees, out of which they are routed by Smoak.


The great 
Musk-Rats
 are as big as a Rabbet,
 and like them live in Holes made in the Ground, but resemble an 
European
 Rat, onely their Skins are black, except one part of their Bellies which are white; they smell so strong of Musk, that it over∣comes those that carry them.


Amongst the Brambles breed also Serpents of a green colour,
 two yards long, and an Inch thick, feeding on Locusts and Birds, which they take in their Nests, but do no hurt to Mankind.


But 
Tobago
 boasts chiefly of the 
Sassafras
-Tree, which resembles the Pine-Tree, hath a firm and streight Body, and on the top Boughs spread like a Crown, the Bark of a dark colour and smooth, and smelling very sweet; the Leaves thin, notch'd,





 and of a deep Green, have also a delicate smell; the thinnest Roots appear above the Ground, and are exceeding good to cure green Wounds, stoppings and shortness of Breath occasion'd by Colds.


The Tobacco, by the 
Caribbeeans
 call'd 
Y-ouli,
 Planted among the Fruit-Trees, grows very plentifully here; it shoots up from a stringy Root, bitter of taste, with a thick Stalk, which shoots out Boughs with great Leaves, woolly underneath, and bears a kind of Violet Flower, which when dry'd, are succeeded by little Cods full of black Seed; and to prevent the over-growing of it, they cut off the top of the main Stalk.


The Bird 
Colibry,
 which is exceeding beautiful, makes his Nest under the Tobacco-Leaves.


A company of Townsmen of 
Walcheren,
 having a Grant from the 
States
 of the 
United Provinces,
 sent a Colony to 
Tabago;
 but they being scarce two hundred in all, were for the most part destroy'd by the 
Caribbeeans;
 the rest weak or sickly, fearing the same Entertainment, sought to save themselves; so that the Island has not for∣merly been frequented but by the 
French
 from 
Martinico,
 and 
Guadalupe,
 who for some time came over onely to catch Turtles and 
Lamantins
 there.


The 
Caribbeeans
 also either in their March against, or Return from the 
Arovages,
 Landed here for necessary Provisions; But of late the Lord 
Lampsen
 hath Setled a Plantation in this desolate Island.






SECT. XXII. St. Christophers.


ST. Christophers,
 a pretty distance from 
Tobago,
 receiv'd its Denomination from 
Christopher Columbus,
 invited thereto by the shape of a great Mountain, having as it were another lesser on one of its Shoulders, being fancy'd to represent the Figure of the suppos'd Giant 
Christopher,
 who is reported to have carry'd our

Saviour
 in the appearance of a little Child on his Shoulders through a deep Sea.


This Island lying seventeen Degrees and twenty five Minutes Northward of the 
Equinoctial Line,
 hath twenty five Leagues in circumference.


The Soil light and sandy, refuses not the production of divers sorts of Fruits common amongst us.


In the middle of the Island rises a high Mountain, out of which run fresh Streams, that sometimes swell so high with sudden Rains, that they drown all the Countrey near them.


This Island being jointly the Plantation of both 
English
 and 
French,
 was divided into four Wards, two whereof have been long since in possession of the 
French,
 and the other two in possession of the 
English,
 strangely divided one from another; for the 
English
 in one Ward cannot go to the other without troubling the 
French;
 and so on the contrary: the 
English
 have more Rivers and People, the 
French
 more plain Land, fitter for Cultivation, and Forts furnish'd with Guns and Soldiers. At the Entrances of the Paths which lead into the several Wards stand Watch-houses, where Sentinels, or Watch-men stand daily in their turns.


In a Bay of the Sea they found a brave Salt-pit, from whence a sandy Cliff runs so far into the Ocean, a that some have swum from the end thereof over to the Island 
Nevis.


A Silver Mine hath been long since discover'd on this Island, in which the 
Eng∣lish
 and 
French
 claim equal Interest, but neither Party make any benefit of it for want of Miners.


The high Mountains, the Springs of boyling sulphurous Water, and brambly Woods, hinder all passage through the middle of the Island: The Ground runs more and more sloaping to the Sea-side, and is divided into several High-ways, along which stand convenient Houses, cover'd with red or glaz'd Slate, shaded with Trees, and environ'd with pleasant Gardens, to which there is a delightful Prospect from the Fields, of the green Tobacco-Leaves, the yellow Sugar-Canes, Ginger, and Potato's.


Besides the scatter'd Buildings, the 
French
 have built a compleat Town near the convenientest Harbor of their Quarter, call'd 
Basse-Terre,
 where the Merchants dwell in fair Houses built of Brick and Free-stone; whither all sorts of People bring their Commodities, and Truck their 
European
 Goods for such as 
St. Christo∣phers
 produceth. All manner of Trades and Handicrafts live also in this Town, and a Court of Judicature is kept every Week. Tde Church built of Free-stone, is cover'd with the aforesaid red Slate, and was formerly Govern'd by the 
Capuchins;
 but they being dismiss'd 
Anno
 1646. the Government was given to the 
Jesuits
 and 
Carmelites;
 who also built themselves other stately Edifices: but the Jesuit 
Henrick du Vivier
 was the first whobore the chiefest Command over all.


The Sick that have not sufficient Means to maintain them, have an Hospital ap∣pointed, where all Necessaries are provided for them; and to which is added a School for the bringing up of poor Children.


But the chiefest Structure is the Castle, on the building whereof the Lord 
Poincy
 spar'd no Cost; it is built half a 
French
 Mile from the Sea at the Foot of a high Mountain, shadowed with great Trees. In the Way thither stand the Houses of the prime Officers; and a long Walk of Orange and Lemmon-Trees leads to a large Court before the Front of the Castle it self, which is built square with Bricks and Free-stone three Stories high; and the Entrance into it is ascended by a large pair of Stairs; near the Gate which opens to the West, stand great Stone Cisterns, into which they receive the Water through Pipes laid under Ground; the Chambers 


Halls are very lightsom and high, and the Walls of them adorn'd with Cedar; a flat Terrace on the top yields a pleasant Prospect all over the Countrey; the Windows in the Front look open not onely upon the Orange Walk, but also upon several de∣lightful Plantations of Sugar-Canes and Ginger.


Westward appear several Mountains, whose high Heads are invested with ever-flourishing Trees; and between the Palace and those Mountains a very large and stately Garden, full of all manner of Flowers and other delightful Plants, as well those commonly known amongst us, as those peculiar to that part of the World; in the middle thereof stands a Fountain, deriving its Source from the Foot of a neighboring Hill.


The Winds which blow from the Hills, and especially those cool Blasts daily coming out of the East, so tempers the hot Climate, that it becomes very to∣lerable.


When any News arrives here of the 
French
 Conquests in 
Europe,
 they sound the Trumpets on the top of the Castle, and the Standards and Ensigns formerly taken by the Governor in the Field, are hung out of the Windows.


On one side of the Castle stands a Chappel, and somewhat farther on a rising Plain, a row of Houses, inhabited by certain Retainers to the Governor, and is call'd 
Angola.
 The Offices and Lodgings for the Governor's Servants are built of Brick, about the Castle, which is fortifi'd with five Sconces, whereon are planted several Guns.


The Governor keeps nine hundred Slaves, and a hundred 
French
-men, to work in his three Sugar-Mills, to till his Ground, and for his Houshold-Service.


Several 
French
 Gentlemen have also built many fair Houses here; amongst which the chiefest are those on which 
Poucy, Treval, Benevent, Girand, Auber, de la Roziere, de St. Andant, de l' Esperance,
 and 
de la Loche
 spent great sums of Money.


The 
English
 also are not much inferior to them in their Counties.


Their Churches are five in all; first on the Point of the 
Palm-Tree
 stands a fair Church; a second near the great Road, below the 
English
 Governor's House; a third at the 
Sandy Point;
 which are all well built, and large enough for a considerable Congregation; the other two at the Inlet 
Cayoune
 are short of the three first. The Ministers thereof receiv'd formerly their Benefices from the Bishop of 
Canterbury,
 in 
Cromwell
's time from the 
Tryers,
 as they were call'd; but of late, since the King's Restauration, from the Bishop of 
Canterbury
 again.


The best Houses belonging to the 
English
 were built by Mr. 
Warner,
 Mr. 
Rich,
 Mr. 
Evrard,
 and Col. 
Geffreyson
 all successively Governors of the Place.


It was in the Year 1625. that the 
English
 and 
French
 jointly (
Desnambuc
 Comman∣ding the 
French,
 and 
Thomas Warner
 the 
English
) Landed on this Island of 
St. Christo∣phers,
 at a certain time when the 
Caribbeeans,
 perswaded by their 
Boyez
 to destroy all Strangers, were ready up in Arms, but they met with such Entertainment, that they soon lost their Courage, and yielded possession to the Assailants: Not long af∣ter which 
Desnambuc
 and 
Warner
 went (the one to 
Paris,
 and the other to 
London
) to inform their Kings of the Condition of 
St. Christophers,
 and to raise a Company which might promote the Planting of it: Both attain'd their Desires, and had fresh Assistance given them; for both Kings favor'd the Design, in regard of the good Conditions that were propos'd to those that should go Undertakers thither: And to prevent all Contentions between the 
English
 and 
French,
 they made Boundaries on each side; but Hunting, Harbors, Fishing, Mines, Trees for Wainscoting, and the like, were to remain in common; and each was to assist the other. The 
English
 Plantation increased daily more than the 
French,
 having constant Supplies from the

Company in 
London;
 when as on the contrary, the Merchants at 
Paris
 grew weary, being desirous first to have a Return for what they had already spent, though the Countrey was not yet Manur'd: wherefore 
Desnambuc
 going thither himself, made the Company understand that they could not possibly expect to receive a Return, unless the Countrey were Planted with Tobacco, Indigo, Ginger, and Sugar, which requir'd both Time and People. But whilst the Business seem'd to go on prosperously, a great Accident hapned which threw down the Work to nothing: for the 
Spanish
 King set out a Fleet within the fore-mention'd Year, of one and thirty Gallions, three Galeasses, and four Pinnaces, with seventy five hundred Men, under the Command of 
Frederick de Toledo, Emanuel de Mineses,
 and 
John Fajardo,
 from 
Cadiz,
 when before the Island 
St. Jago
 there lay at the same time twenty two 
Portu∣guese
 Galleys, fourteen Carvils, carrying four thousand Men, Commanded by 
Anto∣nio Nunnez Barreio,
 and 
Francisco de Almeida,
 who joyning with the 
Spaniards,
 took the City 
St. Salvador,
 and went about wholly to chase out of the 
Caribbee
 Isles all the 
English
 and 
French:
 in which Attempt nine 
English
 Ships lying before 
Nevis,
 were all taken by 
Toledo,
 who Sail'd within Cannon-shot of 
St. Christophers,
 Com∣manded at that time by the 
French
 Captain 
Rossey,
 the Forts cast up by the 
English
 and 
French
 not being stor'd with Provisions nor Ammunition, and consequently no way able to endure a Siege, and the less, because the Works were not quite finish'd; nevertheless 
Desnambuc
 immediately drew up his Soldiers to the Low-land, where he lay Intrench'd along the Coast, to prevent the Enemies Landing; but 
Rossey
 suffer'd the 
Spaniards
 to Land without the least Resistance: whereupon young 
Du Parquet
 Sallying out of the Sconces, fell valiantly upon the first Company, but be∣ing forsaken by his Men, was run down by the Multitude and kill'd: In the mean time all their Sloops full of Men Landed, insomuch that 
Rossey
 fearing to be sur∣rounded, left his Trench and went up into the High-lands, whereby the 
Spaniards
 became Masters of the Fort, but did not pursue their Victory, as suspecting that the 
French
 might lie in Ambuscade in the next Wood; and indeed they suspected not in vain, for the 
French
 having undermin'd their Forts, had laid Gun-powder in some of the Cellars, which firing, blew up very many of the 
Spaniards,
 whilst 
Desnambuc
 Embarquing himself, sav'd those which were not slain by the Enemy's Sword. Mean while the 
English
 relying on the League between the King of 
England
 and the 
Spaniard,
 made no Resistance, (notwithstanding they were inform'd that 
Frederick Toledo
 had quite ruin'd the 
French
 Plantation, and put them all to the Sword) but sent Agents to 
Toledo,
 to put him in mind of the League between 
Spain
 and 
England,
 which he not taking notice of, alledg'd, That Pope 
Alexander
 the Sixth, when a Controversie arose concerning the new Discoveries in the East and West, between the Crowns of 
Castile
 and 
Portugal,
 had determin'd that 
Castile
 had sole Right to the Western World, and therefore that 
St. Christophers,
 being a part of the Western World, according to the 
Pope
's Gift, belong'd to his Master 
Philip;
 and insisting up∣on that Allegation, he commanded them to quit their Right to the Place; to which purpose he restor'd them six of the nine Ships taken at 
Nevis,
 on Condition that they should immediately set Sail for 
England,
 onely those whom the six Vessels were not able to carry, were permitted to stay on the Island till the next opportunity: After which 
Toledo
 weighing Anchor, was scarce out of sight, when the 
English
 began to take new Courage, and gathering together to repair their ruin'd Works as well as possibly they could with what Forces they had left; for besides those who went for 
England
 in the six Ships, being near two thousand, the 
Spanish
 Admiral took six hun∣dred choice 
English,
 which he distributed amongst his Fleet; whilest 
Desambuc
 suf∣fer'd a great deal of hardship, not onely through ill Weather at Sea, but also for

want of Provisions; Having during this time been on the Islands 
St. Martin, Mont∣serrat,
 and 
Antego,
 thinking to have possess'd himself of some or other of them in stead of 
St. Christophers,
 but not finding such a fruitful Soil, and convenient Situa∣tion, as what he had been forc'd to forsake, he was not forward to fix there, but ra∣ther judg'd it convenient to enquire concerning the Condition of 
St. Christophers,
 and at last being inform'd by a Ketch, that the Enemy was gone to 
Havana,
 and the 
English
 were busie in Tilling their Lands, he return'd to his old Station; where ne∣vertheless their Endeavors to repair what was ruin'd, had been in vain, by reason of the scarcity of Provisions, and want of other Necessaries, had not in their greatest extremity some 
Netherland
 Vessels arriving there, furnish'd them with Provisions, Clothes, and other Necessaries, on bare promises of payment: But not long after growing rich with Tobacco, Sugars, Ginger, and Indigo, they made Satisfaction to all their Creditors, and at last attain'd to the Condition before mention'd.


In the late War between Us and the 
Dutch,
 the 
French
 taking advantage of our Engagement, endeavor'd to destroy our Plantations there, and to make themselves Masters of the whole Island; but the Matter being at last brought to some Agree∣ment, Sir 
Charles Wheeler
 hath been very lately sent over thither by His Majesty to re-settle Affairs there, and order the Capitulations between the 
French
 and 
English.








CHAP. XIX. The Islands Sotavento, and the Isle Trinidado.


IN the Division we found to be made of the Islands that lie between 
Florida
 and 
New Spain,
 and 
Southern America,
 the last are the Isles of 
Sotavento,
 which are reckon'd to be these three, 
Margareta, Cubagua,
 and 
Tabago,
 but the last is by most accounted, and hath been mention'd amongst the 
Caribbees.


Margareta,
 so call'd from the abundance of Pearls (of which the 
Spanish
 Appel∣lation comes near the Latine 
Margaritae
) found there by the 
Spaniards
 at their first Discovery, lies about the twelfth Degree of Northern Latitude over against the Main Land of 
Cumana,
 from which it is distant about seven Leagues: It is ac∣counted sixteen Leagues long, and half as much in breadth, and was discover'd by 
Columbus
 in his third Voyage in the Year of our Lord 1498. and was at first in great reputation, in regard of the rich Pearl-fishing upon its Coasts, wherein the 
Spaniards
 (more favorable it seems to the Natives of this Place than usual, because of their readiness to discover their Treasures) employ'd 
Negro's,
 brought from the Coast of 
Guinee,
 whom by severe Punishments inflicted, they forc'd to such excessive Labor, that many of them, though excellent Divers, were drown'd, others either devour'd, or lam'd by the ravenous great Fish thereabouts, and by destroying the very Seed through their insatiable greediness after Pearl, brought the Trade of Pearl-fishing in a short time to a very small Account, in respect of what it might have been, had it been well husbanded. Nor hath this Island of late Years been much frequented, only in the Year 1601. Captain 
Parker
 with a Fleet of 
English
 put on Shore here, and took as many Prisoners as he had five hundred pounds of Pearl for the Ransom of, and at his coming away took a Ship he met from off the Coast of 
Angola,
 with three hundred and seventy 
Negro's
 aboard her, who were going to be sold for Slaves.


The Soil is not unfruitful, bringing forth several sorts of Fruit, and store of

Maiz,
 and probably if improv'd, would as well bear Wheat, and other usual kinds of Grain; but there is great want of Water, which the Inhabitants are troubled to fetch from the neighboring Continent.


The Places of chief note, are 1. 
Monpater,
 a Fort built by the 
Spaniards
 in a Nook of the Island, lying Eastward to secure the Pearl-fishing Trade, and to defend the Town where the Governor resides, as also the Treasurer of the King of 
Spain
's Cu∣stoms of Pearl, which have been formerly valu'd at 50000 
l.
 yearly.


2. 
El valle de Santa Lucia,
 two Leagues from this Town, and as much from the Sea, a 
Spanish
 Colony.


Macanao,
 the onely noted Place belonging to the Natives.




SECT. II. Cubagua.


CUbagua
 lies South-West of 
Margarita,
 about the eleventh Degree of North-Latitude, a League or thereabouts distant from 
Margarita,
 and six Leagues from the nearest Continent, and about three Leagues in circumference. This is also a very great Place for Pearl-fishing, the benefit whereof hath been so considerable, that the King of 
Spain
's Fifths are said to have amounted some years to fifteen thousand 
Ducats;
 but otherwise of a poor and barren Soil, not onely de∣stitute of Water, but of Fruit, Grain, Herbage, and all manner of Cattel and eata∣ble Beasts, except a few lean Coneys; nevertheless, in respect of the Pearl-fishing Trade, the 
Spaniards
 have Planted here a Colony, which they call'd 
New Cadiz,
 ha∣ving plenty of Provisions brought them from the adjoining Coasts, and soon after their first Planting grew in a short time so powerful, that they became Masters of one of the best Ports of those Seas, call'd 
Maracapana Venezuela;
 but upon an Alarm of the Salvages of 
Cumana,
 for a while deserted the Island, and betook themselves to 
Hispaniola;
 from whence nevertheless being remanded back with fresh Supplies, under the Command of 
James de Castellon,
 they soon re-instated themselves in their former Plantation, and made it more strong and flourishing than before; in which state they remain'd as long as the Pearl-fishing Trade continu'd, but that decaying, the splendor also of this Colony declin'd: so that at present the onely thing which makes the Place remarkable, is a Fountain on the East part of the Island, not far from the Sea, yielding a liquid bituminous Water, of singular use in Medicine, and sometimes found floating on the Sea at two or three Leagues distance.


About four Leagues distant from 
Cubagua
 there is an Island call'd 
Coche,
 about three Miles in compass; It was discover'd in the Year 1529. and was formerly lit∣tle less considerable for Pearl-fishing than the other two.






SECT. III. Trinidado.


THe Island of 
Trinidado
 was first discover'd by 
Columbus, Anno
 1447. in his third Voyage, and by him so call'd, as some guess, from its three Points or Promontories; but that seems not so probable, in regard it is otherwise call'd 
La Trinidad,
 or 
Insula Sanctae Trinitatis,
 and therefore is likely to have been de∣nominated upon a religious Account: It lieth nine Degrees or thereabouts distant from the 
Line,
 at the Mouth of the River 
Orenoque,
 and is separated from the Coast

of 
Paria,
 over against which it lies by a 
Straight
 that is three Miles over, and which for the dangerousness of passing it, 
Columbus,
 the first Discoverer of it, call'd 
Bocca del Draco;
 the length thereof from the most Southern Angle call'd 
Punta del Andrada,
 to the North-East, call'd 
Punta del Galera,
 is reckon'd twenty five Leagues, (those that reckon fifty, may be suppos'd to mistake Leagues for Miles) and the breadth about eighteen.


The Air of this Place is so impure, that it is accounted the unwholsomest Island of all the 
Indies;
 nevertheless the Soil is not unfertile, as bringing forth Sugar-Canes, Cotton, 
Maize,
 Tobacco of the best kind, with other Commodities of the general growth of the 
West-Indies,
 besides store of good Fruit and Cattel; and one part of the Island call'd 
Terra de Bea,
 produceth great plenty of Pitch, but not of the best kind; and there have been discover'd several Veins of Gold and other Metals.


The Natives, some say, were antiently call'd 
Cairi,
 or 
Carai,
 and were distinguish'd into several 
Clans
 or Tribes, each under the Government of a 
Casique,
 or petty Prince; but most of them dreading the 
Spaniards
 Cruelty, deserted the Island, and Setled themselves in 
Guiana;
 and at present both this Place, 
Guiana,
 and 
El Dorado,
 have of Custom one and the same Governor, whose Place of Residence here is 
St. Josephs,
 the chief, if not onely Town of the Island; it stands Southward upon the 
Carone.
 Here most of that Tobacco is made, which is sold amongst us for 
Spanish.
 In the Year 1595. Sir 
Walter Raleigh
 possess'd himself of it, being then but a petty Village of about forty Houses, and took Prisoner the then Governor 
Antonio Berreo,
 who, in all probability, to ingratiate himself with him, gave him some light towards the discovery of 
Guiana.


On the North-East of 
Trinidado,
 and not above eight Miles distant from it,
 lies the Island of 
Tabago,
 which hath been already treated of, as one of the 
Caribbees,
 though some will have it one of the 
Sotavento;
 it is otherwise call'd 
New Walcheren,
 from a Town of that Name in 
Zealand,
 from whence a Colony of 
Netherlanders
 was sent to Plant it.


Amongst others of the small obscure Islands hereabouts, is 
Virgin Gorda,
 which is sometimes reckon'd amongst the 
Caribbee
 Islands; but since there is nothing consi∣derable to be spoken of it, it is sufficient that it hath been mention'd, though not punctually in its proper place.








CHAP. XX. California.


HAving before made mention of 
California,
 as it is by some taken for that large portion of 
Northern America
 which lies most Southward, and also ut∣most West of all that is known of the 
New World,
 and having treated of those several Provinces which are generally reckon'd to be comprehended in it, (excepting 
California
 strictly taken, as it is generally granted to be an Island) 
viz. Quivira, Cibola,
 and 
Nova Albion,
 lying on the Continent (though there want not those who make 
Nova Albion
 onely the North part of 
California
) we shall close up our Discourse of these Islands that lie Northward of the 
Equinoctial Line
 with the afore∣said 
California,
 specially so call'd, which was by many thought and describ'd to be but a 
Peninsula,
 or half Island, by reason that the Bay which divides it from 
Quivira


and 
New Gallicia,
 towards the North runneth much narrower than it doth Sou∣therly 
 that some where or other at the North it wa
 joyn'd to the 
 been 
aid, have 
und it to b
 
 
a
e from the Continent: for about the Y
 
 upon those Coasts Northward, acciden∣tally, 
 fell upon a 
Straight,
 the Waters whereof ran with such 
 
hat they brought them into 
Mar Vermiglio,
 whether they 
 no, and before they knew it, and by that means discover'd that 
California
 was an Island, and that the Waters which were observ'd to fall so violently unto that Sea towards the North, were not the Waters of any River emp∣tying it self into the Bay from the Main Land, as was formerly thought, but the Waters of the North-West Sea it self, violently breaking into the Bay, and dividing it wholly from the Continent: It lieth North and South, extending it self in a vast length, full twenty Degrees of Latitude, 
viz.
 from twenty two to forty two; but the breadth nothing answerable: The most Northern Point of it is call'd 
Cape Blanche;
 that to the South, 
Cape St. Lucas,
 memorable for that rich and gallant Prize which Captain 
Cavendish,
 in the Year 1587. being then in his Voyage about the World, took from the 
Spaniards
 near to this Place. As for the Island it self, it is at present little, if at all inhabited by the 
Spaniards;
 whether it be that they want Men to furnish new Plantations, or that they find no matter of invitation and encou∣ragement from the Countrey, or perhaps that the access thither be not so easie: for 'tis reported to be wonderfully well peopled by the Natives, and that there were found onely upon the Coasts and along the Shore of 
Mar Vermiglio,
 twenty or twenty three Nations, all of different Languages; though from the particular Narrations that have been made of the Voyages of several eminent Persons into these Parts, it appears that the 
Spaniards
 have taken great pains in the discovery thereof, and also from the several 
Spanish
 Names of Places, that they have had Plantations here for∣merly, however neglected at present.


The Countrey is abundantly well stor'd with Fish and Fowl, as appears partly by the Natives, who take a huge pride in making themselves gay with the Bones of the one, with which they load their Ears, and sometimes their Noses also; and with the Feathers of the other, which ordinary People wear onely sticking about their Wastes; but Great Persons, and such as will be fine indeed, beset their Heads strangely with them, and have commonly one Bunch of them bigger than ordi∣nary hanging down behind them like a Tail.


Having no knowledge of the true God, they worship what the Devil will have them, that is, the Sun, attributing to it onely the increase of their Plants, healthful Seasons, and most of the other good things they enjoy, or are sensible of.


Their Government is said to be onely 
Oeconomical,
 each Father ordering the Af∣fairs of his Family apart, without subjection to any other Superior; yet so well manag'd, that they live in good Peace one with another; not without many good Laws and Customs, 
viz.
 That they allow but one Wife to one Man; That they punish Adultery with Death; That they suffer not Maids to talk or converse with Men till they be Married; That Widows may not Marry till they have Mourn'd at least one half year for their Husbands deceased; and divers others of like nature, which perhaps, if the truth were known, do more properly belong to the Natives of 
Utopia,
 or 
New Atlantis,
 than to these of 
California.


The Places therein, as yet observ'd, are onely upon the Sea-coasts, 1. The 
Capes
 of 
St. Clara
 and 
St. Lucas,
 the one at the South-East end of the Island, looking towards 
New Gallicia,
 the other at the South-West, looking into the Sea, and towards 
Asia.








2. 
St. Cruce,
 so nam'd from its being first discover'd on 
Holy-Rood
-Day, being a large and convenient Haven, not far from 
Cape St. Clara.


3. 
Cabo de las Playas,
 so call'd from a company of little bare Hillocks appearing from the Sea, and is more within the Bay.


4. 
Cabo Baxo,
 so term'd, as lying towards the bottom of the Gulf.


5. 
St. Andrews,
 another convenient Haven upon an Island of the same Name.


6. 
St. Thomas,
 an Island at the Mouth of the Gulf or Bay, of about twenty five Leagues in compass, rising Southerly with an high mountainous Point, under which is a convenient Road for Shipping, and twenty five Fathoms of Water.


On the other side of the Island, towards the Main Sea, there is 1. 
St. Abad,
 a good Haven, and almost surrounded with a pleasant and fruitful Countrey.


2. 
Cape Trinidado,
 a noted Promontory.


3. 
Cape de Cedras,
 so call'd (together with a small Island near it) from the store of Cedars growing thereabouts.


4. 
Enganno.
 5. 
Puebla de las Canoas,
 so nam'd from the abundance of those lit∣tle Boats which the 
Americans
 generally use, and do call 
Canoos,
 whereof perhaps some store are made there.


6. 
Cabo de Galera,
 from its resemblance to a Rat.


It is believ'd there are many more Promontories and Bays on both sides of this Island, besides Rivers and Islets, yet not nam'd, and altogether unknown. Moreo∣ver Dr. 
Heylin
 hath well observ'd, that those above-mention'd are the Names onely of Places, and not of Towns and Villages, though doubtless there must needs have been some scatter'd Houses, built formerly by the 
Spaniards
 in so many Expeditions.


The first Discoverer of these Parts was 
Ferdinando Cortez,
 who having in the Year 1534. set out two Ships to that purpose from 
St. Jago,
 a Haven of 
New Spain,
 and not finding the Success answerable to his Expectation, went next Year himself in Person, and pass'd a good way up the Gulf, but for want of Provisions was forc'd to return without having done any thing to the purpose.


In 1539. one 
Francisco,
 a Companion of 
Cortez
 in the former Expedition, Set out

upon his own Charges, and having Coasted all about, both upon the Eastern and Western Shores, he at last Landed, but not without notable opposition from the Natives, who with much clamour, and many antique Gestures set upon his Men so furiously with Stones and Arrows, that they had met with a shrew'd Repulse, had it not been for the Valor of their Auxiliaries, the Mastiff Dogs, which it seems they us'd to carry along with them in those kind of Voyages; but at last he got footing so far, that he took possession in the Name of the King of 
Spain
 with the usual For∣malities; and following the Example of 
Columbus,
 set up a Cross in the Place for a Memorial and Testimony of his having been there.


Much about the same time 
Marco de Nisa
 a 
Franciscan,
 undertaking a Voyage in∣to these Parts, reported Wonders at his Return, of the plenty of golden Mines, stately Cities, set out with magnificent Buildings, the very Gates whereof were enrich'd with 
Turquoises,
 and other Precious Stones, and whose meanest Inhabitants went glittering in Gold and Mother of Pearl, and of the flourishing Condition of the Kingdoms of 
Acu, Tonteac,
 and 
Marata;
 whereupon the Governor of 
New Gallicia
 was sent by the then Vice-Roy of 
Mexico,
 with great hopes of bringing back a Con∣firmation of these Reports; but whether out of spite to be deceiv'd in his Expe∣ctation, or having real cause so to do, he represented all things as mean and despi∣cable, as the Fryer had proclaim'd them rich and glorious.


The next that went upon this Design was 
Ferdinando de Alarcon,
 who is reported to have Sail'd many Leagues up a River call'd 
Buena Guia,
 and there to have re∣ceiv'd Homage of 
Naguacatus,
 one of the Heads of the 
Californian
 Tribes.


One more Attempt was made in the Year 1642. by 
Roderico Cabrillo,
 who disco∣ver'd the Island of 
St. Luke,
 and another call'd 
The Island of Possession;
 and this was the last we hear of that thought it worth while to go an Undertaker to these Coasts, and ever since all Undertakings hither have been so wholly laid aside, that what-ever was once discover'd in these Parts, seems rather to be lost and forgotten, than any way improv'd.


As for 
Nova Albion,
 whereas many determine it to be onely the utmost Northern part of 
California,
 though it doth not absolutely appear to be so from the Relation of Sir 
Francis Drake
's Discovery of it, we judge it agreeable to Method and Deco∣rum not wholly to omit the mention of it in this place, though it hath been already spoken of, and the aforesaid Relation deliver'd at large amongst the rest of those Provinces of largely-taken 
California,
 which were taken for granted to be upon the Continent.


Drake
 and his Company brought home this Description of the Countrey and its Inhabitants, 
viz. That the Countrey was exceedingly well stor'd with Deer, Grazing up and down the Hills by thousands in a company; That the Men generally went naked all over, the Women using onely a piece of a Mat, or some such thing in stead of an Apron; That their Hou∣ses were built onely of Turf and Osier, yet so wrought together, that they serv'd very well to keep out the Cold; in the midst of it was their Hearth where they made their Fire, and lay all round about it together upon several Beds of Bull-Rushes. What their Towns were, or whither they had any, is altogether unknown.












The Third Book, CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF PERUANA, OR, Southern America.




CHAP. I.


H
Aving compleated our Description of 
Mexicana,
 or 
Nor∣thern America,
 being that great 
Peninsula
 which lies North∣ward of the 
Isthmus,
 or 
Straight
 of 
Darien,
 together with all the Islands on the North side of the 
Equinoctial Line,
 we come now to the Southern Part, otherwise call'd 
Peruana,
 from 
Peru
 the chief Kingdom thereof, being the other great 
Peninsula,
 which lies Southward of the aforesaid 
Straight:
 It is generally resembled to the form of a Pyra∣mid revers'd; the Basis whereof, that is to say, the more Southerly parts of it to∣wards 
Magellanica
 and the 
Straights,
 extend themselves largely both East and West, becoming more sharp and streight towards the North, and those parts by which it is joyn'd to 
Mexicana:
 in the whole it is suppos'd to contain a Circuit of seventeen thousand Miles at least, and is water'd with four of the greatest Rivers of the World, besides abundance of lesser Streams, which issuing from the 
Andes
 and other Mountains of the Countrey, do run from all Parts both into the North and South Sea, much fertilizing the Countreys through which they pass; the four principal are these following:


1. 
Orellana,
 so call'd from the first Discovery thereof by 
Franciscus de Orellana,
 otherwise the River of 
Amazons,
 from a Generation of warlike Women, who (as the Tradition goes) inhabited certain Countreys lying upon the Banks thereof. This

riseth in the Province of 
Peru,
 and runneth a Course of little less than five thou∣sand Miles, discharging it self at last into the North Sea, through a Channel, as some say, of threescore Leagues broad, and yet with such a violent Current or Stream, that it is said to keep its natural colour and taste almost thirty Miles in the Sea.


2. 
Orenoque,
 by some call'd 
Raliana,
 from Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 who endeavor'd to discover it, a River of the Province of 
Guiana,
 whose Head or Spring is not yet dis∣cover'd: It is said to be Navigable a thousand Miles together by the tallest Ships, and no less than two thousand by Pinnaces and smaller Vessels, and dischargeth it self likewise into the North Sea by sixteen several Channels or Mouths, making thereby several Islands; some whereof are said to be of good bigness, and to lie at a distance of a hundred Miles or more one from the other.


3. 
Maragnon,
 a River of a yet larger Course than any of the former, being, as 'tis said, no less than six thousand Miles from its Head, which is out of the 
Andes
 in 
Peru,
 to its Fall, which is likewise into the North Sea about 
Cape Blanco,
 by a Chan∣nel of seventy Leagues in breadth.


4. 
Rio de la Plata,
 otherwise call'd 
Paraguay,
 a River of two thousand Miles Course, and falling as the rest into the North Sea, by a Channel of threescore Miles over, and about thirty Degrees Southward of the 
Line,
 towards the 
Straights
 of 
Magellane.


The 
Andes,
 or Mountains before mention'd being the most noted, and biggest of all 
America,
 and indeed of the whole World, and thought by 
Cortesius
 to be the same with 
Sephar,
 spoken of in the tenth Chapter of 
Genesis,
 run above a thousand Leagues in length from 
Timama,
 a Town of 
New Granada
 in the Province of 
Po∣payan,
 and are in the narrowest place about twenty Leagues broad; and also of equal heighth with, if not higher than 
Caucasus
 it self: the Ascent to them is un∣passable, except in very few places, by reason of craggy Precipices, and wild over∣grown pathless Woods, serving onely for a shelter to Serpents and other poysonous Animals, which are there so numerous, that a whole Army of one of the Kings of 
Peru
 is reported to have been destroy'd by them; and what-ever People there are inhabiting in any of these Woods and Fastnesses, must needs be in the very utmost degree of rude and brutish salvageness.


Some divide 
Southern America
 into 
Peruviana
 and 
Brasiliana: Peruviana
 they sub∣divide into 
Terra Firma
 and 
Peru; Brasiliana
 into 
Brasile
 and 
Paraguay:
 But the most receiv'd and commodious Division is into these particular Provinces following, all of them wealthy and large, 
viz.
 1. 
Castella Aurea,
 or 
Golden Castile.
 2. 
Nova Granada,
 or 
The New Kingdom,
 as they call it. 3. 
Peru,
 specially so call'd. 4. 
Chile.
 5. 
Para∣guay.
 6. 
Brasile.
 7. 
Guiana.
 8. Lastly 
Paria,
 with some lesser Islands adjoyning to all or most of these Provinces, and commonly reckon'd as part of them.






CHAP. II. Castella Aurea, otherwise call'd Terra Firma.


CAstella del Oro,
 as the 
Spaniards
 call it, or 
Golden Castile,
 taketh up all the rest of the 
Isthmus,
 or 
Straight
 of 
Darien,
 which hath not been yet spoken of, being bounded Eastward, and to the North-East, with the 
Atlantick
 Ocean; and on the West with 
Mare del Zur,
 and some part of 
Veragua;
 Southward it hath the

new Kingdom of 
Granada.
 It is call'd sometimes 
Terra Firma,
 because it was one of the first parts of firm Land which the 
Spaniards
 touch'd upon, after they had pass'd so many Islands, as seem'd for some time to block up, and bar them from the Continent of 
America:
 It is subdivided into these inferior Provinces or Coun∣treys, 
viz.
 1. 
Panama.
 2. 
Darien.
 3. 
Nova Andaluzia.
 4. 
St. Martha.
 5. Lastly, the little Province 
De la Hacha.


The chief Rivers of the Province of 
Panama
 are 1. 
Chagre,
 as it was antiently call'd,
 but afterwards from the great number of Crocodiles that harbor in it, 
Rio de La∣gartos,
 falling into the North Sea between 
Nombre de Dios
 and 
Porto Bellano.
 2. 
Sar∣dinilla.
 3. 
Sardina.
 4. 
Rio de Colubros,
 so call'd from the abundance of Snakes breeding thereabouts. 5. 
Rio de Comagre,
 which falls into the same Sea. 6. 
Chepo,
 famous in times past for its Gold-Sands. 7. 
Rio de Balsas,
 whose Banks are shaded with good Timber-Trees. 8. 
Rio de Congo,
 which falls into 
St. Michaels
 Bay.




SECT. II. Panama.


PAnama,
 commonly call'd 
The District,
 or 
Circle of Panama,
 is bounded Eastward with the 
Gulf,
 or 
Bay
 of 
Urraba,
 by which it is separated from the rest of the Continent of this Southern part of 
America;
 on the West it hath 
Veragua,
 one of the Provinces of 
Guatimala;
 being on both the other sides wash'd with the Sea: It is suppos'd to contain in length from 
Carthagena
 and 
Popayan,
 to the Confines of 
Veragua,
 about eighty or ninety Leagues, in breadth not above threescore in any part; and where it is narrowest, 
viz.
 betwixt the City of 
Panama
 and 
Nombre de Dios,
 if measur'd by a right Line, not above six or seven over from Sea to Sea. It lieth almost under the 
Equinoctial Line,
 but a few Degrees Northward of it, and therefore somewhat hot, and by the neighborhood of both Seas subject to a foggy and gross Air, in comparison of some other parts; so that it is not counted generally so healthful a Countrey, especially for Strangers, and in Summer-time.


The antient Division of 
Panama,
 according to the Lordships of the 
Casiques
 that then Govern'd, were these following: 
Careta, Aila, Comagre, Chiam, Coyba, Chame, Chiru, Nata, Tobre, Trota, Haylia, Burica,
 and 
Escotia,
 where the South Sea with the Spring-Tides flowing over the Plains, at its return being hardned by the Sea, is turn'd into Salt; but as it hath always hapned in all other Countreys of the World, that with the alteration of Government, the Division, of the Countrey, and the Names of Places have totally chang'd, so also here the antient Division of Regions and Territories must give place to the Modern.


The antient Inhabitants of these Parts were a very warlike People, the Women always accompanying their Husbands in the Wars. They us'd to hang on the tops of their Standards the Bones of their greatest Heroes, thereby to animate their Sol∣diers. Their Arms consisted of poysonous Arrows, Stone Swords, and Pikes made of the Palm-Trees. They also carried with them the Idol 
Chiapa,
 to whom they Offer'd living Children at the beginning of their Wars, and afterwards making Merry with the Flesh, anointed the Image with the Blood: Moreover, if they re∣turn'd home Conquerors, they spent several days in all manner of Debaucheries, as Drinking, Singing, Dancing, Cutting their Prisoners Throats, with their Blood also anointing their Image. But if they were conquer'd, then they invented new Offerings to reconcile themselves with their Idol.


The chief Towns and Places which the 
Spaniards
 inhabit here, are 1. 
Panama,


the chief City of the Province, being also a Bishop's See, which is Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of 
Lima,
 and the ordinary Residence of the Governor and Courts of Justice for these Parts: It is seated likewise upon the South Sea, and so near, that at High-water the Ships are said to Ride even under the Walls. Through this Town the Wealth both of 
Peru
 and 
Spain
 passeth once every Year; from 
Spain
 by 
Nombre de Dios
 and 
Porto Bello,
 from whence whatsoever Merchandise or other Commodi∣ties come from 
Spain,
 are Transported to 
Panama
 by Land, and from thence by Sea to all the Parts of 
Peru;
 and by 
Panama
 whatsoever comes from 
Peru,
 is sent into 
Spain:
 It hath commonly a strong Garrison of Soldiers in it, and is doubtless a Place otherwise well fortifi'd, being of so great importance. From the Haven 
Pericos
 three Ways lead to 
Panama,
 the first along a Bridge over a River, whose Banks are great Fortifications to the City, the rather because the River is deep, and next it a Pool over-grown with Weeds. The Way from 
Nombre de Dios
 plain and without Woods, is wash'd by the Brook 
Levendero.
 The third runs along over a Stone Bridge and Champain Grounds, that extend from the Haven 
Pericos
 to the City. Eastward from 
Panama
 appear seven Royal Houses on a Rock, wherein the Courts of Judicature are kept. Five hundred Rods into the Sea lies an Island re∣sembling a Half-Moon, and the Haven wherein the Ships when they unlade cast Anchor, there being else not Water enough for laden Barques, and all lie dry the Tide being out: At the Mouth thereof stands a woodden Sconce. The Places 
Venta de Cruze, Chagre, Quebrada,
 and 
Ballano,
 are also fortifi'd against any Invasion, where else an Enemy might easily Land: But the strictest Watch is kept at the River 
Chagre,
 which Westward below 
Nombre de Dios
 falling into the Northern Ocean, brings the Ships up to 
Venta de Cruze,
 from whence a Way scarce five Leagues long leads to 
Panama.
 The 
Spanish
 Commodities consisting most in Meal, Oyl, Biskets, Cloth and Silk, are all brought from 
Nombre de Dios
 along the same Way; or else in Winter when they cannot stem the Current of the River 
Chagre,
 then they bring their Goods by Land, not without great danger of being taken by the run-away 
Negro's,
 who set upon them out of the Woods with poyson'd Darts and Arrows; and as many 
Spaniards
 as they take, so many several ways they put them to death, because they formerly in the time of their Servitude were us'd with all imaginable Cruelties. The Provisions sold here at a reasonable Rate are 
Maiz, Peruan
-Meal, Poultrey, Honey, Cattel, Swine, Oranges, Lemmons, Cabbage, and all manner of Garden Herbs or Plants. Round about the fore-mention'd Royal Houses lie Bul∣warks, with a strong Castle on one side. A fair Cathedral denotes the Place to be a Bishop's See: And the 
Franciscans, Dominicans,
 and Monks of the Order 
De la Merced,
 inhabit several fair Cloysters here. Two Leagues Westward is the Haven 
Pericos,
 which being secur'd from all Winds by three high Isles that lie before it, is the chief Harbor in which the 
Peruan
 Plate-Fleet (consisting most in small Barques) comes to an Anchor before they touch at 
Panama.
 The Countrey is for the most part Mountainous, and in many places sends forth stinking Damps out of muddy Pools; yet in some places are 
Savanna
 Grounds for Cattel to Graze in. The Air would also be more unhealthful, if it were not clear'd by the Winds which blow from the Sea. From 
July
 to 
October
 there fall continual Rains, mix'd with terrible claps of Thunder. The Inhabitants often recreate themselves in Hunting wild Hogs, with Nets made of the Brambles call'd 
Nequen
 or 
Henachen,
 and that after a strange manner: for they set on fire the Bushes all about the place where they sup∣pose the Game to lie, which to shun the Fire runs into their Nets; so that the same Bushes are both their shelter and destruction, as affording Material to make the Nets wherein they are taken. Besides other Birds the Woods also abound with

Pheasants and Turtle-Doves; and amongst Beasts, those that carry their Young about them in a Bag, as also wild Cats. The Sea abounds with Fish, and produces Crocodiles of a large size, by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Lagartos.
 The Trees are seldom without Leaves, but bear little or no Fruit.


2. 
Nombre de Dios,
 which hath broad Streets, high woodden Houses, and a fair Church: It extends from East to West along the Northern Ocean, in the middle of a great Wood on Moorish Ground, having a great Fen on the West; being situ∣ate under an unwholsom Climate, it hath occasion'd the death of many People. The Merchants which dwelt here had also Habitations in 
Panama,
 (the rest of the Houses being most of them Inns for Strangers) from whence as soon as they had gotten an Estate they went to 
Spain.
 The Countrey round about lies under Water in many places. The Oranges, 
Cassada
-Roots, and the like, which grow here, oc∣casion many Distempers to those that eat of them. In the Harbor, which hath on each side a Ridge of Rocks, on which lies decay'd Forts, the Sea is often-times so turbulent, that the Ships are forc'd to Ride at six Anchors apiece. Eastward from the City a fresh-Water River falls into the Haven, on whose Banks stand seve∣ral Garden-Houses and Orchards. 
Anno
 1595. Sir 
Francis Drake
 arriving here, found a Mill beyond the City; not far from which on a Hill stood a Watch-house, of which having made himself Master, he set fire on the Town 
Nombre de Dios,
 as also on all the Vessels that were in the Harbor. The original of the Name 
Nombre de Dios
 was on this occasion, 
viz. Diego Niquesa
 setting Sail with three Ships out of the Haven 
Carthagena
 to the Golden Countrey 
Veragua,
 was surpris'd by a violent Storm, in which two Ketches, Commanded by 
Lupus de Olano
 and 
Peter Umbria
 were driven out of sight, whilest he suffer'd shipwrack, and getting ashore, rang'd up and down in a desolate Countrey, where he found no other Food but Roots, till at last he met with 
Olano;
 when the Famine began to increase amongst them in such a nature, that being scarce able to carry their Arms, many of them were kill'd by the Inhabitants with poyson'd Arrows, insomuch that of seven hundred there remain'd scarce ninety: 
Niquesa
 shipp'd as many of them in a new Vessel which they had made as it could possibly carry, and promis'd to fetch the rest off from 
Veragua
 as soon as he had discover'd a Place fit to be inhabited: The first Place he Landed at was 
Puerto Bello;
 from whence being necessitated by the 
Indians
 who gather'd toge∣ther to Retreat Aboard, not without the loss of several Men, he set Sail to the Pro∣montory 
Mormor,
 beyond which he Anchor'd in a secure Haven; where, as he was going ashore he call'd to his Men, saying, 
Saltiamo in tierra al Nombre de Dios,
 that is, 
Let us Land in the Name of God,
 and casting up a Fort against the Assaults of the Na∣tives, call'd it 
Nombre de Dios.


3. 
St. Philip,
 or 
Puerto Bello,
 so denominated by 
Christopher Columbus
 from its Haven lying along the North Sea, wonderful convenient and secure, by reason of the good Ground for Anchoring, and a Creek in the same, defended from all sorts of Winds; and which being surrounded with Woods, hath much over-flow'd Land about it, as also abundance of good Gravel for Ballast; for which and several other Reasons, the famous Architect 
Baptista Antonelli
 advis'd the 
Spanish
 King, to build this City for a Staple of Trade (in stead of 
Nombre de Dios,
 which was found unhealthy) having pitch'd upon an excellent Situation for it, 
viz.
 on a Plain at the Foot of a Hill, where there are three fresh Rivulets, meeting with a fruitful and hot Countrey: wherefore his Advice being taken, they first built a Fort at the Mouth of the Haven, put five Guns into the same to defend the new City, and on the Shore a strong Tower with eight Drakes: Moreover, the Rocks along the Shore, and close Woods about the Haven prevent the Landing of an Enemy: But at

the very time that this City was just begun to be built, Sir 
Francis Drake
 having burnt 
Nombre de Dios,
 ran into the Haven 
Puerto Bello,
 where he found ten Houses, besides the Governors Palace, and a Castle whose Breast-works which the 
Spaniards
 had lately rais'd of Timber, Stone, and Earth, were all demolish'd by the 
English:
 But the 
Spaniards
 have since re-built the same, and fortifi'd the Haven, with two strong Castles, notwithstanding in the Year 1661. it was surpriz'd and taken by the 
English
 under the Command of Captain 
Parker,
 and the Governor 
Petro Melendez
 taken Prisoner.


4. 
Nata,
 commonly call'd 
St. Jago de Nata,
 situated on the West side of this Pro∣vince, upon 
Mare del Zur,
 or 
The South Sea,
 about thirty Leagues distant from 
Panama,
 towards the Borders of 
Veragua.


5. 
Acla,
 a Town upon the same Coast, but lying South-East of 
Nombre de Dios:
 It was at first onely a Fort built by 
Peter de Arias,
 but afterwards grew up into a small City, of which at present there is nothing remaining but the remembrance of the famous 
Vasquez Nunnez,
 Beheaded by his Father-in-law 
Arias.


6. Lastly, 
La Crux Real,
 a few Leagues distant from 
Panama,
 for the most part inhabited by a sort of 
Negro's
 call'd 
Simmerones.


Along the North Coast of 
Panama
 are two small woody Islands call'd 
Cattiva
 and 
Comagre,
 lying low in the Water; also the Isle 
De Pines,
 which rises high out of the Sea near the Main Land.


On the Southern Coast are 
Isole de las Perlas,
 or 
The Isles of Pearls,
 about twenty five in number, but indeed rather Rocks than Islands, excepting two, 
viz. Taroreque
 and 
Del Rios
 where in former times the 
Indians
 took great store of Pearls, by diving for them to the bottom of the Sea; and they were esteem'd of greater value and ex∣cellence than those of 
Cubagua,
 and great profit was made of them by the 
Spaniards,
 till by their Cruelties exercis'd upon the Natives through excessive greediness, they depopulated the Islands, and lost that altogether of which before they were so in∣satiable: they are now onely inhabited by a few 
Moors
 and other Slaves, who keep Cattel there for their Masters.


It will not seem amiss to conclude our Description of 
Panama
 with a short Ac∣count of the 
English
 Captain 
John Oxenham
's Exploits in these Parts: He being in∣cited by the Treasure which Sir 
Francis Drake
 fetch'd from hence, resolv'd to Steer for the Northern Coast of 
Panama,
 where he hal'd his Ship of a hundred and twenty Tun on Shore, and cover'd the same with Trees, buried his Guns, and march'd with two Field-Pieces and seven Men up into the Countrey, and was by the 
Indians
 conducted to a River which falls into the South Sea, where he built a Pinnace of forty five Foot long, and Sailing into the South Sea, Landed on 
Tararequi,
 one of the Islands of 
Pearls;
 where he soon after took a 
Peruan
 Barque with sixty thousand pieces of Gold, store of Wine and Bread, and the day following another which came from 
Lima,
 loaden with a hundred thousand Pound in Silver Bars, and some Pearls; with which being enrich'd he return'd to the Main: The Governor of 
Panama
 being inform'd of it, put a hundred Soldiers into four Barques, besides a considerable number of 
Negro
 Slaves; over which 
Juan de Ortego
 having the chief Command, was inform'd at 
Tararequi
 what Course the 
English
 had steer'd; where∣upon he pursu'd them to the River whither they were gone, which falling with three Arms into the Sea, they could not have known which way the 
English
 went, unless they had seen some Feathers of Fowls driving in the Mouth of the least Branch, by which they judg'd that they were not far off; therefore Rowing up they found after four days Journey the Pinnace hal'd on Shore, and watch'd by six Men, who were order'd to stand Sentinel, whereof one being shot by the 
Spaniards,


the other five fled; whom 
Ortega
 pursuing, found half a League from the Shore a Hut made of Boughs, wherein the Booty lay, which he speedily carried to his Barques; but Captain 
Oxenham
 inform'd hereof, fell with two hundred 
Indians
 up-the 
Spaniards,
 who having a Wood on their Backs made such advantage thereof, that eleven 
English
 were slain, and seven taken, and had not the rest fled, they had all been either kill'd or taken Prisoners: Those that were taken inform'd 
Ortega
 that they had been at difference amongst themselves about dividing the Booty, which was the reason of their staying so long: moreover, they discover'd where and how their Ship lay; all which the Governor of 
Panama
 writ to 
Nombre de Dios;
 from whence four Sail were immediately sent to find out the Ship and the buried Guns, as also to take all such 
English
 as they should find preparing of Boats or Barques, and bring them to 
Panama;
 whereupon very many were taken, who were all mise∣rably slain, except a few Youths.






SECT. III. Darien.


DArien,
 which by some Authors not being thought considerable enough to make a distinct Province, is reckon'd one and the same with, or at least part of, 
Panama,
 hath on the North the District or Circle of 
Panama;
 on the South, the new Kingdom of 
Granada;
 Eastward it is bounded with the Gulf of 
Urraba
 abovesaid, and some part of the River 
Darien,
 which giveth Name to the Province; and to the West, with the South Sea; of a more temperate Air by far than that of 
Panama,
 and a Soil so admirably fruitful and lusty, that they say Me∣lons, Cucumbers, and generally all other Fruits of the Garden, are ripe and fit to gather within twenty days or less, after their first sowing, but very much infested by noxious Creatures, as Lyons, Leopards, wild Cats, Crocodiles, Serpents, and Bats, after whose Bitings a Man bleeds to death, unless he washes the Wound well with Sea-water, or stop it with hot Ashes; and no less by the unwholsomness of the Air, which is infested by the many stinking Damps that arise from the muddy Pools. The Inhabitants are sickly, and seeming generally to be troubled with the Yellow Jaundice, never attain to a great Age: they go naked, the Men onely co∣vering their Privities with a Shell or Cotton-Cloth: The Women wear a Cloth which reaches from the Middle down to their Knees, but if Women of Quality, to their Feet.


The 
Spaniards
 have many years ago made themselves Masters of this Province of 
Darien,
 in which 
Alphonsus Fogeda
 built the City 
Sebastian,
 which was inhabited till a 
Spanish
 Knight call'd 
Ancisius, Anno
 1510. built 
Antiqua,
 and made it a Bishop's See, which by reason of the unwholsomness of the Place was remov'd to 
Panama,
 when 
Vasquez Nunnez
 discover'd the Southern Ocean, 
Anno
 1590. because 
Antiqua
 lay on a low Ground between high Mountains, where the Sun burnt exceedingly, and the Way to the South Sea, being three Leagues from thence, it was very trou∣blesom to convey Merchandise thither.


But a worse Accident befell the Town 
St. Cruiz,
 which being built by the 
Spanish
 Captain 
Peter de Arias,
 was ruin'd by the 
Indians.


The chief Rivers are 1. 
Darien,
 which gives Name both to the Province and the Provincial Town, and falls into the Gulf of 
Urraba,
 being a large Arm of the Sea, eight Leagues over at the Mouth thereof. 2. 
Rio de las Redas,
 which runs in like manner through the Province of 
Nova Andaluzia,
 and falls also into the same Gulf.

So likewise doth 3. 
Rio de la Trepadera.
 4. 
Corobaci.
 5. 
Beru,
 chiefly remarkable up∣on this Consideration, that some curious Etymologists have endeavor'd to derive the Name of 
Peru
 from this River, by the alteration onely of the initial Letter.


The chief, and indeed the onely Town of this Tract is 
Darien,
 built as aforesaid by 
Encisus,
 a 
Spanish
 Adventurer, and by him call'd 
St. Maria Antiqua,
 and by others 
The Antique of Darien,
 being one of the first Towns that were built by the 
Spaniards
 on the firm Land; though there are who make mention of two other small Towns or Villages, the one nam'd at least, if not built by the 
Spaniards,
 viz. 
Los Angelos,
 scarce inhabited at present by any but the Salvages; the other an antient Town of the Natives, call'd 
Bizu.






SECT. IV. New Andaluzia.


EAstward of 
Darien
 and the Gulf of 
Urraba,
 lieth the Countrey of 
New Andalu∣zia,
 otherwise call'd 
Carthagena,
 from the Name of its principal City: On the East it hath the Countrey call'd 
St. Martha;
 on the North, the Main Ocean; and 
New Granada
 towards the South. It is for the most part a Mountain∣ous Countrey, and full of Woods, which they say yield abundance of Rozen, Gums, and some very good Balsams; also a sort of Long-pepper, much sharper than that of 
East-India.
 But the Plains, by reason of much Rain, to which the Countrey is subject, especially for some times of the year, of but a spewy and cold Soil. The 
Spaniards
 at their first coming found it a rich Countrey, not so much from the Na∣ture and Profits of the Soil (though it be said to have some Mines in it, and those of Gold) but by reason of a certain Opinion and Respect, which the 
Americans
 of these Parts are generally said to have born towards this Countrey, insomuch that they would be brought and buried there from other Places very remote; and accord∣ding to the Custom of the Countrey, not without good store of Gold and other Jewels, according to the Quality and Condition of the Person that was buried; of which the 
Spaniards
 soon gain'd Intelligence, and in ransacking the Graves and Monuments of the Dead, are suppos'd to have found an infinite Mass of Treasure: but those Mines are long since exhausted.


The Inhabitants of old suffer'd great prejudice by Tygers and Serpents; yet nevertheless this Countrey was very populous before the 
Spaniards
 arrival here; the Natives wore Cotton Aprons before, and Golden Rings about their Arms and Legs, as also Strings of Pearl, and the like. The Women here, as in the rest of these Parts, went with their Husbands into the Wars, and behav'd themselves valiantly, shooting poyson'd Arrows, insomuch that 
Martin Ambesus
 took a Maid, 
Anno
 1509. who had kill'd twenty eight 
Spaniards.


To the Province 
Carthagena
 belongs also the Countrey 
Urraba,
 which is so fruit∣ful, that all kind of 
Spanish
 Trees and Seeds grow better here than in 
Spain:
 Besides which it hath its own Fruit, as also abundance of Pine and Palm-Trees, whose Leaves serve for Brooms. The 
Guaiana
-Tree bears a sharp kind of Fruit like a Lemmon, the 
Guaravana
 a kind of Cittrons, the 
Mameisa
 a Fruit not unlike an Orange, but tasting like a Melon, and the 
Hovos
 a great Plum.


Their Gardens abound with the Root 
Batata,
 whose Leaves send forth several Strings, which over-spreading the Ground fasten in the Earth, and take new Roots; it is yellow without, and whitish within, and bears pale green Flowers, which at last turn to a Cod full of Seed. These Roots roasted in hot Ashes, exceed our 
Eu∣ropean








view of Cartagena


CARTAGENA






Turnip; and beaten and put in Water till it works over, makes a Drink, with which the 
Indians
 Drink and Carouse till they are Drunk.


Moreover, 
Urraba
 abounds in Venison, Fish, and all sorts of ravenous Creatures, as Tygers, Lyons, and a particular strange Beast as big as an Ox, having an Ele∣phants Nose, Horses Feet, and hanging Ears.


The Trees likewise swarm with Birds; and especially near Lakes or Pools breed Pheasants and Parrots, of which some are bigger than Capons, others no bigger than Chickens.


Against 
Urraba
 juts the Mountain 
Abibe,
 whose length Westward remains un∣known; the breadth thereof in some places is about twenty Leagues; it hath many Ways which cannot be travell'd with Horses. The top of this Mountain is uninhabited; but along the Valleys, which are many and large, dwelt formerly a People that possess'd great Riches in Gold, which they gather'd out of Rivulets that fell Westward from the tops of the Mountains. It Rains here almost all the year long, which makes the Ways very bad for Travellers to pass.


At the Foot of this Mountain, towards the South, lie two small antient Casique∣doms, if we may so call them, formerly inhabited by a valiant People, call'd 
Tarabe de Zenu,
 whether chiefly the dead Bodies were brought from all the adjacent Countreys, to be buried in great State, as hath been before intimated.


The principal Towns and Places of note are 1. 
Charthagena,
 (so call'd either from the resemblance of its Situation with the City 
Carthagena
 in the Kingdom of 
Murcia
 belonging to 
Old Spain,
 or because the first Inhabitants were Citizens of the said City) which was begun to be built 
Anno
 1532. by 
Peter de Heredia,
 but fully fini∣shed by 
Georgio Robledo,
 eight years after the first Foundation thereof was laid. This Episcopal Metropolis is on the North wash'd by the North Sea over a plain shallow Ground; on the Land side the Sea flows through a narrow Bay by the City towards the Lake 
Canupote,
 which ebbs and flows equal with the Ocean, and receives and discharges its Water through two Pipes which lie under along Bridge,
 joyning 
Carthagena
 to the Main Coast. This City boasted long since above five hundred Stone Houses, being divided into twenty six large Streets, whereof four are six hundred and twenty Paces long: behind each House is a Garden; and the Church appears above all the other Buildings: The 
Dominicans
 Cloyster is also fairly built; neither is the 
Franciscans
 inferior to it, who also possess a second Edi∣fice on the Main Continent over the Bridge. The Custom-house and Court where the Courts for the whole Province of 
Carthagena
 art kept, are also stately Structures. The Haven hath two Entrances, the chiefest whereof lies half a League Eastward from the City, and the Western, call'd 
La Boca,
 is as far again; both very dange∣rous, because of the many blind Rocks that lie before them. 
Anno
 1585. when Sir 
Francis Drake
 took 
Carthagena
 by Storm, the whole was fortifi'd with Sconces, be∣sides two Forts for the better security thereof, whereof one lock'd up the narrow Mouth of the Haven with a strong Chain; not far from which stood an Abbey, Dedicated to the 
Franciscans,
 and Wall'd round about; since which they have se∣veral Out-works, Forts and Towers, to prevent all foreign Invasions. The City grows wealthy daily by the 
Peruan
 Plate-Fleet putting in there before they go to 
Spain,
 and especially by the Trade from 
New Granada
 along the River 
Magdalena.
 The Island before the Haven, antiently call'd 
Codega,
 now 
Carex,
 inhabited by Fisher-men when the 
Spaniards
 Landed there, is now desolate, the remainder of those that were destroy'd by them being fled to wild places from the 
Spaniards
 Cru∣elties; notwithstanding the People hereabouts were valiant enough to Engage with them. But since the Devastation made by Sir 
Francis Drake, Carthagena
 hath

receiv'd a more fatal Blow; for it was scarce fully repair'd, when five 
French
 Pri∣vateers burnt the City to Ashes: which Mischief was occasion'd by a 
Spanish
 Sea∣man, who being whipt by Command of the Governor, resolving for Revenge, went from 
Spain
 to 
France,
 and conducted the fore-mention'd Ships to 
Carthagena,
 where he reveng'd himself on the Governor; for finding him asleep, he first wak'd him, and after having told him of his causing him to be Whipt, he kill'd him. The Booty which the 
Spaniards
 carried from thence at that time amounted to above a hundred and fifty thousand 
Ducats.


2. 
Tolu,
 by the 
Spaniards
 now call'd 
St. Jago,
 twelve Leagues distant from 
Car∣thagena,
 a Place memorable for the excellent Balsam which is brought from thence, and commonly call'd 
The Balsam of Tolu;
 it is gather'd in a Spoonful of black Wax, stuck under the Hole cut in the Bark of a low Pine-Tree, out of which in hot Weather runs a Golden colour'd Gum, very soveraign, and of an excellent smell.


3. 
St. Crux de Mopox,
 a neat Town, seated a little above the confluence of the two Rivers, 
St. Martha
 and 
Magdalena,
 which waters this Province.


4. 
Baranca de Nolambo,
 a Place of great Traffick, especially for all Commodities of the new Kingdom of 
Granada;
 it standeth upon the Banks of the River 
Magda∣lena,
 and about six Leagues distant from the Sea.


5. 
Buena Vista,
 otherwise call'd 
St. Sebastian de Buena Vista,
 a Town commodi∣ously seated upon, a rising Ground not far from the Gulf of 
Urraba,
 or the Sound of 
Darien,
 about a League and a half from the Sea.


6. 
Villa de St. Maria,
 thirty Leagues Southward of 
Carthagena.


The Province of 
Carthagena
 is stor'd with many Brooks and great Rivers, amongst which the Stream 
Cauca
 falls into the River 
Magdalena,
 beyond 
Popayan
 near 
Mopox.


The River 
Zenu,
 which gives Denomination to the above-mention'd Ter∣ritory, makes a very convenient Harbor with its Mouth, where much Salt is to be had.


The 
Daria,
 which runs between 
Panama
 and 
Carthagena
 into the Inlet 
Urraba,
 gives its Denomination to the foregoing Province, through which it also runs, as hath been already mention'd.


The River which for its greatness is call'd 
Rio Grande,
 or 
Magdalena,
 (because it was discover'd on the Day Consecrated to that Saint) falls with such force into the Northern Ocean, about twenty three Leagues Eastward from 
Carthagena,
 that run∣ning two Leagues broad and ten long into the Sea, it retains its freshness of Water; in which there lying many Rocks, makes the same very dangerous for Ships. In the Mouth of the Haven lies an Island, which is divided by the River, the widest and most frequented Channel of which respects 
St. Martha,
 where those that carry the Merchandise up this Stream to 
New Granada,
 spend two Moneths in Toeing, when∣as they come from thence in three Weeks.


Thunder and Lightning rages here many times after a terrible manner from Midnight till Morning. In 
January
 there falls also abundance of Rain, which gli∣ding from the Mountains swells the River exceedingly.








SECT. V. St. Martha.


ST. Martha,
 so call'd from the chief City of the Province, is border'd on the West with 
New Andaluzia;
 on the East, with 
Rio de la Hacha;
 on the North, with the Ocean; and on the South, with 
New Granada;
 It is about three∣score and ten Leagues in length, and not much less in breadth: It was antiently distributed into several little 
Seignories,
 Govern'd by 
Casiques,
 or petty Princes, 
viz. Pozigueica, Betoma, Buritaca, Chimola,
 inhabited by valiant Men and beautiful Wo∣men, and above all the rest, 
Tairona,
 (whose People for a long time maintain'd War against the 
Spaniards
) lying at the Foot of the high Mountains 
Sierras Nevadas,
 whose snowy Crowns are seen thirty Leagues off at Sea, and run along in a conti∣nu'd Ridge through 
Peru
 and 
Chili
 to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan.


This Countrey was Discover'd, and part of it Planted, 
Anna
 1524. by 
Roderic de Bastredas,
 who afterwards was murder'd in his Sleep by his own People.


The Sun shines so exceeding hot near the Sea-coast, that there is no enduring of the same; but up in the Countrey the snowy Mountains occasion great Cold, and in Harvest and 
October
 it Rains exceedingly, whereas at other times it is very dry Wea∣ther, and the Winds blow generally out of the East or North-East, yet the Land-Breezes coming out of the West bring sometimes Rains with them. From the Mountains, which are stony and barren, fall many Brooks and Rivers, which wa∣ter divers Plains, the Grass and other Plants of which are often blasted by violent Storms; nevertheless Oranges, Lemmons, Granates, and all sorts of 
Spanish
 Garden Fruits grow here in great plenty. The Woods afford likewise Pigeons, Partridges, Venison, and the like; the Rivers all manner of Fish, which are seen to swim in great numbers twenty Yards under the Water, especially in the Haven 
St. Martha,
 near which formerly liv'd many Fisher men, who with Nets made of tough Twigs pleited together, caught such plenty of Fish, that they furnish'd all their Neighbors. The High-ways are made dangerous by Lyons, Tygers, and Bears.


The Countrey 
Buritaca
 affords the Inhabitants Gold; 
Tairona,
 excellent Stones against Bleeding and the Gravel, Jasper, Porphyr, and Gold; the Valley 
Tunia,
 many rich Emeraulds, which Stones us'd to be in great esteem before 
America
 pro∣duc'd such great numbers of them. 
Acosta
 relates, That a 
Spaniard
 desiring to know the Price of an Emerauld, shew'd two to an 
Italian
 Jeweller, who valu'd the one at a hundred, the other at three hundred 
Ducats;
 but soon after seeing a Chest full of them, said they were scare worth a 
Ducat
 apiece; and that the Sute which the 
Roman
 Lady wore, being beset with Emeraulds, and valu'd at four hundred thousand 
Du∣cats,
 would not sell now for half so much. This Stone or Jewel exceedingly fortifies the Sight, wherefore the Emperor 
Nero
 represented the bloody Encounters of Fen∣cers in an Emerauld. It is also judg'd to be good against the Falling-sickness, wherefore the 
Indians
 hang them in their Noses to this day, and adorn their Idols with them; they grow in stony Rocks along Veins, not unlike Crystal, and in time obtain a glittering Greenness; the biggest of them that are found in this Age are most esteem'd of in 
Genua.
 The Emerauld Pillar, which as a wonderful Orna∣ment stood in 
Hercules
's Temple in the City of 
Tyrus,
 being very famous amongst the Antients, was without doubt no more than a green Stone; and perhaps of the same Material, was the Pillar erected by the 
Arabian
 King 
Miramamolines,
 in the Ca∣thedral at 
Corduba.
 But the great fame of these Emeraulds incited 
Gonzalvez Zimenes,


Governor of 
St. Martha,
 to leave his Place and seek for them; to which end he Sail'd up the Rivulet 
Gayra
 with two Ketches and forty five 
Spaniards,
 who meeting with the Casique 
Bagotta,
 got much Gold of him, and afterwards went to the Valley 
Tessuca;
 of which 
Simandoca
 being Governor, conducted 
Ximenez
 twenty three Leagues farther to an Emerauld Rock, from whence he return'd exceedingly enriched; the rumor of which spreading up and down, made several travel thi∣ther; amongst whom was 
Peter di Lugo,
 Governor of 
Terra Firma,
 who sending for Aid from 
Carthagena,
 fought his way to 
Bagotta,
 who resisted him for some time, till at last being defeated he made Peace with them for a considerable quantity of Gold;
 which when 
Peter di Lugo
 had receiv'd, not regarding his Word, he plun∣der'd all the Countrey, and having committed all imaginable Cruelties on the Na∣tives, return'd home with an invaluable Mass of Gold and Emeraulds to 
St. Mar∣tha.
 Not long after the 
Welsares, German
 Knights, came from 
Venezuela,
 (which Ci∣ty the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth Morgag'd to them 
Anno
 1518.) and travell'd through the snowy Mountains of 
St. Martha
 with 
Indian
 Guides, whose Instru∣ctions following, they digg'd many Emeraulds out of the Valley 
Funia;
 the Inha∣bitants of which affrighted at the sight of the Strangers, hang'd themselves out of despair, though naturally valiant, and ingenious in working in Tapestry the shapes of Tygers, Lyons, and other Beasts, and painting on the Walls of their Houses variety of Figures of divers colours, covering their Floors with Mats neatly pleited of Rushes. They fed on Fish, Venison, and Mans-flesh, and also on the Roots 
Agies,
 tasting like Chesnuts, 
Yuca, Maiz, Batata,
 and 
Cassada.


The chief Cities and Places of principal note in this Province are 1. 
St. Martha,
 which gives Denomination to the whole Province, it stands built at the North Sea, which makes a large and convenient Harbor, being defended from the Winds by high Mountains and two Isles, is a Bishop's See, and hath a large Cathedral. The Houses built of Canes are cover'd with 
Palmito
-Trees, and some with woodden Shingles, The Haven hath neither Fort nor Castle to defend it, because there is no Trade but with the 
Indians,
 which bring Earthen Ware and Cotton Clothes to sell; and because the 
Spanish
 Ships seldom come hither, the Place is much gone to decay, and the more, because it is no way defended against any Assault of an Ene∣my, which the 
French,
 and afterwards the 
English,
 under the Command of Sir 
Francis Drake,
 and the following Year under Captain 
Anthony Shirley
 took advantage of, and plunder'd and burnt the City.


2. 
Teneriff,
 built on the Banks of the River 
Magdalena,
 forty Leagues from 
St. Martha.


3. 
Tamalameque,
 otherwise call'd 
Villa de las Palmas,
 twenty Leagues South of 
Te∣neriff,
 lying on a high stony Ground; between which are plain Pastures for Cattel, surrounded with high Woods, as also Pools made by the over-flowing of the Ri∣vers, whose Banks are inhabited by the 
Indians,
 who are much addicted to Sleep and Drinking. The Pools before mention'd produce abundance of Fish, as also Cro∣codiles, and the terrible 
Manati
 before describ'd.


4. 
Ocanna,
 which hath an Inland Haven.


5. 
Ramada,
 formerly call'd 
New Salamanca,
 standing at the Foot of the Mountain call'd 
Sierras Nevadas.
 This Town is famous for its Copper and Brass Mines.


6. 
Cividad de los Reyes,
 which built in the Valley 
Upari,
 stands on the Shore of the mighty River 
Guataporeya,
 where from the beginning of 
January
 till 
May
 the Eastern Breezes moderate the Heat, otherwise intolerable: But the continual Rains there∣about occasions the 
Quartan
 Ague, and many such like Distempers. The Natives hereabouts, salvage and valiant, would never submit to the 
Spaniards.
 The peculiar




The peculiar Plants of this Place are the Tree 
Xagua,
 which bears a Fruit like a Raisin, which dry'd and ground yields exceeding good Meal for Bread.


The Root 
Scorzonera,
 which cures the Bitings of Serpents. The 
Indians
 also use the Tail of a Serpent for a Remedy against the same Evil, as they take Tobacco against the Falling-sickness, and snuff the Powder in at their Nostrils, and drink the Juice thereof to cause Loosness.


The chief Rivers of this Province, are 1. 
Polomino,
 so call'd from a 
Spanish
 Cap∣tain, that was drown'd there with his Horse, falling from the 
Sierras Nevadas.


2. 
Guatupori,
 whose Water causes the Bloody-flux and Loosness, which again is cur'd by the same Water drunk with beaten Cinamon. 
Guatupori
 reckons many Rivulets, amongst which the 
Cesar
 and 
Budillo
 are both large, deep, and abounding with Fish.


Near the City 
Los Reyes
 are three great Water-pits, triangular between stony Cliffs; nigh which a Tradition goes, That of old there lurk'd a terrible Serpent, which at times devour'd a thousand People; insomuch that none durst dwell there∣abouts, till certain 
Spaniards
 having the hardiness and curiosity to go seek out this Serpent, heard a great noise in the Pits, but saw nothing like the fore-mention'd Animal.


Here are likewise several Fountains of Pitch and Tar.






SECT. VI. Rio de la Hacha.


Rio de la Hacha
 is the Name of a little Province lying on the North-East of 
St. Martha,
 wash'd on all other parts with the Waters of the Main Ocean, or with the Gulf or Bay of 
Venezuela.


The chief Towns of this Province, are 1. A small Town call'd 
De la Hacha,
 which gives Denomination to the said Province, having no convenient Haven, but otherwise seated in a Soil very rich and fertile, not onely of all sorts of Fruits and Plants, especially such as are brought from 
Spain,
 but likewise in many Mines of Gold, Gems of a large size and great value, and many excellent Salt-Wiches, as they call them; it is eight Leagues distant from 
Salamanca
 aforesaid, and eighteen frome 
Cape Villa,
 the most Westerly Point or Foreland of the Bay of 
Venezuela;
 and with the rest had the hap to be surpris'd and pillag'd by the 
English
 with Sir 
Francis Drake
 in the Year 1595. who refus'd twenty four thousand 
Ducats,
 which the Go∣vernor proffer'd him for the Pearls he had taken.


2. 
Rancheria,
 six Leagues Eastward of 
La Hacha,
 inhabited chiefly by Pearl-Fishers, or such as get their Living for the most part by Fishing for Pearl; which was wont to be good on these Coasts.


3. 
Tapia,
 five Leagues from 
La Hacha,
 and considerable, for that the adjacent Parts were laid waste by the 
English,
 to revenge the perfidiousness of the Governor of 
Salamanca,
 refusing to pay the four thousand 
Ducats
 he had promis'd, upon Con∣dition of their sparing the Town.


The last King of those that Govern'd in any of these Provinces of 
Terra Firma,
 was 
Abibeca,
 who could not be won to come down from his Palace, which he had on the top of a Tree, till a 
Spanish
 Officer, one 
Francisco de Vanquez
 began to lay an Ax to the Root thereof.


After 
Didaco Niquesa, Alphonso Oreda,
 and 
Anciso,
 had made very large Discove∣ries in these Provinces, 
Valboa
 was the first that discover'd the Way to the South-Sea.










CHAP. III. New Granada.


THe new Kingdom of 
Granada,
 as 'tis commonly call'd, was for the most part both discover'd and conquer'd by 
Gonsalvo Ximenes,
 about the Year 1536. and with so good success, that in less than a years space, the whole Countrey was quietly setled under the 
Spaniards
 Government, and the Captain with his small Company had made shift to gather together such a Mass of Treasure as may seem almost incredible, 
viz.
 from the 
Reguli,
 or petty Princes of those Coun∣treys, whom he had either destroy'd or made Tributary. But a more particular Relation of 
Ximenes
 his Journey take as followeth:


Being sent out by 
Peter Ferdinando de Lugo,
 to discover the Countreys that lay along River 
Magdalena,
 he travell'd upon the right side or it with great trouble; for not onely the brambly Woods, Moors, and deep Brooks, made the Way excee∣ding bad to be travell'd, but also the Inhabitants, who fell upon him from their Ambuscades: yet at last he reach'd 
Tora,
 which Name he chang'd into 
Pueblo de los Bracos,
 because four Rivers unite their Waters there. Here ordering his Brigan∣tines which were come up the River to cast their Anchors, he judg'd it convenient to stay all the Winter, because the swoln Rivers had drown'd the adjacent Coun∣trey. 
Ximenes
 observing that the 
Indians
 fetch'd Salt from the Sea-side, judg'd that the Countrey was inhabited, and therefore in fair Weather march'd up to the Mountain 
Opou,
 behind which he found a Countrey full of Salt-pools, which pro∣duc'd Cakes of Salt. And somewhat farther the Province Govern'd by the Casique 
Bogata,
 who at first resisting the 
Spaniards,
 was soon put to flight, when he heard the noise of the Guns. The 
Panches
 divided from 
Bogata
's Countrey by a small Moun∣tain, also maintaining continual Wars with him, suffer'd the 
Spaniards
 unmo∣lested to travel through their Countrey, and the Valley 
La Trompetta,
 to a high bar∣ren Mountain, on the top of which 
Ximenes
 found several Emeraulds; and going from thence fell upon the Casique 
Tunia,
 and three days Journey farther, upon the Governors 
Sagamosa
 and 
Diutama;
 from which three Countreys he carried above a hundred and ninety thousand pieces of fine Gold, fifty five thousand pieces of in∣different Gold, and eighteen hundred Emeraulds; all which the 
Spaniards
 left behind with Guards whilest they went back to 
Bogata,
 whom they found lying dead of his Wounds on a high Hill: But 
Sagipa, Bogata
's Successor, receiv'd 
Ximenes
 with great Civility, to engage his Assistance against his Neighbors the 
Panches;
 which he did not refuse him: but afterwards he fell most perfidiously upon the said 
Sagipa,
 whom he caus'd to be Executed, because he either could not, or would not discover where those Riches were which 
Bogata
 had left behind him. After he had pillag'd the little Region 
Neyba,
 and brought into subjection the whole Countrey, he gave it the Name of 
New Granada,
 from 
Granada
 the place of his Nativity, being the chief City of the Kingdom of 
Granada
 in 
Spain,
 and built the City 
Santa Fe;
 which done, he quitted the Place, upon information that 
Sebastian de Bevalcazar
 coming from 
Popayan,
 was seeking a Way Northward; and not long after him 
Nicholas Federman
 follow'd, each claiming 
New Granada
 as their Right, whereas 
Ximenes
 alledg'd, That the first Discovery thereof was to be ascribed to him onely: at last Agree∣ing, they resolv'd that it should be at the King of 
Spain
's disposal.




The antient Inhabitants, nam'd 
Moxas,
 divided their Countrey into two chief Principalities, 
viz. Bogota
 and 
Tunica,
 which before the 
Spaniards
 Arrival were each under their particular 
Casique
 or Prince. The Men were of a good proportion; the Women also handsomer, and of a fairer Complexion than their Neighbors: Their Habit also consisted of black, white, and divers colour'd Cotton Cloaks, and some also had Bonnets of the same. The temperateness of the Climate makes little difference between Winter and Summer. Their Houses were of Planks, and cover'd with long Rushes. Their chiefest Food was 
Maiz
 and 
Cassave,
 which first grows on Stalks as large as Canes, containing very large and weighty Spikes or Ears, each Ear generally yielding seven hundred Grains, which are Planted in hot and moist Ground; one Bushel Sow'n, generally produces three hundred. But the 
Maiz
 is distinguish'd into a courser or finer sort, which last is call'd 
Moroche,
 the Leaves and Canes whereof afford a wholsom Provender for Horses, and the Corn, Bread for the Inhabitants, who make it several ways; for sometimes they boyl it in Water, and at other times parch it in Ashes, or grind it to Meal, which kneading in∣to Dough, they make into Cakes, Biskets, and the like: Moreover, 
Maiz
 steep'd in Water, and after being boyl'd and set a working, makes a very strong Liquor. They also use 
Cassada,
 which they make of the Root 
Yuca,
 which being large and thick, is cut in pieces, grated, and all its Juice, which is deadly poyson, being press'd out, is Bak'd in thin Cakes. There is likewise another sort of 
Yuca,
 which hath not so poysonous a Juice, keeping good a long time, and is both wholsom, and of a good taste. The Natives of old liv'd much upon the Roots 
Yomus,
 and 
Cubias,
 all sorts of Venison, Fowls, and Fish, which the Rivers and Lakes afford in great abundance. Those that are left of the Natives, are a deceitful, crafty, and ingenious sort of People, very apt to learn Art, and to Trade with Salt to 
Rio Grande,
 and the Mountain 
Opou.


Besides Copper and Steel-Mines; this Countrey hath also several of Gold; and the Fields produce all manner of Plants.


The 
Panchas
 which remain are yet a salvage People, but their Countrey is an in∣different fertile Soil, though not in all places alike; for those which border upon 
Tunia
 fed much heretofore on Pismires; of which some being long, have double Wings, others lesser and without Wings; which last sort being roasted, are ac∣counted a great Dainty; and a speedy Remedy against the Distemper of the Gravel. There are also a sort of venomous Pismires, which stinging a Man, cause a swell∣ing and great itching, and these are call'd 
Tayoques,
 whose Stings are cur'd by a Plaister of bruis'd Pismires.


The Countrey is bounded on the North with 
Castella Aurea
 aforesaid; on the West, with 
Mare del Zur;
 on the East, with 
Venezuela;
 the Southern parts of it being not well discover'd, by reason of certain huge and unpassable Mountains, which block it up wholly on that side, save onely where a Passage is kept open in∣to the Province of 
Peru,
 specially so call'd: It containeth in length about a hun∣dred and thirty Leagues, and not much less in breadth, being for the most part a very healthful Countrey, and abounding in Mines of the best sort of Metal, besides others of Brass and Iron. It is subdivided into these two Provinces, 
viz. Granada
 and 
Popayana.






SECT. II. Granada.


GRanada,
 specially so call'd, is a Countrey of a very temperate and good Air, as hath been before observ'd, neither subject to over-much Cold, nor to extremity of Heat; which is the more to be admir'd by reason of its near∣ness to the 
Line,
 from which it is distant Northward but a very few Degrees.


The Towns and Places of chief importance are, 1. 
St. Foy,
 commonly call'd 
St. Foy de Bogota,
 which was the old Name of this Province, and to distinguish it from another 
St. Foy,
 in the Countrey of 
New Mexico
 above mention'd. It is the Me∣tropolis and Capital City of this Province, an Arch-bishop's See, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor, built by the above-mention'd 
Gonsalvo Ximenes
 upon the Lake call'd 
Guatavita,
 and hath been long since inhabited by above six hundred Families of 
Spaniards.


2. 
St. Michael,
 twelve Leagues Northward of 
St. Foy,
 and a well Traded Town. The 
Indians
 that dwell about this Place being above five thousand, pay great Tri∣bute yearly. Not far from hence lies the Lake 
Guatavita,
 where the Inhabitants in former times Offer'd much Gold to their Idols.


3. 
Tocaima,
 fourteen Leagues Westward from 
St. Foy,
 within a Territory which antiently belong'd to the 
Panches,
 who yet possess the worst part of it, lying still wild and unreduc'd: It is situate on the Banks of the great River 
Pati,
 which falls into the Rivulet 
Magdalena.
 This City, which enjoys the benefit of a wholsom Cli∣mate, is surrounded with Mines of Gold, Copper, Silver, and Lead. And besides the Fruits of the Countrey, all 
Spanish
 Plants thrive exceedingly after once Planted; and though Sheep will not breed here, yet Kine, Hogs, and Goats increase daily, but are often devour'd by Tygers, Lyons, and Bears. The Woods produce Nut-Trees, Cedars, 
Guaiacum,
 or 
Pock-Wood,
 and the wonderful Tree 
Zeyba,
 whose Leaves fall off every twelve hours, and grow again. The Fowls of this Countrey are ma∣ny and several. Near the City are sulphurous Fountains, whose Waters cure Scabs and Leprosie. In the Valleys also flow Springs of salt Water, which thrown on Herbs, turns to Rozen and Pitch, and is good to make Boats tight. The tops of the Mountains are continually cover'd with Snow, notwithstanding some of them vomit forth horrible Flames and Ashes, which are blown several Leagues over the Countrey. The vicissitude of the Weather occasions two Summers and two Win∣ters; the first Summer begins in 
December,
 and the second in 
June;
 the first Winter accordingly begins in 
March,
 and the other in 
October.
 This alteration of Seasons is not distinguish'd by any change of Heat or Cold, but the continuance of fair Weather during the Summer, and in the Winter, of such terrible Hurricanes, that blow from North to South, or from South to North, with such Thundering and Lightning, as if the end of the World were at hand. The chiefest Trees that grow here are Cedars, and one that bears exceeding great Almonds. The 
Quaque
 also bears a pleasant Fruit about the bigness of a Goose-Egg; and the Fig-Tree, Figs as large as Oranges. The 
Agnapa
 which grows here is of such a nature, that an 
Euro∣pean
 sleeping under it, swells exceedingly, but an 
Indian
 bursts. The Bark and Sprigs of the 
Hobo,
 which grows high and round, serve against Swellings and Ul∣cers, and occasion also Loosness. Sugar-Canes grow also here in great abundance, amongst which feed certain Beasts like Hogs, whose Navels grow on their Backs; and large Stags. The Fountains in most places of this Countrey run with salt







map of Northwestern South America


TERRA FIRMA et NOVUM REGNUM GRANATENSE et POP
AYAN






Water; and sometimes Salt is found betwen fresh-Water Brooks. The Natives, who are valiant, subtile, and well proportion'd, are since their giving over eating of Mans-flesh much increas'd, and many of them forsaking their Heathenish Idola∣try, have embrac'd the 
Roman-Catholick
 Religion.


4. 
La Palma,
 built 
Anno
 1572. in a certain Territory, the People whereof were antiently call'd 
Musi
 and 
Colymae.


5. 
Trinidad,
 which is indeed the antient 
Tudela
 renew'd, or a City sprung out of the Ruines thereof. This 
Tudela
 stood on the Shore of the River 
Zarbi,
 which run∣ning between high Mountains, makes the Rivulet 
Turatena,
 and in the same Terri∣tory as 
La Palma
 above mention'd, 
viz.
 of the 
Musi
 & 
Colymae,
 by whom the 
Spaniards,
 who had here a Colony, were so exceedingly molested, that they deserted the same, together with their Governor 
Peter de Orsua:
 yet not long after the forsaken Place was again re-built by the Name of 
Trinidad;
 but that Place proving incommodi∣ous, was again abandon'd, and a new 
Trinidad
 built, where now it is to be seen on a convenient place Eastward from the high and cold Mountain 
Paramo.
 From seve∣ral rich Gemmaries thereabouts are digg'd store of Emeraulds, Crystal like Dia∣monds, white Marble, and the Beryl, especially on the Mountains 
Ytoco
 and 
Abipi.


6. 
Tunia,
 having a Territory about it, to which it gives Denomination; It lies on a high Hill, from whence the Church and two Cloysters of the 
Dominican
 Fry∣ers are seen at a great distance. Here also is kept the greatest Market in 
New Granada.


7. 
Pampelona,
 sixty Leagues distant from 
St. Foy
 to the North-East, abounding with Cattel and Gold.


8. 
Merida,
 surrounded with Corn-Fields, the farthest Town of this Province North-Eastward towards 
Venezuela.


9. 
Belez,
 which though it suffers great prejudice by a burning a Mountain that vomits Fire and Stones, and also Thunder and Lightning, is the greatest Residence of several Orders of Fryers.


10. 
Marequita,
 otherwise call'd 
St. Sebastian del Oro,
 which lies under a hot Cli∣mate, and hath much Pasture.


11. 
Ybague,
 the Habitation chiefly of 
Dominicans.


12. 
La Vittoria de los Remedios;
 and 13. 
Juan de los Lanos,
 or 
St. John of the Plains,
 seated in a rich Nook of the Countrey, where there are good Silver and Gold-Mines.


The Merchandise that come to these Towns, are brought up the River 
Magdalena
 in 
Canoos
 of sixty Foot long.






SECT. III. Popayana.


POpayana,
 the other part of this new Kingdom, is border'd on the West with part of 
Granada
 last spoken of, from which the River 
St. Martha
 divides it for the most part: On the North it hath 
Nova Andaluzia,
 or 
Carthagena;
 on the West, 
Mare del Zur;
 and on the South, 
Quito,
 or rather some unreduc'd Countreys lying betwixt them both; It extends in length above a hundred Leagues from North to South, but in breadth, betwixt the River and the South Sea, not much above forty or fifty. The Countrey is said to be a little too much subject to Rain, yet not so, but that the fertility of the Soil answers the industry of the Inhabitants in most places very well.




Sebastian de Bevalcazar,
 Governor of 
Quito,
 marching 
Anno
 1536. with a Company of 
Spaniards
 to 
Otabalo,
 where the Countrey 
Papayan
 begins, was often set upon by the Natives from their Ambuscades, and the many Inconveniences which he suf∣fer'd for want of Provisions, and trouble of travelling over the high Mountains, had necessitated him to return, had he not been resolutely bent to discover the Countrey; to which purpose marching on leisurely, he came into the heart of 
Popayan,
 where his wearied People sufficiently resting themselves amidst a fruitful Countrey, where they found pleasant Fruit-Trees, Houses full of Provisions, and fresh Rivers, which glided from the Mountain 
Andes,
 and some of the Rivulets also affording Gold, were encourag'd to build several Villages; in which nevertheless they made no Settlement, either because they could not get Gold enough, or else being driven from thence by the valiant Natives.


The Places of chief note in it, are 1. 
Popayan,
 situate on the Banks of a fair Ri∣ver, but not nam'd, and in the midst of a Plain in a place of great Wealth, and en∣joying a good Air. The original of the Name 
Popayan
 is from the 
Casique
 who Go∣vern'd there at the time of the 
Spaniards
 first Arrival. It is a Bishop's See, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor of the Province. The chief Buildings are the Cathedral, and a Monastery of the Fryers 
De la Merced.
 The 
Savanna
 Grounds to∣wards the North feed many fat Cattel. The Fields produce the best 
American Maiz.
 Some of the adjacent Mountains either vomit Smoak, Flames, great Stones, or scald∣ing Water, leaving a Salt behind it. Beyond the City 
Popayan
 the great River 
Mag∣dalena
 takes its original in the Valley 
Cali,
 where several Brooks gliding from the Mountain 
Andes,
 inhabited by the 
Cocunocos,
 unite their Waters.


2. 
Antiochia,
 otherwise call'd 
St. Fides de Antiochia,
 on the Borders of 
New Anda∣luzia,
 and about a hundred Leagues from 
Popayan.
 In the midst of a small Territory to which it gives Name, in the Valley 
Nore,
 between the River 
Magdalena
 and 
Daria,
 wash'd by Rivulets, whose Sands are Golden, and whose Banks are shaded with all sorts of Fruit-Trees. The Inhabitants white and very rational, sleep in the Night under the open Skye: Their Houses are built a good distance from the High∣ways; near which the Pastures feed abundance of Sheep. The Pools breed plenty of Fish, and the Mines store of Gold, especially in the Mountain 
Buritica.


3. 
Caramanta,
 seated likewise on the Banks of the River 
St. Martha,
 within a little Province also of the same Name; the Inhabitants whereof being valiant and strong go naked, and dwell in little Huts, make white Salt out of a Fountain and a little Lake: they generally go to 
Antiochia
 in six hours, which is forty five Leagues, so swift runs the Stream.


4. 
St. Anne,
 in the 
Cantred
 or Hundred of 
Anzerma,
 a Town neatly situate upon the side of an Hill betwixt two Rivers, and in the midst of Plain no less pleasant than fertile: It was so call'd by 
Bevalcazar,
 because the 
Indians
 of this Place name the Salt 
Anzer;
 it is surrounded with Villages and Woods on a high Plain between two Rivers. The Air being exceeding hot, lightens generally every day.


5. The Village 
Pueblo Llana,
 which is inhabited by little People, who Trade in Salt, and have also Golden Rivulets. Near this Place is the Valley 
Aburra,
 consist∣ing of many fruitful Plains, moistned by several Rivers; the Inhabitants whereof at the 
Spaniards
 first coming thither, hang'd themselves, with their Wives and Children.


6. 
St. Jago de Arma,
 built in a Wood of Palm-Trees, so nam'd from the Terri∣tory in which it standeth, rich and famous for its Mines of Gold, which it is said to have many and very good: The Ground round about being Mountainous, hath several Rivers, the chiefest whereof call'd 
Di Arma,
 is dangerous to cross, especially

in Winter. The unwholsom Air hereabouts occasions many Sicknesses. Amongst other Fruits that grow in this County, is the 
Pytahaya,
 which whoe're eats, voids Urine as red as Blood. Adjacent to it are the little Provinces 
Paucuran, Pozo,
 and 
Picara,
 which possess Golden Mines: also the Territory 
Carrapa,
 which hath high and rugged Land, and many Rivulets: likewise the County 
Quimbaya,
 which a∣bounds with thick and long Canes, wherewith the Natives build their Houses; in the hollow Bodies of these Canes the wild Bees gather store of Honey; and amongst them breed also exceeding great Lyons, the four-footed Beast 
Chuca,
 which carries its Young in a Bag, Stags, Rabbets and 
Guadaquinajes,
 which being bigger than Hares, are exceeding good Meat. The Mountain 
Nevada,
 wonderful high, and smoaking continually, produces the golden Rivers 
Tacurumbi
 & 
De la Cequo.
 Twenty Leagues or more distant from 
St. Jago is,
 7. 
Carthago,
 the chief City of 
Quimbayaes,
 and by which the aforesaid Rivers run. The temperate Climate here gives Health and long Life to the Inhabitants, who have several Fountains of salt. Water, and the Fruit 
Caymito,
 not unlike a Peach, black within, having little Kernels, and a Juice which Dyes so deep, that it can scarce be wash'd off. Horses and Cows they have likewise very plentiful. 
Carthago
 it self stands in a pleasant Plain between two Rivulets; the Ways that lead to the same are very dirty, because of the continual Rain which falls there, with Lightning and Thunder. A League beyond the City flows the Stream 
Consota;
 near which lies a Lake, out of which Salt is made.


8. The City 
Cali,
 the Residence for the Governor and Collector, lying under a hot Climate in a plain Valley at a River, which falling from the Mountain; glides to the Stream 
Magdalena.
 Round about the same dwelt antiently several People, 
viz.
 the 
Gorrones,
 so call'd, because they nam'd a Fish 
Gorron,
 the 
Chancos,
 Giants, with long Faces and broad Foreheads, the 
Aarbacoas, Agnales,
 and 
Los Timbas,
 inhabi∣ting among barren Mountains; but most of them were slain by the 
Spaniards,
 or destroy'd by one another, few onely escaping to the tops of the Mountains. The Countrey also swarms with wild Beasts, which have also devour'd many of the Inhabitants, both 
Indians
 and 
Spaniards.


9. The Haven 
Bonaventure,
 situate in a deep Inlet, about which live some Fa∣milies which send the Commodities that come from 
New Spain
 to 
Popayan, Cali,
 and other Places; and though there be a Way along by the River 
Dagua,
 convenient for Mules and Horses to travel, yet it is seldom us'd, because the Cattel are so wea∣ried out with the long Journey, that they cannot go through with their Loads; wherefore they employ the 
Indians
 to carry their heavy Burthens over the Moun∣tains, which they do for a small Reward.


10. 
St. Juan de Pasto,
 giving Denomination to the Countrey about it, and being built on the pleasant Plains of the Valley 
Atris,
 is situate in a wholsom Climate, and is moistned by several Fountains and the River 
Angasmayo,
 the Boundary of 
Peru.
 The 
Spaniards
 have several Houses here, and breed store of Cattel, and espe∣cially Hogs. They have likewise Sugar-Mills, with which they make abundance of Sugar. The antient Inhabitants were salvage, deform'd, and of little Reason.


11. 
Timana,
 giving Denomination to the Countrey about, is plac'd under a hot Climate, yet the Inhabitants live long; they drive a great Trade with Thred spun out of the Herb 
Pita;
 and also with Sweet-meats, Fruits Preserv'd with Honey and Sugar, and especially a Kernel not unlike an Almond. In their Gardens they Plant the Herb 
Cocoa,
 which they chew constantly for the strengthning of their Hearts. Near 
Pita
 is a Mountain with Load-stones; and somewhat farther the Habitations of the valiant 
Yalcones
 in the Valley 
Aquirya,
 the 
Paezes, Pixaos,
 and 
Manipos,
 which so molested the 
Spaniards,
 that they forc'd them, to forsake the Towns 
Neyra, St. Vincent,
 and 
Ville de los Angelos.




12. 
Guadalajara de Buga;
 and 13. 
Sebastian de la Plata,
 built on a Plain near the River 
Guali;
 the Countrey about which is exceedingly troubled with Earthquakes, and the Inhabitants with their Neighbors the 
Nineres,
 who bring the Flesh of their Prisoners to Sale in the publick Shambles.


14. 
Almague,
 built on a high Mountain, and lying under a cool Climate, is sur∣rounded with fruitful Fields, which feed store of Cattel, and enrich'd with several Gold-Mines.


15. 
Juan de Truxillo,
 which the 
Indians
 call 
Yscance.


16. 
Madrigall;
 17. 
Chapanchipa;
 18. 
Malaga;
 and 19. 
Agreda;
 the Mountains about which inclose store of Gold.


Between the Promontory 
De Corrientes
 and the Island 
Palmas,
 are the Rivers 
Sali∣nas
 and 
Balsas,
 which fall into the Southern Ocean; 
St. Juan,
 whose Banks are in∣habited by a salvage People which dwell in the tops of the Trees, because the Ri∣ver oftentimes overflows the Countrey. They sowe Pease and Beans, and catch Fish, but buy other Provisions, with Gold.


Against the Mouth of this River 
St. Juan
 lies the Isle 
Gorgona,
 three Leagues in circumference, which is compar'd to Hell, because of the dismal Woods which are upon it, barren Mountains, Millions of 
Musticho's,
 whose Stings are intolerable, and never-ceasing Rain, insomuch that the Sun never shines upon it.


West-South-West from 
Gorgona
 lies the round Island 
Del Gallo,
 about a League in circumference; it is divided by several Rivers, and round about Planted with Trees, on which the 
Indians
 dwell as at the River 
St. Juan.








CHAP. IV. Peru.


PEru,
 so call'd, as some think, from the River 
Beru
 afore mention'd, in the Southern part of 
America,
 was antiently a great and mighty Kingdom, as 
Mexico
 in the Northern, and fell under the Power of the 
Spaniards
 much af∣ter the same manner that the Kingdom of 
Mexico
 did, 
viz.
 through the Dissentions and Differences amongst the People themselves, as in the History of this considera∣ble part of the 
New World
 will be related at large hereafter.


The Kingdom of the Kings of 
Cusco,
 which in some sence, and by some Writers upon occasion, is call'd 
The Kingdom of Peru,
 was extended by the last 
Inca
 or King, 
Huayna Capac,
 from North to South above a thousand Leagues together, compre∣hending not only a great part of the Province of 
Chile
 towards the South, but also the new Kingdom of 
Granada,
 and divers other Provinces to the North; but 
Peru,
 properly so call'd, containeth little more than half so much, 
viz.
 six hun∣dred Leagues in length, and about fifty or threescore in breadth, except onely in some places, as in the Countrey of 
Chacopoyas,
 where 'tis thought it may be a hun∣dred Leagues from the 
Andes
 to the South Sea: It lieth between the first and fifth Degrees of Southern Latitude, and is bounded on the East and North-East with that vast Ridge of Mountains which they call the 
Andes;
 on the West it is wash'd with 
Mare del Zur;
 on the North it hath the Countrey of 
Popayan;
 and on the South, 
Chile:
 It is commonly divided into three parts, which they call 
The Plains, The Hill-Comtrey,
 and 
The Andes;
 the 
Plains
 are that part of the Countrey which lie







map of Peru


PERV






along upon the Sea-Coast, being for the most part a meer Level without any Hills at all. The 
Sierra,
 as they call it, or 
Hill-Countrey,
 is that part of 
Peru
 which is part∣ly mountainous and partly plain, fertile and well inhabited in both. The 
Andes
 are so high, rocky, and inaccessible, that they are scarce inhabited at all but by Salva∣ges, save onely upon the skirts of them. The 
Plains
 from the Sea-shore to the 
Hill-Countrey,
 are for the most part about ten Leagues over or broad, upon which it scarce raineth all the year long. The 
Hill-Countrey
 is commonly twenty Leagues in breadth where narrowest; and from 
September
 to 
April
 hath Rain, the rest of the Year generally being fair Weather; but on the 
Andes,
 which take up all the rest of the Countrey of 
Peru,
 it raineth almost continually all the year long. In the 
Hill-Countrey
 their Summer begins in 
April,
 as is said, and ends in 
September;
 but in the 
Plains
 it begins in 
October,
 and ends in 
May;
 so that in the space of a day a Man may feell both Summer and Winter; be scorch'd with excessive Heat in the Morn∣ing, and yet well nipt with Cold before Night. The 
Andes
 generally are cover'd with thick Woods and wild Forrests. The 
Hill-Countrey
 is for a great space naked and open; the 
Plains
 in many places sandy and dry, and would be much more scorch'd with Heat than they are, but for the neighborhood of the Sea, which affords them many cooling Gales from the South and South-West Winds, whose property, al∣though it be natural in other parts to be tempestuous, to bring Rain and foul Wea∣ther, yet here there is nothing but Serenity and fair Sun-shine days all the year long, although these Winds blow almost without ceasing upon the Countrey, and no other at any time, whereas the 
Sierra,
 or 
Hill-Countreys
 have Wind from every Coast, and such as bringeth all sorts of Weather with it, Rain, Hail, Frost, Snow, great claps of Thunder,
 
&c.
 The Countrey affordeth not so much Cattel of the breed of 
Europe
 as some other Provinces of 
America;
 but in stead of Kine and Sheep, the Woods and Pastures are replenish'd with multitudes of the 
Vicugnes
 and 
Pacos,
 which are of no less Profit and Service. The 
Pacos
 here are said to be as big as some young Hei∣fers of two years old, bearing a Fleece like Sheep, and their Flesh no less pleasant than the Mutton of 
Europe.
 But the great Wealth of this Countrey lies out of sight in the bowels of the Earth, 
viz.
 in those rich and (as they may seem) inexhaustible Mines both of Gold and Silver, which, as 'tis well known, the Countrey of 
Peru
 affordeth more than any other Province of 
America
 besides. The 
Sierra
 opens into large Valleys, amongst the chiefest whereof are 
Xauxa, Andaguailas,
 and 
Yucay,
 all of them well inhabited and fruitful. Below 
Cusco
 the Mountains 
Andes
 and those of 
Sierra
 run a greater distance than elsewhere one from the other, leaving the great Plain 
Callao
 in the middle. Moreover, several sandy Wilds, without Water, Herbs, Trees, or any living Creature, except Birds, extend from 
Tumbez
 to 
Taparaca.
 From the Valleys flow several Rivers into the Southern Ocean. On the Mountain 
Pira
 is a Fountain call'd 
Puchio,
 which springs in the Night,
 but is quite dry in the Day∣time. Also near the chief City 
Quito
 in the Valley 
Chilo,
 is a Fountain whose Wa∣ters boyl faster or slower according as any one speaks softer or louder; and when not a word is spoken, it stirs not at all. If any thing exceed this for strangeness,
 it is a Rock in the Province 
Concuchos,
 which is all compos'd of black and white Stones, which are so neatly plac'd by Nature, as if Art had done a Master-piece, in the exact placing of them one between another: but the chiefest thing belong∣ing to it worthy of admiration, is a wonderful power either to heal or hurt; for if the black Stones in this Rock be touch'd by any, they cause immediate Death; whenas the white ones cure all manner of Sicknesses, and being digg'd out, leave a Seed behind them, out of which grow new Stones to fill up the empty place.


Iuca Garcilasso,
 Extracted from the 
Peruvian
 Kings, tells us concerning Plants, That



 he saw a Raddish which a Man with both Arms could scarce embrace, and that under the shade of their Leaves, Horses might stand. But of all the 
Peruan
 Fruit the 
Cocoa
 is the crown, which grows on Trees of a Fathom long in hot and moist Grounds of the Valleys between 
Andes
 and 
Sierra;
 from whence it is carried to the Sea-Coast in long Baskets by Companies of three or four thousand at a time on the Backs of the Sheep 
Pacos.
 Before the 
Spaniards
 coming hither none might chew 
Cocoa
 without the Governor's leave: A handful thereof chew'd and suck'd in the Mouth, enables a Man to travel two days without any other Sustenance, and mix'd with burnt Bones or Chalk, it is accounted an excellent Dish; there is such extraordi∣nary plenty of them, that the Inhabitants spend yearly 90000 Baskets of the Leaves in Pottage. The 
Peruans
 also esteem 
Mamayes,
 a Fruit which grows round, not un∣like a Peach, with two Stones, hard Rinds, and a well-rellish'd Pulp within, which dipt in Sugar is a great Dainty; they grow for the most part in the Islands. The 
Guaiyavas
 bears a wholsom and delicious Fruit like a large Plumb. The 
Palto,
 a Tree with many Boughs, bears a Fruit resembling a Pear, having a hard Rind, and within the Pulp a great Stone. The Fruit which grows on the 
Annona
 hath out∣wardly the same shape, but white within, and hath many black Kernels, which taste very deliciously. The Fruit 
Andas,
 so call'd from the desolate 
Peruan
 Moun∣tains on which they grow, resemble the fore-mention'd 
Cocoa,
 but differ from the 
East-Indian,
 because they are full of hard shell'd Almonds, the like whereof grows on the Tree 
Cachapoyas,
 which are not inferior to any 
European
 Fruits that grow on Trees; in that part of 
Peru
 which hath its Name from that Fruit is the best sort, being ex∣ceedingly devour'd by Monkies, who plucking the 
Cachapoya
 Almonds from their Stalks, throw them on the Ground to break their prickly Shells, that so they may eat the Kernels without hurt. The 
Mille
-Tree, being a sort of Grapes, furnishes with Wine. But the greatest benefit the Inhabitants receive is by their Sheep 
Pacos
 and 
Moromoros,
 which carry great Loads, and feed on what they find by the Way; their Flesh is good and wholsom, and being either Smoak'd or Salted, keeps good a considerable time; their Wool dress'd affords 
Cumbi,
 of which they make fine

Table-clothes and Tapestry, which on both sides is alike. The chiefest Weavers liv'd formerly at 
Copachica,
 near the great Lake 
Titicacu:
 They Dye their Wool with the Juice of boyl'd Herbs. It seems also strange to consider what Loads the fore∣mention'd Sheep carried, for besides all sorts of Merchandise, they convey'd the Silver from 
Potosi
 to 
Arica,
 a Way of sixty three Leagues; but in former times they brought it as far again to 
Arequipa;
 and though they carried two thousand Bars at a time, amounting to above thirty thousand 
Ducats,
 yet they had no other Guard but a few Herdsmen, who driving them slept with them in the Nights under the bare Skie, yet lost none of their Riches, but when the bald Sheep call'd 
Moromoros,
 being wearied with their Loads, standing still, stretch'd put their Necks, and looking on their Drivers; on a sudden ran up into the Mountains, by which means the Silver was oft-times lost, if they were not suddenly shot. The woolly Sheep 
Pacos
 have also strange Tricks, for they often fall down under their Loads, and cannot be got up again, but must be let alone till they rise of themselves. So soon as one of the Sheep hath gotten the Mange (which the 
Peruvians
 call 
Tecarache,
) they bury them alive to prevent farther Infection.


The antient Natives, though differing in Language and Customs, yet went all Apparell'd after the same fashion, the Men cover'd themselves with a shirt, which came down below their Knees, and over that a Cotton Cloak; the Women wore woollen Coats down to their Ancles: Their Head-Ornaments were different ac∣cording to an inviolable Compact between the Natives of several Provinces; for some were wrought, some plain, some divers colour'd Caps, with two, three, or no Feathers, according to the Custom of the Place: They were generally of a middle Stature; but those that were near the 
Equinoctial Line
 lesser.
 Their Histo∣ries make mention also of Gyants, who formerly inhabited the Promontory 
St. Helena,
 were each four times bigger than an ordinary Man, and fed not onely on the greatest Sea-Monsters, but devour'd each of them thirty 
Peruvians
 at a Meal. The Stone Images of these Gyants are at this day to be seen not far from 
Puerto Viejo.
 They likewise kept for a long time Annual Feast-Days, on which they la∣mented the loss of the Gyants, which (as they say) was as followeth:


A Youth glittering in glory like the Sun descended from Heaven, and breath'd Fire, which rending the Rocks so terrifi'd the Giants, that they fled into a deep Cave, where they were all kill'd.


Cornelius Whitefleet
 relates, That 
Helvius,
 Governor of 
Puerto Viejo,
 being stirr'd up by the Report of the fore-mention'd Images, caus'd all the Graves to be broke open, in some of which he found Bones, which they suppos'd to be Whale-Bones, had not the Sculls manifested the contrary.


Concerning the original of the Kingdom of 
Peru
 the Natives give this Account of it: That the most antient Inhabitants flock'd together like wild Beasts, with∣out constant Abodes, Customs, Laws, or Governors, which salvageness is still re∣tain'd in many Parts, amongst the 
Brasilians, Chunches, Chiruguanes, Yscayungus, Piloco∣nens,
 most of the 
Floridans, Chinchemeco's,
 and others, which degenerate from all Hu∣manity. In time when some kind of Government began to be observ'd, it was ra∣ther Popular than Monarchical; yet generally those that were most powerful, va∣liant and subtile, bore the greatest sway: Amongst whom the first that five Ages since Commanded over the Inhabitants of the Valley 
Cusco,
 was 
Ingaroca,
 a subtile and politick Person, who built the Fort 
Pucora,
 Eastward near the Foot of the Mountain 
Andes,
 that so he might bridle the People which inhabited in those Parts between the Rivers, Moors, and Lakes, where the remainders of the Fort are to be seen at this day: Moreover, he conquer'd all the Countrey along the Sou∣thern

Ocean towards the North and South, giving out that he was extracted from one of the seven 
Ingas
 (by which Name the 
Peruan
 Kings have been styl'd ever since) which came out of the Cave 
Pacaritambo,
 where they were preserv'd against the Deluge (of which the 
Heathens
 in 
America
 had long since an obscure knowledge,) and restor'd the drowned Families; wherefore every one not onely obey'd, but paid him Tribute, and bound themselves to receive of him the true Religion, which they desir'd he would teach them, as none knowing the same better than he, whom they look'd upon as Extracted from the 
Ingas.
 Amongst these 
Ingas
 the chie∣fest was said to be 
Mangocapa,
 who, according to their fabulous Tradition, climb'd through the Window 
Tambo
 out of the Cave 
Pacaritambo,
 and produc'd two Families, 
viz. Hunan Cusco,
 and 
Urin Cusco;
 from the first whereof 
Ingaroca
 affirm'd him∣self Descended, and having first made himself Master of all the Countreys about 
Cusco,
 rais'd the Family 
Vicaquiquirao,
 and laid out a great part of his Revenues upon Gold and Silver Utensils, and Ornaments for his Person and House, which he in his last Will charg'd that none of his Successors should inherit, nor dwell in his Palace, but that every one should build a new Habitation for themselves: He also erected divers Golden Idols.


Some Authors begin this 
Dynastie
 of the Kings of 
Peru
 in a very different manner, making 
Mango Capa
 to be the first thereof, and to have been Succeeded by his Son 
Chincaroca,
 which cannot but be the same with this 
Ingaroca
 here mention'd. 
Yaguar∣guoqu
 (that is,
 
Crier of Blood,
 because on a time being Commander, and taken Pri∣soner, out of vexation and exceeding grief he cried 
Blood
) Succeeding him after his Death, rais'd the Family 
Aocaillipanaca,
 and was Succeeded by his eldest Son, the wealthy 
Viracocha Inga,
 of whom, when the 
Spaniards
 conquer'd 
Peru,
 went a Re∣port, that great Riches lay buried in the Earth with him; wherefore 
Gonzalus Pi∣zarrus
 tortu'd the Natives after an inhumane manner, to know of them where the Grave of the said 
Inga
 was; at last obtaining his Desire, he digg'd for the Body, which he found so well Embalm'd, that it seem'd to live, but no Gold with it; wherefore 
Pizarrus
 deceiv'd in his expectation, burnt the Corps; the Ashes where∣of the 
Indians
 gathering in Urns, worshipp'd, though when he liv'd the Vulgar were much incens'd at him, for taking upon him the Name of 
Viracocha,
 who was their supream God and Creator of all things; but he pacifi'd them, saying, That 
Viracocha
 appearing to him in a Dream, had commanded him to take that Name up∣on him.


The fourth 
Inga,
 call'd 
Pachacuto Yupangui
 succeeded in the Throne after the Death of his eldest Brother, who was slain in a Field-Battel against the 
Changas,
 inhabiting the Valley 
Andaguailas,
 where the 
Peruan
 Army was utterly defeated, few of them onely escaping by flight; among whom was 
Yupangui,
 who perswaded the rest to a subtile Design, by alledging, That the Almighty Creator, angry at their Destru∣ction, had reveal'd many Secrets to him, 
viz.
 That the Creator in Heaven was call'd 
Viracocha Pachayachachie;
 That he resented it very ill; That whereas he for∣merly made Heaven, Sun, Moon, Stars, and Men, none worshipp'd him for it, but in stead of him they reverenc'd the Sun, Thunder, and the Earth, who had their Beings from him; That he would shew his Power against the victorious 
Changas
 by an unexpected Assistance of an invisible Army. This being believ'd of every one, stirr'd up the 
Peruans
 far and near, insomuch that in a short time a vast Army being rais'd, presented themselves to 
Yupangui,
 who made good use thereof; and also told them that 
Viracocha
 had decreed in Heaven, that he 
Yupangui
 should be his Vicegerent on Earth; which the Army believing, set the 
Peruan
 Crown which they had taken from his Father, on his Head: Thus promoted, he march'd against

the 
Changas,
 whom in a bloody Battel he conquer'd, and brought them all under his Obedience: Moreover, he made his Soldiers believe, that they were not the Con∣querors, but invisible Men, whom 
Viracocha
 had sent, and who could be seen by none but himself; and that after the Battel they were turn'd into Stones, which they must seek for. Whereupon they gathering a great number of Stones on the Mountains,
 
Yupangui
 call'd them 
Pururancas,
 and order'd that they should be worshipp'd, and carried with them into the Field whensoe're they fought another Battel, hoping thereby to stir up his Soldiers to be couragious, who firmly believ'd, that with the visible Stones walk'd invisible Heroes that would certainly assist them. This Ima∣gination wrought so much, that 
Yupangui
's Army assur'd of Victory with the help of the Stones, went on undauntedly on all Designs, insomuch that being fear'd by all the adjacent People, he forc'd them all to submission. This 
Yupangui
 rais'd the Family 
Yuaupococa,
 and plac'd a great Golden Image call'd 
Indyllapa
 on a Golden Chariot, which since was religiously worshipp'd, and afterwards carried to 
Caxa∣malca,
 for a Ransom of the 
Peruvian
 King 
Attabaliba,
 whom the 
Spanish
 General 
Pizar∣rus
 kept Prisoner, and at last Strangled. The Councellor 
Polus
 opening 
Yupangui
's Grave, found the Body Embalm'd, and no way defaced, but the Eyes cover'd with thin Golden Plates, and on his Head appear'd the Scar of a Stone which had been thrown at him; and though the Body had lain eighty years in the Grave, yet it seem'd rather living than dead, being onely a little grey. This Corps, as also seve∣ral other 
Inga's,
 the Marquess 
Camette
 brought from 
Cusco
 to 
Lima,
 so to prevent the 
Peruvians
 worshipping of them.


Yupangui
 after his Decease was succeeded by 
Sopa Inga,
 and he by his Son of the same Name, who rais'd the Family 
Ayoac Aillo:
 The last (for nothing worthy of memory was done by either of them) was succeeded by 
Guaynacava,
 a wealthy and valiant young Man, who was no sooner setled on the Throne, but he manag'd all things with great prudence, maintain'd War with several People, and conquer'd the Kingdom of 
Quito,
 four hundred Leagues beyond 
Cusco,
 whither after his Death his Body was carried, and buried in the famous Temple of the Sun, but his Entrails were buried in 
Quito
 not without many bloody Offerings, thousands of his Servants Sacrificing themselves at his Grave willingly, that so they might serve their Prince in the other World. The invaluable Treasures which he left behind him were care∣fully hid by the 
Peruvians
 till the 
Spaniards
 conquer'd that Countrey: The pav'd Ways, magnificent Buildings, and strong Castles, testifie as yet the Power of this 
Inga;
 wherefore in his life-time he was honor'd as a God. His Mother 
Mamaoclo
 liv'd to see above three hundred of her Children's Children, all Extracted from her Son 
Guaynacava.


The chief of the Family 
Tanebamba
 were 
Huascar
 and 
Attabaliba,
 Sons to 
Guaynaca∣va,
 (both by the 
Coya,
 or lawful Queen, however some have deliver'd to the contrary) who falling at variance betwixt themselves, resolv'd to decide the Quarrel by a Field-Battel, in which 
Attabaliba,
 being the youngest, was Conqueror. This Civil War was at the heighth when the 
Spaniards
 invaded 
Peru,
 which they could ne∣ver have conquer'd, had not the Realm been so divided. During 
Attabaliba's
 Im∣prisonment by 
Pizarrus,
 his two Generals, 
Quizaniz
 and 
Chilicuchima,
 took the 
Inga Huascar
 (formerly call'd 
Tito Cusi Gualpa, Attabaliba
's Brother) in 
Cusco,
 and carrying him to the Valley 
Sacfahuana,
 burnt him alive. It is set down as remarkable, that 
Huascar
 after his being vanquish'd, made great Offerings to 
Viracocha,
 thereby to gain his assistance in his extremity against 
Attabaliba;
 when he was inform'd, that a strange People which came from a remote Place over the Seas, had defeated 
Atta∣baliba
's Army, and taken him Prisoner: From which News 
Huascar
 taking courage,

call'd the 
Spaniards Viracochas,
 and judg'd that they were come from Heaven to his Delivery, and the more, because his Brother had spilt so much Blood already: for 
Attabaliba
 had not onely slain the Prince 
Atoco,
 which led 
Huascar
's Army, with three thousand two hundred Men, and drank out of 
Atoco
's Skull tipt with Gold, but had also pluck'd out the Harts of above a thousand Children, which the 
Cann∣rites
 sent with Palm-Boughs to him, to desire Peace.


After 
Attabaliba
's and 
Huascar
's Decease, 
Mango Inga
 their Brother drove all the 
Spaniards
 out of 
Cusco,
 whither they not long after coming with new Forces, neces∣sitated 
Mango,
 not without the loss of many Men, to take his flight up into the Mountain 
Vilcabamba,
 where he Setling, his Successors Reign to this day, secur'd from any Invasion by the natural strength of the Place. But the 
Inga Saritopa
 co∣ming from the fore-mention'd Mountain, submitted himself to the 
Spaniards,
 who allow'd him the Valley 
Yucay
 to dwell peaceably in; but the rest of the Family of the 
Inga's
 that fell into the Hands of the 
Spaniards,
 were all of them kill'd in 
Cusco,
 not without great grief of the old Inhabitants, to see so antient and noble a Family, by which they had been Govern'd in great State for three hundred years together, put to death by common Executioners.


The City 
Cusco,
 which was the Royal Seat of all the 
Peruvian
 Kings, was made more splendid than ever before, by 
Guayanacava,
 of whom 
Augustine de Tarrate,
 descri∣bing his Magnificence, relates, That when his Queen was Deliver'd of a Son, who was to succeed in the Throne, 
Guayanacava
 kept a great Feast for twenty days toge∣ther, and on that day when the Child was to be Nam'd, a Golden Chain, each Link of which was as big as a Hand, and contain'd in all seven hundred Foot in length, was carried by twenty 
Peruvians
 to the Temple.


The Succession of the 
Inga's
 was after this manner: The 
Inga's
 keeping many Concubines had many Children by them, none of which could lay claim to the 
Peruvian
 Crown, but onely the Son begotten on the 
Coya,
 or 
Queen,
 being generally the Kings own Sister, (whom they accounted lawful for them to Marry, as in antient times did the 
Egyptian
 Kings) Inherited the Realm, unless the 
Inga
 had a lawful Bro∣ther, who Inherited before the Son, though born of a 
Coya;
 or if the said Brother had a Son, he obtain'd the deceased Uncles Crown before him, who in apparence was the elder Heir.


The same Succession was also observ'd by other Governors, which the 
Peruvians
 call 
Curaca's.


The Burials of their Kings were perform'd with great solemnity; and the Trea∣sures which they left behind were bestow'd in building of magnificent 
Guaha's,
 which were Temples or religious Houses, where a kind of solemn Worship was to be perform'd, to celebrate the Memory of the Deceased. Some part of the Trea∣sure was also distributed amongst the 
Inga
's Servants; but the Successor inherited not the least Mite of what his Predecessor had gotten, but was forc'd, according to an antient Law, to build himself a new Palace, and purchas'd anew every thing else belonging to it.


Their Crown or Diadem was onely a fine red woollen Coif with a Tassel, that hung down over their Foreheads, which other meaner Princes wore hanging on their right Ear.


Their Coronations were also kept in great Pomp and State, the Nobility and Priests coming from all parts of the Countrey to 
Cusco,
 besides an innumerable mul∣titude of common People.


The Noblemens Presents to the 
Inga's
 consisted chiefly of Gold and Silver Ves∣sels, fine Cloth call'd 
Cumbi,
 all sorts of Sea-shells, and stately Plumes of Feathers of inestimable value.




Thousands of Sheep differing in colour serv'd for Offerings: moreover, the Chief Priest sacrific'd a Child before the Image of 
Viracocha,
 on whom with great Reverence he cry'd, 
O great God
 Viracocha, 
we Offer you this Child, that you may keep our Realm in Peace, aid us in time of War, prosper our
 Inga 
in all his Undertakings, make him more powerful and greater than any of his Predecessors, and grant him wisdom to Govern this vast Countrey.


No People in the World can be more respective, and shew greater Reverence to their Kings, than the 
Peruvians:
 for there were never any heard of in this Countrey that ever Rebell'd against their Prince; the reason of which was chiefly, because they always Govern'd with great Justice and Mildness, placing Governors over the re∣spective Countreys and Provinces, according to their several Divisions, greater or lesser, with subordinate Power one under another, so that they Rul'd with great strictness, punishing with Death both Drunkenness and Theft. Moreover, the 
Ingas
 observ'd a prudent way in Government, 
viz.
 They kept their Subjects con∣tinually employ'd: The ordinary sort of Persons of subdu'd Provinces were sent to remote Countreys, and the Governors thereof kept at the Court in 
Cusco;
 and Princes Descended of the Royal Blood sent in their Places to Govern the new got∣ten Dominions: they divided the Inhabitants into Companies, plac'd one to Command over ten, another over a hundred, and a greater Officer over a thousand, and at last a 
Prefect
 or Major-General, over ten thousand; every one of which Officers were to bring in an Account every Week to the supream Governor, who was always of the 
Inga
's Family, what Men dy'd of their number, or how many were born, a present Estimate of every ones Stock, in Cattel or otherwise, and all remarkable Transactions that hapned. On the high Feast-day they were all to appear at Court, and to bring in the Revenues gather'd out of their Substitute Countreys. The main Division of the Countrey was into four grand Pro∣vinces, call'd 
Tahucantinsuyos,
 according to the four Ways that went from 
Cusco
 through the whole Realm, 
viz. Chinchasuyo
 towards the North, 
Coclasuyo
 towards the South, 
Andesuyo
 towards the East, and 
Condesuyo
 towards the West. The Col∣lectors were divided into 
Hanansayos,
 Upper-Collectors, and 
Urinsayos,
 or Under-Collectors. The 
Quipocomayos,
 or Accomptants, could 
ast up exactly with Buttons, not onely what every Province, but also what each Man was to pay, and that ac∣cording to the ability of the Countrey and Person.


Many were the stately Temples, invincible Castles, magnificent Palaces, and other wonderful Structures built by the 
Ingas,
 the chiefest whereof stood in 
Cusco, Tiaguanaco,
 and 
Tambo;
 the Builders whereof were sent for by turns out of the ad∣jacent Countreys, from which they brought exceeding great Stones, most of them thirty eight Foot long, eighteen broad, and six thick, which were so neatly joyn'd to∣gether with Mortar or Iron-work, that a whole Edifice seem'd to be one entire Stone. Their Bridges that led cross the Rivers were made of Flags and Rushes, fastned to each Shore with great Ropes. The like Bridge lay cross the deep Mouth of the Lake 
Chicuito,
 on which great Bundles of the Rushes 
Toto
 being ty'd together, and cover'd with Straw, so strengthen'd the Bridge, that great Loads were safely carried over the same.


No Prince ever possess'd so much Riches and Splendor as an 
Inga
 of 
Peru,
 each Countrey presenting him with what was most esteem'd amongst them; the 
Chiches
 bringing Sweet-woods; the 
Lucanas,
 strong Sedan-Carriers; the 
Chumbibilcas,
 brave Dancers; and so accordingly every Countrey provided him with what they best esteem'd, besides the usual Tributes which they paid.


Those which digg'd the Gold and Silver out of the Mines, had Meat, Drink,

and Clothing from the 
Inga,
 though at other times he enjoy'd the Labors of his Subjects for nothing.


When at any time he conquer'd a Countrey by force of Arms, he made them pay three several sorts of Tribute; the first was bestow'd in religious Offices. Each 
Guaca
 or Chappel receiv'd also a Revenue from the late conquer'd Countreys, the Fruit of which serv'd for Offerings to their chief God 
Pachayachachu,
 the Sun, their Thunderer 
Chuquilla,
 and to the Souls of the Deceased, and for Food for the Priests. The Religion through the whole Realm agreed with that which was ob∣serv'd in 
Cusco.
 But the second Tribute fell to the 
Inga
's Family, or Relation and Soldiers. Those who Till'd the 
Inga
's Ground, Sung before him in Festival Clothes. That which could not be spent in the Court was laid up in Store-houses for ten years together, against a scarcity should happen. Aged People, Widows, and such as were decrepid, paid no Tribute. The third part was for the Poor, which had eve∣ry Year a piece of Ground allow'd them to make use of as they pleas'd. In unfruit∣ful Years they receiv'd an Allowance out of the Store-houses before mention'd.


So likewise the Pasture, Meadows, and Arable Land was order'd for three se∣veral Uses, one third for religious Uses, a second for the 
Inga's,
 and the last for the Poor. The Sheep being shorn on a certain Day, yielded the Poor a certain quan∣tity of Wooll to make them Clothes. As soon as any Beast grew Mangy (which the 
Peruvians
 call'd 
Carache
) they burnt them alive, so to prevent the spreading of it farther. Those that belong'd to the 
Inga
's Family, wore all Clothes made of the finest Wooll, and the coursest, call'd 
Tabasca,
 was distributed among the Vulgar.


Besides this good Order of Government, it is wonderful to observe the 
Peruvians
 manner of Living, each learning from their Infancy not onely a Trade, but all things which they accounted necessary in House-keeping, as Weaving, Tilling of Land, building of Houses, and making of Tools requisite for both; so that they never made use of one another on any Account. Moreover, Master Artists, who work'd more for Pleasure than Gain, dwelt apart, being Silver-smiths, Painters, Musicians, and Dancers.


Their Habits were heretofore of one fashion through the whole Realm, onely the Covering of their Head were several, by which the People of one Countrey were distinguish'd from the other, according to an inviolable Law made many Ages since; some therefore wore thin Caps, others broad Pleits, others little Hats, others round Bonnets, others woven Caps, and the like.


Their Post-Stages, call'd 
Chasquis,
 were little Houses, each standing a League and a half from one another, wherein dwelt certain Officers, who with extraordinary speed convey'd the 
Inga
's Letters from one 
Chasquis
 to the other; after which man∣ner in two days time they convey'd a Letter a hundred Leagues. But since the 
Spa∣niards
 conquer'd this Countrey, that Convenience was lost, till the tenth 
Peruvian
 Vice-Roy 
Martin Enriques
 re-establish'd the same; for he allow'd a Sallary to those Posts, that they might with speed convey all Letters and Packets from one to the other, being distant, according to his Establishment, four Leagues.


Lastly, the 
Ingas
 maintain'd strict Laws in criminal Affairs; for as they did not neglect to encourage noble Atchievements (for whoe're had done a valiant Act in the Wars, was made Governor of a Countrey, or had a certain quantity of Land given him, or Married one of the 
Inga
's Family;) so likewise they severely punish'd all Malefactors: for Murderers, Thieves, and Adulterers suffer'd Death without Mercy; yet they allow'd store of Concubines, and it was free for any one to Lie with his Neighbor's Concubine, but Death to have to do with any Man's lawful Wife, who were serv'd by the Concubines.




When a Bridegroom Betrothed himself to his Bride, he gave her (and put them on himself) a pair of Shoes call'd 
Ajota,
 not unlike those of a grey Fryer, which were lin'd with Cotton if she were a Maid, but with Leaves if a Widow, who ne∣vertheless being generally younger than the Man, was to Mourn a whole year in Black for her deceased Husband; till the expiration of which time she was not to Marry another. Governors of Provinces and other Officers of State, receiv'd their Wives from the 
Ingas,
 who enquiring out the beautifullest and most accomplish'd Virgins they could hear of, put the 
Ajota
 on their Feet, and gave them to such Per∣sons as they most fancied; after which if they committed Adultery they were cer∣tainly put to death. The Marrying of Brothers and Sisters was also forbid, till the Inga 
Topa Yupangui,
 Father to 
Guaynacava
 broke that Law, by Marrying his own Sister 
Mamoello,
 and made ah Order that the 
Ingas
 onely should have that liberty; nay, when he lay on his Death-bed, he strictly charg'd his Son 
Guaynacava
 to take his own Sister 
Goya Cuissilmay
 to Wife; and this incestuous Marriage produc'd 
Huascar
 and 
Attabaliba,
 (though some say 
Attabaliba
 was begotten on a Concubine) in whose time the 
Peruvian
 Kingdom went to ruine. 
Guaynacava
 also permitted the common People to Marry their Sisters of the Fathers side, but not of the Mothers.


The 
Peruvian
 Houses were antiently for the most part light and small; and for their Table they made but little preparation, satisfying themselves with a little Beer made of Rice, Bread bak'd of 
Maiz,
 dry'd Flesh, Fish, and Roots.


In their Wars they us'd Slings, Darts, Arrows, Lances, Pikes, Halberds, Pole-Axes, and Shields.


Their Funerals were also solemnly kept, especially those of Persons of Quality, the Corps was carried out on a brave Chair, from which he was put into the Ground, with two of his Concubines whom he best affected, and also three Ser∣vants, Gold and Silver Vessels, 
Maiz,
 and the Liquor 
Chica,
 which the nearest Re∣lation spurted into his Mouth through a Cane; all which they did that the Decea∣sed might make use thereof in the other World. But before the Funeral the Relati∣ons Mourn'd over the Corps several days, and after the Body was Interr'd, they plac'd the Picture of the Deceased upon the Grave: but the meaner sort of Peo∣ple had the Tools belonging to their Trade; and Soldiers their Arms plac'd on the same.


In their Religion they had various Fancies; their prime God 
Viracocha
 bore se∣veral Denominations, and amongst others he was call'd 
Pacachame,
 or 
Pachayacha∣chick,
 by which he was signifi'd to be the Creator of Heaven and Earth; as al∣so 
Usapu,
 that is, 
Wonderful.
 In honor to this 
Pacachama
 stood formerly a magnifi∣cent Temple about four Leagues from 
Lima,
 where the Ruines still manifest its for∣mer glory, it being the Place where the Devil answer'd the Priests, who stood with their Backs towards the Image of 
Pacochame,
 bowing their Heads to the Ground, and showing many antick Tricks. The second Temple stood near 
Cusco,
 in which the 
Inga's
 had plac'd the Images of all the Gods and Goddesses that were worshipp'd in 
Peru;
 and before each Image stood an Altar: the chiefest of them, call'd 
Puachao,
 consisting of massie Gold, was Dedicated to the Sun, on whose Forehead the Sun was Engraven on a Plate, which afterwards fell into the Hands of the 
Spanish
 Cap∣tain 
Mancius Sierra de Lequizamo;
 but because he lost the same one Night at Gaming, this Proverb was rais'd upon it, 
Lequizamo lost the Sun before it rose,
 because he got the Plate on which the Sun was Engraven in the Afternoon, and lost the same in the Night: The Temple it self, built of great Stones, curiously joyn'd together in 
Mosaick
 Work, and within link'd with Golden Plates of a Finger thick, stood full of Golden Chappels and Altars; round about it were several Galleries, into which



 the Priests and Priestesses Chambers open'd. Near the River 
Ticiquaque
 a third Temple, Consecrated to the Sun.


This kind of Idolatry was common to the 
Peruvians,
 with several other Nations of the antient 
Heathens,
 as hath been before observ'd, which made them mock at the 
Spaniards
 when they told them of a Crucifi'd 
Saviour,
 saying they had a splendid God, who appear'd to them in glory every Morning. In the third Temple near the River 
Taciquaque
 in 
Peru,
 which exceeded the other two, they worshipp'd Thunder by the Name of 
Chuquilla, Catuilla,
 and 
Intillapa,
 which the 
Peruvians
 believ'd to be a Man that Commanded the Air, and who being Arm'd with a Club and Sling, throws down Rain, Hail, and Snow from the Clouds, and shooting Bullets through the lower Region, causes Thunder and Lightning: They worshipp'd him after the same manner as they did 
Viracocha
 and the Sun, with holding up of a thing like a Glove, and sometimes Offering, especially in 
Cusco,
 living Children: Also they ador'd the Earth of which they made the Goddess 
Bathamama;
 also 
Mamacocha,
 the God of the Sea. The Rainbowe, which the 
Ingas
 carried between two Ser∣pents for their Arms, was also religiously worshipp'd. Amongst the Stars they imagin'd 
Colca,
 by us call'd 
Aries,
 or the 
Ram,
 as chief; yet held several others of peculiar Denomination, in veneration, of which they crav'd such things as they wanted. The Shepherds ador'd the Star 
Nereuchilla,
 or 
Capricorn,
 whom they judge to Rule over the Beasts. Others worshipp'd 
Machacuay,
 which the 
European
 Astrono∣mers call the 
Serpent,
 as commanding Serpents and Dragons, that they might re∣ceive no hurt from them. Tygers, Lyons, and Bears, were Rul'd by the Star 
Chu∣quichinchag;
 wherefore those who would walk free from those ravenous Beasts, lifted up folded Hands to the Constellations representing the same. They believ'd that there was no Creature living on Earth, whose Likeness the Heavens could not afford; and that those which were on Earth were under the influence of those in Heaven: from hence proceeded the Names of the Stars 
Chacana, Topatatca, Ma∣mana, Mirma,
 and others. They likewise attributed a kind of Divinity to Fountains, Rivers, Rocks, Mountains, some kinds of Herbs, Roots, and especially the 
Papas,


of a strange shape, and had a veneration for all manner of Creatures that were of an unusual form. When they travell'd they strew'd Shoes, Plumes of Feathers, and 
Cocoa
 in all cross Ways and tops of Hills, by them call'd 
Apachitas;
 and if they want the fore-mention'd things, then they throw a Stone for an Offering, from whence it proceeds, that in all cross Ways, and on the tops of Hills, lie heaps of Stones, which are accounted holy.


The like fond veneration of Stones the 
Saracens
 are said antiently to have had, upon a Tradition, That 
Abraham
 had enjoy'd 
Agar
 upon a Stone, and that accord∣ing to 
Euthymius
 and 
Libanius,
 he ty'd his Cammel to a Stone when he went to Offer his Son 
Isaac.


The Images of their deceased 
Ingas,
 which they call'd 
Guaoiqui,
 were had in great honor, and carried with them to the Wars, and up and down in Processionings, and call'd upon for fruitful Seasons.


The Immortality of the Soul, the giving of Punishments to the Wicked, and of Rewards to those that do well, was generally believ'd amongst the 
Peruvians,
 but not the Resurrection of the Dead. Many suffer'd themselves to be buried with their Friends, that they might accompany them to the other World. When the Inga 
Guaynacava
 was buried, above a thousand of his Courtiers Sung several Songs, kept a great Feast, and went with great joy to be buried with him, that so they might serve their King on the other side of the Mountains. They Offer'd likewise a great number of Children, and with their Blood cross'd their Faces from one Ear to ano∣ther: But this barbarous Offering was never us'd but at the Death of prime Per∣sons of Quality; for the meaner sort of People set onely Meat on the Graves, and gave the Dead two Sutes of Apparel, put Money in their Mouthes and Hands; for they believ'd that the Souls ranging up and down from place to place, suffer'd many inconveniences.


The 
Peruvian
 Images consisted generally of Gold, Silver, Stone, or Wood, all of them strangely deform'd: Some of them were said to give Responces like the Oracle at 
Delphos
 and 
Dodona,
 chiefly in the Temple 
Pacachama,
 whose greatness is suf∣ficiently manifest by the Ruines of its Walls beyond 
Lima,
 where 
Franciscus Pizarrus
 got an invaluable Treasure. Each 
Peruvian
 Province had a Temple, besides which, in the Cities, Villages, and Hamlets, were Chappels of Ease, into which the Priests went at Night with their Backs towards the Idol, bended Heads and Bodies; in which posture they requested to know future Events, and were many times answer'd (if we may believe their Reports) in a terrible Voice. The great Temple at 
Cusco,
 wherein the 
Ingas
 had plac'd all the 
Peruvian
 Idols, is now turn'd into a 
Dominican
 Cloyster. In each Province of 
Peru
 was also a Nunnery (if we may so term it) or Ha∣bitation of devoted Virgins, call'd 
Allaguau,
 ie. 
A House of the Choicest,
 over which was plac'd a Governor nam'd 
Appopanaca,
 to whom none durst deny their Daughters; some of which were styl'd 
Wives of the Sun,
 and others Servant-Maids to the same: The Wives Cloth'd in Embroyder'd Coats, adorn'd the Temple, whilest the Maids kept clean the Walls and Floor. When they attain'd to fourteen Years of Age, some were chosen out from the rest, and oblig'd to perpetual Virginity and soli∣tude of Life in their Chappels; which sacred Obligation if they broke by suffering any to Lie with them, they were buried alive after the manner of the Vestal Virgins, the Ceremony whereof is related by 
Plutarch:
 Others were oblig'd to make daily Offerings; others to make peculiar Sacrifices for the 
Inga
's Health, and happy Events in War; many also were employ'd in the Court-Service to wait upon the 
Inga's
 Wife or Concubines; and those being absolv'd from their Vow, were oft∣times Married to Courtiers. These Nunneries were Endow'd with great Revenues

from the 
Chacaras,
 or Church-Lands. Their Offerings were (for sometimes they Offer'd to their Idols the highly esteem'd Herb 
Cocoa, Maiz,
 several colour'd Plumes, Sea-Monsters, Gold and Silver Images of Beasts, fine Clothes call'd 
Cumbi,
 Sweet∣wood, and Tallow to burn) either to have success in their Journeys, Trades, or for the preservation of Health, or to obtain a plentiful Harvest. But their usual Offer∣ings were 
Cuces,
 a sort of Toads, which were eaten by the 
Peruvians.
 When they were to do any Business of consequence, then Persons of Quality kill'd their Sheep 
Pacos,
 not without strange observation of the colour and number of them, as also of the time; all which things well consider'd, they took the Sheep and laid it cross their right Arm, turn'd the Face thereof towards the Sun, and mutter'd several words to themselves according to the colour; for if it was spotted grey, they spoke to 
Chuquilla,
 or Thunder; if white and short Fleec'd, to the Sun; if well Fleec'd, to 
Viracocha.
 In 
Cusco
 they Offer'd daily a short-fleec'd Sheep to the Sun in this manner: Making a great Fire call'd 
Vibbacaronca,
 the Priests threw the Sheep and four Baskets of 
Cocoa
 into it. Their Sacrifices 
Cozocovicca
 and 
Sapovicca,
 to ob∣tain Conquests, were also very strange: for they gather'd out of 
Puna
 (which is a desolate place) several sorts of Brambles and Bushes nam'd 
Ganilli,
 which being all set on fire, they went about the Fire with round Stones in their Hands, on which were painted Serpents, Lyons, Toads, and Tygers, crying, 
Usachum, grant us Conquest,
 together with this Prayer, 
Destroy, O Creator, the power of our Enemies Gods;
 which said, several starv'd Sheep were brought out, which for that reason they call'd 
Urca;
 whose Hearts having torn out they began their Prayers afresh, saying, 
Mighty
 Viracocha, 
thus do thou pull out the Hearts of our Enemies.
 For the prosperity of the 
Ingas
 they kill'd in an open Field black Dogs, by them call'd 
Appurucos,
 whose Flesh was eaten with many Ceremonies by People appointed for that purpose. They made Offerings also to the Fountains, Rivers, Brooks, and Sea-shells, under pretence that those Shells were Daughters of the Ocean, and the Ocean the Father of Streams and Springs; when they had Sow'n their Fields, their Priests, chose to that Office, went from House to House to gather such Offerings as every one was pleas'd to give; which they laid at the Banks of several Sluces, at the time when the Water began to rise there, thinking by that Oblation to keep them from over-flowing their Lands, and washing away their Seed. In all places where two Rivers joyn'd together they wash'd themselves, having first bedaub'd themselves all over with stamp'd 
Maiz;
 and afterwards look'd upon themselves as well purg'd from Sin; which power they ascrib'd to their Baths. To strangle Children between four and ten years of Age was never us'd, unless upon the 
Inga
's being sick, or when he receiv'd the Royal Tassel, that from the death of the Children he might receive Health, or Reign prosperously. The fore-mention'd Nuns that were chose to at∣tend on the King's, were also strangled when the 
Inga
 was sick; nay, sometimes a Father would Offer his Son to 
Viracocha,
 on the Sun-Priest's suggestion, That by his Son's death he would recover from his Sickness, Praying to the foremention'd Dei∣ty, that they would be pleas'd to save the sick Father, because the Son had with his Death paid for his Fathers.


This kind of Cruelty the Devil seem'd to prompt the 
Heathens
 to, by making use of 
Abraham
's Example, who prepar'd his Son 
Isaac
 for a Sacrifice on Mount 
Moria;
 and that it was a Practice amongst the antient 
Ammonites
 and 
Moabites,
 and other 
Heathens
 (by which even the Children of 
Israel
 were apt to be seduc'd) appears from the Scripture it self: the Ceremonies of which bruitish Customs, with the seven Brazen Chambers of 
Moloch,
 may be seen describ'd by 
Rabbi Solomon.


The high Feast 
Capacrayne,
 which the 
Peruvians
 kept in the first Moneth 
Rayme,




 agreeing with our 
December,
 deserves serious observation: for as long as the Feast lasted, no Stranger was suffer'd to Lodge in 
Cusco,
 whither they all flock'd again after the Feast was over, to receive Cakes made by the 
Mamaconas
 (an Order of Nuns) of 
Maiz
 and the warm Blood of a white Ram, and were distributed by cer∣tain Priests (Extracted from the Royal Family 
Iluqui Yupangui
) who carrying them up and down in Golden Dishes, gave every one of a Company one, saying at the delivery of it, 
If you do not Reverence the Sun and
 Inga, 
this Food will witness against you to your Ruine; but if you worship them, then their Bodies will by this Pledge be united to yours:
 after which those that had eaten of the Cakes promis'd Obedience, and thank'd the Sun and 
Inga
 for their Food.


At the fore-mention'd 
Chasquis
 a course was taken to carry all that desir'd, to eve∣ry Temple through the whole Kingdom of 
Peru,
 where the Inhabitants receiv'd them with great Reverence, having before confess'd all their sins to their 
Yahuries,
 or Father-Confessors,
 who being chosen to that Office with a great deal of Ceremo∣ny, impos'd greater or lesser Penances, according to the sins of the Penitent: those that were suspected to have conceal'd any of their sins, were put to cast Lots, or had the Entrails of the Beasts which they had kill'd to that purpose consulted about them, and thereby were discover'd if they had conceal'd any of their sins; which when∣ever it hapned, the Priests falling upon the false Penitents, thump'd them with a Stone on their Backs so long, till they had confess'd all their Faults, which the Priest was not to reveal on pain of Death, but to make Expiatory Offerings. The sins about which they were Examin'd, were chiefly Theft, Murder, Adultery, prepa∣ring of Poyson, or sleighting their 
Inga
 or Gods; for each of which Transgressions they had several kinds of Punishments. When the 
Inga
 fell sick, all People in ge∣neral were forc'd to come and make Confession of their sins; also every one went to his Confessor when he was in trouble, or expected some Misfortune to befall him: The 
Inga
 himself Confess'd his sins to none but the Sun, which he desir'd to re∣late to 
Viracocha,
 and to beg pardon of him for the same, which done, he bath'd him∣self in a running Stream, and cry'd, 
I have made my sins known to thee, O Sun; do thou,

O River, wash away mine Iniquities, and discharge them into the Sea, that they may never be more laid to my charge:
 which custom of Bathing, call'd 
Opacuna;
 wa
 also us'd by all other Penitents.
 A Father losing his Son by Death, was censur'd for a great Sinner, wherefore he could not be permitted to be Confess'd before he had been whipp'd with Nettles by a cetain ill-look'd Officer appointed for that end; after which their Fathers 
Ychuris
 enjoyn'd such Penances as they thought fit; some were order'd to fast several days; others to pay rich Garments, Silver, Gold, or the like; others receiv'd a certain number of Blows; some were condemn'd to live on the Moun∣tains, excluded from the society of all Men. If their Sorcerers at any time fore∣told a Fathers Death, then he immediately Sacrifis'd his Son, that with his Death he might buy his own Life.
 No People were more respected than their Sooth∣sayers, as Men that could discover private Thefts, Accidents that hapned in re∣mote Countreys, and also future Events, and so far their Credit amongst the Vulgar carried them, that they undertook to tell the 
Spaniards
 when their Countrey-men should be Conquerors, and when defeated in the War they maintain'd against the 
Netherlanders.
 There were also cunning Women, who making themselves dead Drunk with 
Chica,
 with which they mix'd the Herb 
Viloa,
 and afterwards coming to themselves again, answer'd all the Questions that were proposed to them.


The 
Peruvians
 kept two sorts of Feasts, the first at certain times, the others on special occasions; the set-Feasts were kept Monethly; on the first Moneth 
Rayme,
 agreeing with our last Moneth 
December,
 as aforesaid, they kept the great Feast 
Ca∣pacrayme,
 on which they brought Multitudes of Sheep and Lambs for Burnt-offer∣ings, besides Silver and Gold. Not far from the Fire stood three Carv'd Images of the Sun, and three others representing Thunder; and this was generally the Day of the Installation of the young 
Inga's,
 which was after this manner: The chief Priest boring a Hole through his Ear, cover'd the upper part of his Body with the holy Cloth 
Guaras,
 whilest the inferior Priests whipt him with knotted Cords, and painted his Face with the Blood. During these Ceremonies no Stranger was suf∣fer'd to remain in 
Cusco,
 but after the Feast was ended they all return'd, and as be∣fore, receiv'd Cakes bak'd of 
Maiz
 and Blood, as a testimony that they lov'd and honor'd the 
Inga.


The three Images of the Sun before-mention'd they call'd 
Apointi, Churiunti,
 and 
Intiquaoqui,
 that is, 
Father-Sun, Son-Sun,
 and 
Brother-Sun.
 In like manner they nam'd the three Images of Thunder, 
Chuquilla, Catuilla,
 and 
Intillapa;
 from which 
Acosta
 judges that the Devil had obscurely taught the 
Peruvians
 the Mysteries of the holy 
Sacrament
 and 
Trinity,
 (that their glory might be eclips'd by Idolatrous Errors) espe∣cially the last, which seems plainly to be signifi'd by the 
Peruvian
 Deity 
Tangatanga,
 whom they affirm'd to be One in Three, and Three in One. And that other Nations also had a glimpse of the same may be collected from 
Philip Cluverius,
 who endea∣vors to demonstrate, that the antient 
Germans
 and 
Gauls
 obscurely ador'd the 
Trinity
 in the midst of their 
Heathenism,
 under the notion of 
Sun, Moon,
 and 
Fire,
 the Sun signifying the 
Father,
 the Moon the 
Son,
 and the Fire the 
Holy-Ghost;
 to confirm which he makes use of 
Caesar
's Testimony, 
viz. They onely esteem those Gods whom they see, and those that assist them,
 viz. 
the
 Sun, Vulcan, 
and the
 Moon; 
for they have never heard any thing concerning any other Gods. Diodorus Siculus
 seems also to ascribe a glimpse of this Mystery to the 
Egyptians,
 when he says, That the antientest Peo∣ple in 
Egypt,
 when they view'd the World, and were amaz'd at all things on the Earth, they judg'd that two Gods Govern'd them all, 
viz.
 the 
Sun
 and 
Moon,
 by whom all things flourish'd and encreas'd; to whom they added a third, namely 
Fire,
 to which they attributed a Divinity, as conducing much to the increase and growth of



 all things. The 
Moon,
 which was also call'd 
Juno,
 they judg'd to be the Offspring of God, (for Son and Daughter were promiscuously taken) who, according to 
Homer,
 Marrying with 
Jupiter,
 brought forth 
Vulcan,
 which might haply be to them a Type or Figure of the 
Holy-Ghost,
 proceeding from the 
Father
 and 
Son: Vulcan
 was by her plac'd a President over the Fire, by which the 
Heathens
 seem'd to imitate the fiery Power of the 
Holy-Ghost,
 purifying and cleansing all things: and this cleansing Power was aim'd at by 
Romulus,
 when, according to 
Dionysius Halicarnassensis,
 he commanded his Soldiers to leap through a Fire made before his Tent, that so they might be purifi'd from all their Crimes. But it may be thought strange, that the 
Peruvians, Germans,
 or 
Egyptians,
 lost in a Wood of gross Idolatry, could have any apprehension, though never so obscure, of the holy 
Trinity,
 when as the most nice and curious 
Greek
 and 
Roman
 Wits have made such gross mistakes concerning God. But to return again to the 
Peruvians:
 They kept their second Feast in the second Moneth 
Camay,
 on which they threw the Ashes of their Offerings into the River, and fol∣low'd them on the Shore for the space of five Leagues, praying the River to carry the Ashes to the Sea, where 
Viracocha
 would receive them. In the third and fourth Moneths they kill'd a hundred and ten black spotted and grey Sheep.
 In the be∣ginning of 
May
 (by the 
Peruvians
 call'd 
Hatuncuzqui
) they gather'd in their 
Maiz,
 and kept the Feast 
Aymorai;
 after which they return'd home Singing from their Fields, call'd 
Chacra,
 and carried a great heap of 
Maiz
 with them, nam'd 
Perua,
 wrapping it up in rich Garments; three Nights they continu'd their Ceremonies, implo∣ring the 
Perua
 to preserve their Harvest of 
Maiz
 from any damage that might chance to come to it, and also to let that grow prosperously which they should Plant next. Lastly, their Sorcerers consulted whether the 
Perua
 could last till the next year? to which if they were answer'd 
No,
 they carried it into the Fields, and burn∣ing it, made a new 
Perua,
 which when they knew to be sufficient to last good a year, they carried it to the Granary in great triumph. In the seventh Moneth 
Ancaya∣cuzqui,
 they kept the Feast call'd 
Intraymi,
 with a hundred Sheep, in honor of the Sun. They also made several Images of the Wood 
Quimia,
 which they put in rich

Habits, strew'd the Ways with Flowers, Danc'd a strange Dance nam'd 
Cayo,
 Singing several Songs. Persons of Quality put Golden Plates about their Knees, as the common People painted them with divers Colours. In the eighth Moneth 
Chahua
 they kept the high Feast 
Huarqui,
 on which they Offer'd a hundred grey Sheep; the like number, but of a Chesnut colour, they Offer'd the following Moneth 
Yupaquis,
 besides a thousand 
Cuies,
 that the Air, Water, or Sun, might not spoil their Plants. Their Feast 
Situa
 they kept on the tenth Moneth 
Coyaraymi
 after this manner: They gather'd all together on the first day before the Moon rose, which no sooner appear'd, but they made a terrible noise, beat one another with lighted Torches, then wash'd the Dirt from their Bodies, and made themselves Drunk for four Days together. The eleventh Moneth 
Armaraimi,
 was nam'd 
Pun∣chaiquis,
 from the Feast they kept therein, on which (besides the usual Offerings of eight hundred Sheep) they ty'd a black Sheep to a Post without Meat, till such time as there fell store of Dew. Their Feast call'd 
Raymicantara Raiquis,
 was kept in the last Moneth 
Ayamara,
 on which their Youth were bor'd through the Ears. Amongst the high Feasts which were kept on great occasions,
 the chiefest was 
Ytri,
 against which they all made new Clothes after a peculiar fashion, wearing their Cloaks muffled about their Heads; in which manner they walked leisurely a whole Day and a Night; during which time none durst either Eat or Drink, or open his Eyes: But after this serious Processioning follow'd four days of extravagancy, as Drinking, Dancing, and the like. In their Dances, which were to the sound of Drums, Pipes, and Horns, they imitated all manner of Trades by strange motions of their Bodies, besides divers other Frolicks and May-games which they us'd at such times of Mirth and Festivity: But since the 
Spaniards
 conquer'd 
Peru,
 all these 
Heathenish
 Customs have been laid aside.


As to the Prognostications and Fore-runners of the destruction of the old Empire of 
Peru,
 it is reported, that 
Guaynacava,
 Father of the last King 
Attabaliba,
 lying on his Death-bed in 
Quito,
 said to his Princes, 
This Realm, at present rais'd to the highest top of Eminency, is hastning towards its Ruine; and though our Kingdom remain as yet freee from foreign Invasion, the Countreys round about are already conquer'd and in Slavery: The Gods have call'd strange People from unknown Regions, who by degrees will reach us also. With me, who am the twelfth
 Inga, 
dies the Dominion of the mighty
 Peru. 
A People of other Fashions and Religion will subvert our Religion, Laws and Government, and bring us under subjection to them.
 There were also Signs and Prodigies that portended the Dissolution of this Empire; amongst the rest a great Eruption in the Province of 
Tacinga,
 which rend∣ing the Earth asunder vomited up Flames of Fire; nor was it long e're they were ful∣fill'd, for whilest the 
Peruvians
 were making of Offerings to 
Viracocha
 for the delivery of their imprison'd King 
Huascar,
 News was brought to 
Cusco
 of 
Attabaliba
's being ta∣ken; the Particulars whereof, with other Matters touching the Conquest of this King∣dom by the 
Spaniards,
 and how they pillag'd the Countrey, murder'd the Inhabi∣tants, and enrich'd themselves with their inestimable Treasures, shall in order be related.


 The first that gave the 
Spaniards
 notice of 
Peru,
 was an 
Indian
 Prince call'd 
Pan∣guinaco,
 who having been taken Prisoner, inform'd 
Vasquez Nunnez
 of the abundance of Gold and Silver which was to be had there, who resolv'd to venture through a thousand Dangers into the South Sea. After which 
Francisco Pizarro, Ferdinand de Lugue,
 and 
Diego de Almagro,
 consulted upon this great Design, 
Anno
 1525. 
Pizarrus
 being order'd to Sail before with a Ship carrying a hundred and fourteen Men, and 
Al∣magro
 to follow with a Vessel carrying seventy Men, whilest 
De Lugue
 staid to ma∣nage the Affairs at home. Fifty Leagues Southward from 
Panama, Pizarrus
 found a







portrait of Francisco Pizarro


FRANCISCO PISARRO




small Neck of Land nam'd 
Peru,
 from which it is most probable that great King∣dom afterwards receiv'd its Denomination, though many deduce it from the River 
Beru,
 as before mention'd: Thence Sailing to the main Continent of 
Peru,
 and Landing, he lost several of his Men, and being himself desperately wounded, re∣turn'd with ill success, whilest 
Almagro
 missing of him, Landed afterwards in the same place, and also lost several of his Men, and one of his own Eyes: yet not long after they renew'd their Design, carrying with them in two Ships and three Boats, three hundred stout Men, which all suffer'd extream Hunger, and had they not happily gotten some Sea-Crabs, they had without doubt all of them perish'd: at last Landing on the Coast of 
Catamez,
 they were Encountred by a People whose Faces were hung full of Golden Nails, and daily lost more and more of their Men; upon which ill Successes the new 
American
 Vice-Roy forbad the farther discovery of 
Peru,
 and call'd home the remaining part from the Island 
Gallo,
 so that 
Pizarro
 kept with him but twelve Men, with whom he went to the desolate Isle 
Gorgona,
 where he liv'd on Sea-Snails, till he receiv'd Provisions from 
Panama;
 after which they spent two years in making farther Discoveries upon the Coasts of 
Peru:
 During which time he visited the Queen 
Capullana,
 and discover'd a mighty Palace, where three of the twelve Men were kill'd, whose Memory deserves to live for ever, be∣cause the World owes to their unheard-of Valor the Discovery of the mighty King∣dom of 
Peru;
 but there are onely left Recorded the Names of those nine Worthies who surviv'd that Exploit, which were these following, 
Nicholas de Rivera, Peter de Candia, Juan Torre, Alonzo Briseni, Christophero Peralca, Alonzo de Truxillo, Francisco Cuel∣lar, Alonzo Molina,
 and the Pilot 
Bartholomeo Ruyz:
 With these nine 
Pizarro
 Landed on the 
Isle Puna,
 inhabited by a valiant People, who us'd Bowes, Darts, Silver Knives, and Pikes-tipt with Gold: From thence he steer'd his Course unto the Haven 
Tumbez,
 where 
Peter de Candia
 Landing, was met by forty thousand of the In∣habitants, who conducted him to the Temple of the Sun, built by the 
Inga Guayna∣cava,
 and adorn'd in the in-side with Golden Plates.
 Not long after which 
Pizar∣ro
 was by an Order from the 
Spanish
 Court made Governor of 
Peru,
 to the great discontent of 
Almagro;
 which Difference being decided, 
Pizarro
 set out again with two hundred and fifty Foot, besides Horse, with which he Landed a hundred Leagues lower than before, where he got a great Mass of Gold and some Emeraulds of the 
Casique,
 all which he sent to 
Panama,
 thereby to stir up the People to come to 
Peru
 to his assistance; where those that were at present on the Place, besides other great Hardships which they suffer'd, were miserably plagued with Ulcers in their Faces; yet they prosecuted their Conquest as well as they could with what small Power was left them, and had newly taken 
Puerto, Viejo
 when Captain 
Bevalcazar
 and 
Juan Florez
 brought fresh Supplies of Men and Horse; with which Recruit 
Pizarro
 conquer'd the Valley of 
Tumbez;
 from whence they Sail'd over to the Island 
Punas,
 where the friendly Entertainment they met with at first, turn'd soon after in∣to a bloody Battel: for the 
Spaniards
 not forbearing to prie into every House, and committing many Outrages, were set upon by the Natives, whom having at last subdu'd and being again supply'd with new Forces by 
Ferdinando Sotto
 from 
Nicara∣gua,
 they return'd to 
Tumbez,
 where the Countrey was all in Arms upon the Report of the 
Spaniards
 Cruelties committed on the Island 
Puna,
 insomuch that they Offer'd all those whom they took alive to their Gods, and slew as many as they could con∣veniently meet with. 
Pizarro
 having stay'd about twenty days, went with his Bro∣thers 
Juan
 and 
Gonsalves,
 the Captains 
Sotto
 and 
Bevalcazar,
 and fifty Horse over the River 
Ambato
 about Mid-night, through a thorny Way betwixt Mountains, and about Break-of-day fell upon the 
Tumbezan
 Army, and having setled things pretty

well in those Parts, he built the City 
St. Michael
 in the Countrey 
Tangazara,
 along the River 
De la Chira,
 where he was Complemented by two Agents from 
Cusco,
 who desiring Aid in 
Huascar
's Name against his Brother 
Attabaliba,
 receiv'd for Answer, That he was going to 
Caxamalca,
 as indeed he was, to find 
Attabaliba
 there; whose Commands that he should not approach prov'd all in vain: for 
Pizarro,
 under pretence of Complementing him in his Catholick Majesty's Name, was no sooner admitted to his Presence,
 but he took him, Prisoner, and set for a Ransom upon him as much Gold as a Room of fifty four Foot long and nine Foot broad was able to contain, as high as he could just reach with his Hand held up: But the Gold coming slower than was expected, 
Pizarro
 was much incens'd thereat, whom 
Attabaliba
 endeavoring to pacifie, alledg'd, That it could not possibly come sooner, because the Way between 
Caxamalca
 and 
Cusco,
 from whence the Gold was to be fetch'd, was at a great distance: The truth whereof 
Pizarro
 resolving to try, sent 
Sotto
 and 
Peter del Bara
 to 
Cusco
 in Chairs, carried by 
Peruvians
 exceeding swift of Foot, and who if they tir'd were successively reliev'd by others that attended, with∣out so much as setting down the Chair; being got about half way, they met with 
Attabaliba
's Captain 
Cilucuchuma,
 he having taken 
Huascar
 Prisoner, who re∣quested 
Sotto
 and 
Baro
 that they would be pleas'd to deliver him out of the Hands of his blood-thirsty Brother, for which kindness he would pay three times as much Gold as 
Attabaliba
 had promis'd, who was not able to give any thing else but the Golden Plates which were in the Temple of the Sun in 
Cusco;
 whereas 
Huascar
 had all the Treasure that was left by 
Guaynacava;
 which indeed was true, for 
Huas∣car
 had caus'd it privately to be buried, and put to death those that did it, that so he might keep the place conceal'd where it lay; insomuch that none could ever find it out to this day, though the 
Spaniards
 have tortur'd the 
Indians
 with all imagi∣nable cruelty, to make them discover the place. But 
Attabaliba
 inform'd by 
Pizar∣ro
 of 
Huascar
's Imprisonment, seem'd to be exceeding sorry, and said, 
I am much troubled at the News of my Captain's laying violent Hands on my Brother
 Huascar, 
whom I ac∣knowledge my eldest Brother, and both of the same Father and Mother; but I suppose he has no design to kill him, but onely keeps him Prisoner, to bring him to grant me peaceably to enjoy the Kingdom of
 Quito, 
of late brought under subjection of the
 Peruvian 
Crown. Pizarro
 not observing 
Attabaliba
's subtilty (who design'd nothing but 
Huascar
's Death, out of fear that the 
Spaniards
 upon his liberal promises to them, might promote him to the Throne) comforted him as well as he could: whereupon 
Attabaliba
 supposing that 
Pizarro
 would be little concern'd at the killing of his Brother 
Huascar,
 gave speedy Order that he should be burnt alive,
 which accordingly was put into exe∣cution; but before he was brought to the Fire, he foretold his Brother 
Attabaliba
's cruel Death. During which time 
Almagro
 came with fresh Supplies from 
Panama,
 eager to have a share of the fore-mention'd Ransom, which at last was paid with overplus; for by daily bringing in of Baskets of Gold, the Chamber was fill'd up to the very top; but though 
Attabaliba
 had more than perform'd his Promise, yet Sen∣tence of Death was pronounc'd against him presently after he had been Baptiz'd:
 the Reasons of which wicked and rash Condemnation were two; first the false Ac∣cusation of a 
Peruvian
 Interpreter call'd 
Philippillo,
 who desir'd his Death, that then he might with the more freedom enjoy one of his Wives; for 
Attabaliba
 mistrusting the same, bad complain'd thereof to 
Pizarro,
 saying, 
That his Imprisonment was not so grievous to him, as the thoughts of the Adultery, acted against the strict Laws of his Coun∣trey;
 the Defiler of an 
Inga
's Bed being not onely to be burnt with the Adulterers, but also the whole Families of them, to the least Infant, their Houses to be rac'd to the Ground, and their Land sow'n with Salt, as for ever curs'd. The second

cause of 
Attabaliba
's Death is laid on 
Almagro,
 who came to 
Peru
 with new Forces, and who fearing that none of the Gold which 
Attabaliba
 had the delivery of, would fall to his share, as not having been in the Battel where 
Attabaliba
 was taken, there∣fore order'd him to be suddenly Strangled, that so the Booty might be equally divi∣ded.
 Not long after 
Pizarro
 conquering 
Cusco,
 got no less Treasure than at 
Caxa∣malca.
 Here the Reign of the 
Peruvian Inga's
 ceased, with which before no Kings that ever Govern'd in the World were able to compare in Riches and Glory.
 Their Palaces were round about adorn'd with Golden Images; and they never ate but out of Golden Vessels, spitting in the Hands of beautiful young Women of Noble Extract, were worshipp'd like Gods both whilest living and when dead, all their Subjects being their Slaves, and they the sole Lords of the whole Realm. In the interim 
Bevalcazar
 march'd from the new City 
St. Michael,
 with a hundred and twenty Foot and eighty Horse, to assist the 
Cannares
 against one of 
Attabaliba
's Generals, who having spoil'd the Ways by digging Pits, and covering them over with Bushes, resisted them in several places: then marching to 
Quito
 he burnt the City, after having kill'd a hundred of the Natives, because they laughed at the 
Spa∣niards
 Arrival. Afterwards joyning with 
Almagro,
 he went back to 
Cusco,
 whither on the Way he had News of 
Quisquis, Attabaliba
's General, and of his Brother 
Guay∣palcon,
 who making use of a Rock, threw down great Stones, by the 
Peruvians
 call'd 
Galgas,
 which in their Fall hitting others, brought down a great number with them, by which means he not onely defended the Place for the present, but kill'd fourteen 
Spaniards;
 nevertheless distrusting his ability to keep it, he retreated to a steep Mountain about Midnight, at the Foot whereof a Passage led over a deep River, where he burnt all his Luggage that he could not carry with him; also above fifteen thousand Sheep and four thousand Prisoners, became wholly at the Discretion of 
Almagro,
 who leaving there Captain 
Martin Astete,
 order'd him to build the Town 
Truxillo:
 In the mean time 
Quisquis
 was put to flight by 
Pizarro,
 and went to 
Quito,
 where he lost many People, that were kill'd by 
Bevalcazar
's Guard; yet those that were remaining chose rather to Fight to the last, than flye through Wildernesses, and there be starv'd to death; which 
Quisquis
 contradicting,
 was Stabb'd by his Captain 
Guappalau,
 and immediately after cut to pieces. As soon as these Stirs were quieted, 
Pizarro
 began to build the City 
Los Reyos,
 near a convenient Haven of the Southern Ocean, whilest 
Almagro
 marching to 
Chili
 with two Troops of Horse, and five hundred Foot, return'd without doing any thing remarkable, ex∣cept his taking the Interpreter 
Philippillo,
 (whom he caus'd to be cut into four pieces) and his maintaining several Battels against the 
Chileses,
 clad in Sea-Wolves Skins. In this Journey he lost several of his Men on the Snowy Mountains. About this time a Ship fitted out by 
Gabriel Carvajal,
 Bishop of 
Placentia,
 Sailing through the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 ran into the Haven 
Los Reyos,
 out of which the first Rats swam ashore that ever were in 
Peru,
 by which the Countrey since suffering much damage, the Inhabitants call'd them 
Ococha,
 that is, 
Sinful Creatures.
 Now all things on the 
Spaniards
 side were tending to a quiet possession, when a new Accident arose, whic
 had like to have spoil'd all, for 
Mango Inga, Attabaliba
's Brother,
 being releas'd out of Prison by 
Juan Pizarro,
 obtain'd leave to go to 
Yucaya,
 to fetch the famous Golden Image 
Machys,
 representing his Father 
Guaynacava:
 but he having now gotten his Liberty slew all the 
Spaniards
 which work'd in the Gold-Mines, took the Castle of 
Cusco
 by Storm, as also the City, after a Siege of eight Moneths; which neverthe∣less was by 
Francisco Pizarro
 soon re-taken, and 
Mango
 forc'd to flye into the Moun∣tains 
Andes,
 after he had kill'd several of 
Almagro
's Men; soon after 
Almagro
 about Midnight getting over the Walls, and taking 
Ferdinando
 and 
Gonsalvo Pizarro,
 and

Alphonso Alvarado
 Prisoners, condemn'd them all three to die, caus'd himself to be proclaim'd Governor, and gave the Royal Tassel to 
Paulo Inga,
 whilest 
Gonsalvo
 and 
Alvarado
 breaking Prison, inform'd 
Francisco Pizarro
 thereof (who then had ob∣tain'd the Title of 
Marquess,
 and for an Inheritance, the Province 
Attabillos;
) he was exceedingly troubled for his Brother 
Ferdinand,
 whose Enlargement he thought would be best procur'd by making Peace with 
Almagro,
 and the sooner, because the 
Peruvians
 began to rebel against the 
Spaniards
 in most places,
 slew divers Companies of them; amongst whom 
Diego Pizarro
 was set upon in a narrow Path call'd 
Lau∣cesta Parcos,
 and amongst the Mountains lost seventy Horsemen; and 
Gonsalvo de Tapico
 sav'd not one of eighty Horse. Also the 
Peruvians
 set upon three hundred Troopers, Commanded by the Generals of the Horse, 
Morgoveio
 and 
Gaeti,
 in a nar∣row Path, and rowl'd down great Stones from the tops of the Mountains both be∣fore and behind them, so killing both Horse and Man before they could put them∣selves into a posture of Defence, insomuch that none escap'd with Life but two Troopers. 
Francisco de Godoy,
 sent out of 
Los Reyos
 with forty five Horse, upon Discoveries, return'd also with great loss, being pursu'd twenty Leagues by the 
Pe∣ruvians;
 against whom 
Peter de Lerma
 being sent out with sixty Horse, fought a whole day with them, and though few of his Men were kill'd, yet many were wounded, and several taken: The victorious 
Peruvians
 retreating to the top of a sandy Moun∣tain in the Night, Offer'd the 
Spaniards
 they had taken Prisoners, as a testimony of thanks, to 
Viracocha,
 and afterwards stood drawn up near the City 
Los Reyos
 by the General 
Tyzopangui.
 The Marquess thus beset round, sent for Aid from 
New Spain
 and 
Truxillo,
 and also for 
Alphonso Alvarado
 to come back, who had been sent to discover the Countrey 
Chachepoyos,
 and being gotten into a Desart, would without doubt have perish'd for want of Water, had not some Horsemen riding somewhat out of the Way, found Pits with fresh Water: notwithstanding which, five hun∣dred 
Inacona's
 (for so the 
Spaniards
 call'd the 
Peruvian
 Slaves) died for Thirst. He was afterwards supply'd by 
Gomez Tordoya
 with two hundred Men, by the help of whom,
 though encompass'd by the Inhabitants near the Bridge 
Lamucacha,
 where began a fierce Battel, 
Alvarado
 was in the end Conqueror.


Whilest the 
Spaniards
 found so much to do with the 
Peruvians,
 yet they could not forbear more and more Clashing amongst themselves,
 the Marquess commanding that 
Almagro
 should surrender and leave the City 
Cusco;
 but he refusing to obey, fortifi'd himself on the top of the Mountain 
Gaytara,
 stopt the Ways by cutting down the Trees: but 
Ferdinando Pizarro
 getting up to the top along a private Way, made such a confusion amongst them with Bolt-shot, that 
Almagro,
 who was sick at that time, was forc'd to flye; which being told 
Pizarro,
 he pursu'd him, and had doubtless utterly defeated him at that bout, had not his Men, benumm'd with marching in the deep Snow, been taken with a Distemper which made them as if they had been all Sea-sick, (for such is the property of the Mountain 
Guaytara
) in∣somuch that they could scarce carry their Arms: Whereupon 
Almagro
 was advis'd 
 oppose his Pursuers, and that he need not doubt of the Victory; but he either following his own Dictates, or being counter-advis'd, fortifi'd himself in 
Cusco,
 whither 
Ferdinand
 and 
Gonsalvo Pizarro
 march'd against him. 
Rodrigo de Orgonnes
 Commanded 
Almagro
's Army, who being sick, lay on the Walls of the City to see the Battel fought. The 
Peruvians,
 who on each side were in the 
Spanish
 Service, march'd in the Front: on the twenty sixth of 
April, Anno
 1538. the Fight began, in which the 
Almagrians
 did much mischief with Cross-bar shot amongst the 
Pizarrians;
 yet 
Almagro
's Horse retreated first, being under the Command of 
Peter Valdivia;
 soon after which the rest of his Army, their Courage also failing, fled to the City;

into which, as soon as 
Orgones
 being shot in the Head and slain, the Conqueror rush'd after them, and took 
Almagro
 Prisoner: yet notwistanding this prosperous be∣ginning, he soon found himself in a great strait, since those which remaih'd alive of 
Almagro
's Party refus'd to serve 
Pizarro,
 and murmur'd against him in all places, resolving to take 
Almagro
 from him by force, besides that 
Pizarro
's Soldiers grum∣bled that they were not paid sufficiently for the many hazards which they had run: wherefore to compose these Troubles as well as possibly he could, he banish'd all whom he thought to be of the opposite Party, sent away the chief of his own mu∣tinous Soldiers with Captain 
Peter de Candia,
 to discover new Countreys, put 
Alma∣gro
 to death, and march'd to 
Callao;
 where being straitned for want of Provision, he made no stay, but got his Army with much ado to 
Cusco. Gonsalves Pizarro
 was likewise so set upon by the Natives, that he lost a considerable number of Men: In short, the 
Pizarrans
 were defeated in all places, and at length the Marquess,
 though forewarn'd by his Secretary 
Antonio Picado,
 was murder'd in his own House in the City of 
Lima,
 otherwise call'd 
De los Reyos,
 by a Bastard-Son of 
Almagro,
 nam'd 
Diego,
 in the Year 1541; his Body dragg'd to the Church-yard, lay there to every ones view and derision, till 
John de Barbara
 buried the same.
 His Father 
Gonsalvo Pizarro,
 sir-nam'd 
The tall Citizen of Truxillo,
 Commanding a Company of Foot in 
Navarre,
 had two lawful Sons, 
viz. Ferdinand,
 who was murder'd in the 
Spanish
 Castle 
Motta,
 and 
John
 that was slain in 
Cusco,
 when 
Mango Inga
 conquer'd the City, the other two, 
Gonsalvo
 and 
Francisco,
 being both Bastards; the last of which is said to have been expos'd by his Mother in the Church Porch, and kept alive for several days by sucking of a Sow, till his Father afore-mention'd finding him, and acknowledging him for his Son, put him out to Nurse, and when he was grown up set him to keep Swine; which course of Life he soon left, and following 
Alphon∣sus de Ojeda, Balboa,
 and 
Pedro de Avita
 in their Expeditions, he quickly grew rich, and at last came to that heighth of Honor and Command we have heard. 
Franciso Martino de Alcantara
 was also his Brother by the Mothers side onely. He was a Man who despis'd all Dangers and Hardships, was so well experienc'd in Martial Af∣fairs, that he might well stand in competition with many of the antient Heroes. In 
Los Reyos
 he built two very artificial Water-Mills, a 
Dominican
 Cloyster, and an∣other for the Monks 
De la Merced,
 and likewise a stately Palace for himself: He was both meek and affable; and though he bore the greatest Command in the Em∣peror's Name over the mighty Kingdom of 
Peru,
 and got more Riches than ever any of the 
Roman, Persian, Grecian,
 or 
Assyrian
 Monarchs possess'd, yet he went in the same plain kind of Apparel in the heighth of his Grandeur, as when he was but in a low Condition; about his Neck he commonly ty'd a Linnen Hankerchiff, with which he us'd to wipe the Sweat from his Face: in peaceable Intervals he spent whole days in playing at Bowls, without any distinction of Persons, chusing often to play rather with a Sea-man or common Soldier, than a phantastick Gallant: He visited the meanest Citizens, and many times us'd to eat with poor People, to whom he was upon all occasions very noble and liberal; All his Designs he carried on by the strength of meer natural Parts: for he was so very illiterate, that he could nei∣ther Write nor Read; his Edicts were Sign'd with his two Marks, betwixt which his Secretary writ 
Francisco Pizarro;
 he is said to have had a Son which died young by 
Attabaliba
's Sister, who came afterwards to be call'd 
Donna Angelina;
 he died in a very unfortunate time, for upon his good success the 
Spanish
 Power had grounded their whole Designs, thinking with the 
Peruvian
 Treasures, as the Sinews of War, to have erected a fifth Monarchy to succeed the fourth of the 
Romans,


Pizarro
's Murderer, though aiming at the Supream Power, he had a considerable

Party to countenance and aid him, yet he found resistance in many places, not with∣out the loss of many Men on both sides.
 In which Juncture the Learned 
Vacca de Castro
 Landed in 
Peru,
 with a Commission from the Emperor to settle the divi∣ded Kingdom of 
Peru
 in Peace and Quiet; but the young 
Almagro
 mad to see his Ambition thus cross'd, gave Battel to 
Castro
 in the Plain of 
Chupas;
 the Dispute was long and resolute on both sides, and the Night coming on made the Fight the more terrible, in which the Victory inclin'd to 
Castro;
 however the 
Almagrians
 stood to it stoutly for a great while, and that chiefly through the valor of the Captains 
Balboa
 and 
Christopher Losa,
 who breaking in amongst the 
Castreans,
 hack'd and hew'd down all they came near, till at last they were forc'd to betake themselves to flight, and had not many of them exchang'd their white Scarfs with the red of the slain 
Castreans,
 scarce any of them had escap'd from being kill'd in the pursuit, and most of them that did escape were slain the next Morning by the 
Peruvians.
 
Rodrigo Sala∣zar, Almagro
's Deputy; deliver'd up his Lord to 
Castro,
 who condemn'd him to death, whereupon he was immediately Beheaded with a Sword. This Battel hapned on the twenty sixth of 
September Anno
 1542. when it Froze so hard the following Night, that most of those that were left wounded upon the place, were frozen to death. Thus 
Castro
 began his Government with Blood, and made it his first Business to make a Discovery by several of his Captains, whom he sent for that purpose, of the Countreys lying Eastward from 
Peru,
 lying upon the great River 
De la Plata,
 and the River 
Marannon,
 where in most places they met onely with salvage People, and for the most part Man-eaters; and in one place where they Landed, a great Fish re∣sembling a Dog came ashore and kill'd several Arm'd Soldiers. A year and a half 
Castro
 had liv'd in 
Cusco,
 when at the arrival of the Vice-Roy 
Blascus Nunnez Vela,
 all things were turn'd topsie-turvy, he being sent thither by the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, accompanied by four Councellors, 
Diego Sepada, Lison Tejada, Juan Alvarez,
 and 
Peter Ortiz,
 to curb the 
Spaniards
 Villanies and Outrages committed against the 
Peruvians,
 entred 
Tumbez Anno
 1544. where he immediately publish'd the Emperor's Edicts, which were to this effect:


All
 Peruvians 
are to be releas'd from Slavery; no
 Spaniard 
shall in the least oppress them, nor make use of their Service without rewarding them for the same, nor take any Provisions of them without paying for it.


This Proclamation was like to put the 
Spaniards
 into an uproar: for at that time a 
Peruvian
 Lord was forc'd to allow every Foot-Soldier three Slaves,
 and a Horseman five, besides Hens, Rabbets, Eggs, the Wine 
Azun,
 and other Provisions, for nothing. The general Complaints were, 
Is this the Reward for our Service which we have shewn to the Emperor? Is not this mighty Kingdom of
 Peru 
by our Blood and Labor joyn'd to the Imperial Crown? Our Shoulders are grown sore under our Arms, our Bodies made useless with Wounds, and our Limbs lame'd with Bruises. Who shall maintain our Wives and Children, if the
 Peruvians, 
who according to the Law of Arms are become our Slaves, should not be forc'd to fish for Pearls in the Sea, and dig us Silver out of the Mines, and do us other Service for to maintain us?
 But 
Vela
 being deaf to these Complaints, resolv'd that the Emperor's Commands should be fulfill'd, and that those that spake against them should lose their Lives: and that he might terrifie the generality with the punish∣ment of a few, he caus'd Fryer 
Peter
 of the Order of the Virgin 
Mary
 to be Execu∣ted in 
Truxillo, Castro
 to be committed to Prison at 
Lima,
 because he had put 
Almagro
 to death without Examination, and shut the Gates of 
Cusco
 when his Agent came before the same. But do what he could, the 
Spaniards
 generally making Head, ut∣terly refus'd to obey the Emperor's Edicts, and chose 
Gonsalvo Pizarro
 for their General, who rais'd five hundred Men in compleat Arms in 
Cusco,
 from whence he

march'd directly with them to 
Los Reyos,
 under pretence to deliver a Petition there to the Vice-Roy's Council, about deferring to put the new Edicts in force till the Emperor was better inform'd of the present Condition of the 
Peruvian
 State; twenty great Field-pieces being also order'd to follow 
Pizarro
's Army, were car∣ried by the 
Peruvians
 over craggy Mountains; to each Gun without the Carriage were order'd three hundred Men, of whom twelve at a time, carried it in their turns a hundred Paces a piece; though several eminent Persons considering the weightiness of the Affair, forsook 
Pizarro
's Party, and went privately to the Vice-Roy, as on the other side, many deserting the Vice-Roy joyn'd with 
Pizarro,
 who being not a little supply'd by 
Peter Puelles
 Governor of 
Guanaca,
 took several of those that had deserted him Prisoners, and put them all to death, whilest the Vice-Roy made what Preparations possibly he could, Hanging many innocent Persons onely on suspicion of holding Correspondency with 
Pizarro,
 insomuch that there was no end of Murdering on both sides. But 
Vela
 clashing with his Councellors,
 because they would not consent that he should ruine 
Los Reyos,
 resolv'd to do it without them; and to that end to remove the Emperor's Seal, Staple of Trade, and Courts of Judicature to 
Truxillo,
 and to spoil the Countrey all about; which as he was about to put in Execution, they privately got Captain 
Martin Robles,
 and 
Vela
's Lifeguard, consisting of a hundred Men, on their side, whilest the common Peo∣ple mutinying broke into the Palace, took 
Vela
 and carried him to the chief Church in 
Los Reyos,
 where the four Councellors were assembled, who order'd that the Pri∣soner should be Shipt and sent away to 
Spain,
 when 
Alvares Cueto
 lying in the Har∣bor with ten Sail, threatned to fall upon the Inhabitants if they would not release the Vice-Roy: whereupon the Councellors well provided with Guns, rais'd se∣veral Batteries against his Ships, so that 
Cueto
 finding himself too weak, set four of his Vessels on fire, and Sail'd with the rest to the Haven 
Guavara;
 where being set upon by 
Diego Garzias,
 he was forc'd to deliver the remaining part of his Fleet up to the Councellors, who sent 
Vela
 away with the same, under the Command of 
Didaco Alvaradez.
 But 
Pizarro,
 who till this time had pretended that he sought nothing else but 
Vela
's Departure, march'd close to the Walls of 
Los Reyos
 with twelve hundred Men, Hang'd three Citizens upon a Tree, requir'd the Councel∣lors to grant him Letters Patents, by which he might be acknowledg'd for the Su∣pream Governor of 
Peru,
 which if they refus'd, he threatned to put all that were in the City to the Sword; and upon Consultation it was judg'd convenient to grant his Demands, the rather, because they had not above fifty fighting Men in the City. Mean while 
Didaco Alvaradez
 making an Agreement with the Vice-Roy,
 they return'd back with their Ships, and Landed in the Haven Mouth of the Ri∣ver 
Tumbez,
 rais'd what Forces they could possibly thereabouts, but were forc'd to retire from thence to 
Quito,
 (at the same time that the Councellor 
Tejada,
 being sent by 
Pizarro
 to the Emperor, came to an Anchor there) where they were courte∣ously Entertain'd; as also in 
St. Michael,
 where they got daily more and more Assi∣stants; of which 
Pizarro
 being inform'd, went thither with five hundred Men, and forcing the Vice-Roy to flye from thence, pursu'd him above thirty Leagues,
 Hanging up all those whom he could take of his Party. After many Rencounters and Hardships suffer'd by both Parties, 
Pizarro
 exceedingly wearied, return'd to 
Quito,
 where he minded nothing but all manner of Debaucheries, not in the least regarding the Vice-Roy's Designs, which it concern'd him to have narrowly look'd into, for he having got five hundred Men on his side, resolv'd to venture a Battel. It was towards Evening when the two Parties had sight of one another: 
Pizarro
 having not onely more Men, but also better Exercis'd in Arms than the Vice-Roy,

who being sensible thereof, went silently about Midnight from his Station along a narrow by Path, so to fall behind upon the Rere of the Enemy, who mistrusted nothing, by reason the Vice-Roy's Dogs kept a continual Barking in his old Sta∣tion, and the 
Peruvian
 Sentinels were heard calling to one another, and making great Fires all the Night long; but because the Way was over-grown, and farther about than it was suppos'd, the Vice-Roy finding the Night too far spent, went back to 
Quito,
 out of which he Sallied as soon as he had sight of 
Pizarro
's Forces; against whom, being clad in a white Riding Coat, through the Slits of which ap∣pear'd a Cloth of Tissue Doublet, he came Riding on a Bay Gelding in the Head of his Party; with which breaking in amongst the Enemies Ranks, he made a consider∣able slaughter amongst them, till 
Hernand Tores
 coming near him, gave him a Blow on the Had with a Battel-Ax,
 that fell'd him to the Ground, which the Lawyer 
Carvayales
 seeing, ran immediately, out of desire to revenge his Brother's Death, whom the Vice-Roy had murder'd, and chopp'd off his Head. Thus 
Pizarro
 being absolute Master of the Field, began to shew his tyranny upon the Prisoners, some he took away by Poyson, others he Executed with the Sword and Halter, others he banish'd to the remote Countrey 
Chili,
 and spent his time in all manner of Vice in 
Quito;
 where, amongst other leud Actions, making Love to another Man's Wife, he hir'd one 
Vincent Paul
 to murder her Husband, which said 
Vincent
 was afterwards Hang'd at 
Valladolid
 in 
Spain.
 The Adulteress also was afterwards Got with Child by her own Father, and both of them put to death for Incest and murdering of their Child. 
Pizarro
 being receiv'd as King in 
Los Reyos,
 grew every day more proud than other, insomuch that his Friends themselves began to hate and envy him, and wanted onely a convenient opportunity to rid themselves of this high-minded Ty∣rant. A strange Accident, among others, had done him great hurt, had it not been timely discover'd, 
viz. Joan de la Torre,
 a Soldier formerly belonging to the Vice-Roy, found accidentally a Grave in the Valley 
Hica
 (which by the 
Peruvians
 had been worshipp'd above two Ages before) and in it so much Offer'd Gold and Sil∣ver as amounted to above eighty thousand Crowns in Gold, besides many Eme∣raulds and 
Turcoises,
 all which Treasure he was puzled how to carry away and pos∣sess securely, partly fearing the Emperor's Displeasure, if he should arrive thus rich in 
Spain,
 the rather because he had sided with 
Pizarro,
 and also knowing it was impossible to convey it on Ship-board without one or others knowledge; at last, after many Contrivances, he judg'd it convenient to put the Money in a small Vessel, and Sail with the same to 
Nicaragua,
 there to raise Men to oppose 
Pizarro
 in those Parts, that so he might re-gain the Emperor's Favor. This Undertaking seem'd to be threatned by many Dangers, he not having a sufficient Spirit to Com∣mand, or at least Experience to officiate the Place of a Captain.
 In the mean time 
Vela Nunnez,
 Brother to the slain Vice-Roy, taken in the Battel at 
Quito,
 had so much priviledge allow'd him from 
Pizarro,
 that he went a Hunting, and other such Exercises, distant from the Camp, who meeting with 
La Torre,
 took him in his arms, and embrac'd him with great joy, which so wrought upon 
La Torre,
 that he discover'd the Secret of his discover'd Treasure, took an Oath of him that he would be faithful to him, and take Revenge of 
Pizarro
 for all the Injuries receiv'd from him; but before, according to their Agreement, they could set Sail from thence, their Plot being discover'd, both 
Nunnez
 and 
Torre
 were Executed, and their Riches fell into the Hands of 
Pizarro.


Whilest the 
Peruvian
 Affairs were in this confusion and disorder, 
Peter Gasca,
 im∣power'd by the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, arriving there, endeavor'd to settle all things in Peace and Quiet, and sent by 
Peter Hernandes,
 besides the Emperor's Letter,

another which he writ himself to 
Pizarro,
 the Contents of which were to this purpose:


THe
 Peruvian 
Soyl hath drunk up the
 Spanish 
Blood long enough, and the ruin'd Realm gapes for Rest: The Emperor proffers Pardon for all past Crimes, Repeals the new Laws which the Vice-Roy
 Vela, 
during his Government, enjoy'd the
 Spaniards 
to observe. If
 Pizarro 
aims at the general Welfare, he may easily see that Arms must first be laid aside, which he now depends on in vain, all his Associates being ready to forsake him, because no Soldier can take up Arms against the Emperor, without being guilty of high Treason.


Pizarro
 confounded with this Letter, call'd a Council of War, who differ'd very much from one another in their Votes, some judging that it would be best pri∣vately to destroy 
Gasca,
 others were for an open Engagement, but most thought of another way, 
viz.
 to get his Person into their custody, and keep him under a strong Guard on the Island 
Puna,
 under pretence that the 
Peruvian
 Princes were sent for to come and acknowledge him as supream Governor, which because the Cities lay so remote one from another, could not be done in less than two years. Mean while an Embassy was to be sent to the Court at 
Madrid,
 which should enjoyn 
Gasca
 to remain in 
Panama,
 and not offer to come to 
Peru
 till such time as the Emperor commanded the same a second time at the return of the Agents.
 But 
Hieronimus Loaisa,
 chief Bishop of 
Los Reyos, Thomas Martin,
 Provincial of the 
Dominicans, Gomes Solis, Pizarro
's Steward, 
Laurence Aldana,
 who were design'd for this Embassy to the Emperor 
Charles,
 never went their Journey, but staid in 
Panama
 with 
Gasca,
 who had also gain'd to his Party 
Peter Alphonso Alnoiosa,
 who Commanded 
Pizarro
's Fleet: 
Aldana
 likewise inform'd him of all 
Pizarro
's private Councels; where∣upon 
Gasca
 sent privately for Aid to 
Mexico, Guatimala, Nicaragua,
 and 
St. Domingo,
 and dispatch'd four Ships with three hundred Men, Commanded by 
Aldana,
 from the Haven 
Panama,
 with Order to Land about Midnight against the City 
Los Reyos,
 and so fall unawares on 
Pizarro. Aldana
 accordingly falling into the Bay of 
Mala∣brige,
 was reliev'd and supply'd with Provisions by 
Diego Mora,
 Governor of 
Truxillo:
 On the other side, the Field-Marshal 
Carvayales
 being sent for by 
Pizarro,
 made a pompous Entrance, with the firing of Guns and Bonfires, into 
Los Reyos,
 where all Persons that seem'd to have the least inclination for 
Gasca,
 were either stabb'd or poyson'd. In the room of 
Mora, Pizarro
 sent the Lawyer 
Garcias Leon
 to be Go∣vernor of 
Truxillo,
 but he being taken by 
Aldana
's Fleet, joyn'd with 
Gasca;
 and thus all things began to conspire the ruine of 
Pizarro,
 yet he despair'd not, but being inform'd of the approach of the Ships, caus'd the Drums to be beaten in 
Los Reyos,
 forc'd every one that was able to bear Arms, on pain of death to serve him, made several experienc'd Soldiers, Commanders over his Horse and Foot, to whom he gave as much Money as they requir'd, to maintain those whom they had rais'd, and who were to be rais'd, by which means he got a thousand Men in Arms; to which number, according to an Order sent to 
Cusco, Plata, Arequipa, Lima, Guanuco,
 and other neighboring Places, new Forces were expected to joyn; but 
Savedra,
 Gover∣nor of 
Guanuco,
 deserting the City, left 
Pizarro
 and joyn'd with 
Mora,
 who secur'd the Province of 
Caxamalca
 for 
Gasca.
 Thus 
Pizarro
 began to be daily more and more forsaken. Since the destruction of the Vice-Roy 
Vela,
 Captain 
Diego Centeni
 had hid himself out of fear of 
Pizarro
 a whole year, in a Cave under Ground, but now inform'd of 
Gasca
's Arrival, came forth, and getting forty Men and some Horses together, which also belong'd formerly to the Vice-Roy, resolv'd, though meanly Arm'd, to go upon a bold Design, 
viz.
 to take the City 
Cusco;
 of which

Antonio de Robles,
 a Man hated and despis'd for his mean Extract and little Wit, had the chief Command, there being therein a Garrison of five hundred Soldiers, besides the Citizens, who were likewise in Arms: Being inform'd of 
Centeno
's ap∣proach, he sent out 
Francisco Aguierre
 as a Spye to discover the Enemy; but he joyning with 
Centeno,
 advis'd him to march along a By-way, and towards Night to draw up about 
Cusco,
 which accordingly he did, and forcing open the Gates, rush'd in with his Horse against the Enemy, who were drawn up in the Market-place, and break∣ing through their Ranks trampled whole Companies under foot;
 after which he fell in upon 
Robles,
 who having forgotten to give his Men the 
Word,
 caus'd a great di∣straction; for the Men blinded by the darkness of the Night, knew not Friend from Foe, insomuch that 
Robles
's Party did one another more mischief than 
Centeno
 did; who being thus become Master of the City, caus'd 
Robles
 to be Beheaded the next day, and distributed a hundred thousand 
Ducats
 amongst his Soldiers, and then march'd with a hundred Men to the City 
Plata,
 to bring 
Mendoza,
 Governor of the same, under the Emperor's subjection; in which his Design he likewise prov'd suc∣cessful, being supply'd with a hundred and thirty Foot, which 
Lucas Martin,
 had fetch'd from 
Arequipa
 for the Service of 
Pizarro,
 whom since he had deserted and joyn'd with 
Gasca
's Party. Mean while the Fleet under the Command of 
Aldana
 arriv'd in the Haven before 
Los Reyos,
 to the great terror and amazement of the whole City; from whence 
Pizarro
 marching, Encamp'd himself with five hun∣dred and fifty Men, so to prevent their Landing, swearing that he would spare none whoe're fell into his Hands, and sent Order to 
Peter Martin,
 whom he had left in the City, immediately to Hang up those which would not follow the Army, or who return'd from thence home; to which purpose 
Martin
 went from place to place with an Executioner, and thinking him not quick enough in his Work, stabb'd many Citizens himself: And strict Order was given by 
Pizarro,
 that all Run∣aways should be punish'd with Death; notwithstanding all which many of his nearest Friends daily forsook him, taking advantage of the darkness of the Night; nay, the Soldiers themselves would at Noon-day ride away from him, crying aloud, 
Long live the Emperor, and let the Tyrant
 Pizarro 
die:
 Wherefore he judg'd it most convenient to remove to the Countrey 
Nasca:
 During his Journey thither, whole Troops left him, insomuch that he scarce kept a hundred and fifty Men, and those he fear'd every Minute would fall upon him and Murder him.


With 
Pizarro
's departure, the whole Scene of Affairs was chang'd in 
Los Reyos;
 for there the Imperial Standard was erected, the City Cryer read the Letters of Pardon which 
Gasca
 had brought with him from 
Spain
 in the corner of every Street. 
Juan Palimino
 Landing with fifty Men, receiv'd all those that had deserted 
Pizarro,
 whilest 
Gasca
 set Sail from 
Panama
 with five hundred Men, with whom Landing at 
Truxillo,
 he Encamp'd himself in the Valley 
Xauxa,
 whither great multitudes flock'd from all places out of malice to 
Pizarro,
 who in a short time had destroy'd above five hundred Gentlemen. But 
Pizarro
 having quitted 
Los Reyos,
 he possess'd the City 
Arequipa,
 which he found quite desolate, but meeting afterwards with the Forces Commanded by 
Juan Acosta,
 of which one half were also run away, joyn'd with them, and march'd against 
Centeno,
 who lay along the Lake 
Titicaca,
 with whom he Engag'd in the Plain 
Guarina: Ludovico Ribera
 Landing, 
Centeno
's Party fir'd their Guns before the 
Pizarrians
 were within shot of him, of which 
Carvayales
 making speedy use, drew up his Pieces close before the Enemy, and made an exceeding slaughter amongst them, killing above a hundred and fifty Men in the first Onset; the Horse amaz'd at the sudden destruction of the Foot, fled, leaving the remain∣ing Foot-Soldiers open to the Enemy, who was gotten behind them with his Mus∣quetteers,

and with his Horse before, whilest six 
Peruvians
 carried away 
Centeno
 out of the Fight, he lying sick on a Chair. 
Pizarro
 thus become Victor, kill'd all he met with; of which 
Gasca
 being inform'd, resolving upon a private and sudden Revenge, caus'd all Necessaries for War to be made ready, and march'd with a thou∣sand and nine hundred Men out of the Valley of 
Xauxa
 to 
Cusco,
 where by the Way he was supply'd with the Forces, which the experienc'd Colonel 
Peter Valdivia
 had brought from 
Chili;
 with which coming to 
Andagua,
 he took up his Quarters there for some time, because the mild Winter had with continual Rains made the Ways so dirty, that there was no travelling, and had rotted their Tents and 
Maiz,
 and al∣so occasion'd the Bloody-flux amongst the Soldiers. In 
March, Gasca
 broke up with his Camp to cross the River 
Apurima,
 which he found very troublesom, because 
Pi∣zarro
 had broke down all the Bridges: But 
Gasca
 caus'd Wood and other Materi∣als to be carried to several places, that the Enemy should not certainly know his In∣tentions, and at last march'd over deep snowy Mountains to 
Cotabamba,
 where sud∣denly he made a Bridge, over which march'd four hundred Foot, but the Horse suf∣fer'd most damage; for sixty Horses loaden with Arms going to wade over, were carried down by the Stream against sharp Rocks, by which they were desperately gor'd in their sides, and many of them kill'd outright. 
Pizarro
 inform'd of the Enemies whole Proceedings by his Spyes, sent 
Acosta
 thither with two hundred Musquetteers, to fall upon those that were come over, whom he finding too many, durst not venture to Engage with them. Mean while 
Gasca
's whole Army getting over on the other side of the River 
Apurima,
 march'd up a high Hill, whilest 
Pizar∣ro
 Encamp'd himself five Leagues from 
Cusco,
 in a Plain call'd 
Saguisagrana,
 the Entrance into his Camp being fortifi'd with six Field-Pieces, each side by a Ri∣ver and several Mountains, and the Rere by a deep dry Moat: 
Gasca
 stood upon a Hill and view'd the Enemy's whole Forces lying in the Valley, and being op∣press'd with excesssive Heat, whilest his Men were so exceedingly pinch'd with Cold in the Night, that they were scarce able to hold their Arms, according to the strange property of the 
Peruvian
 Climate; for the tops of Hills generally Freeze, whilest the Valleys about a League from thence are parch'd with Heat: At Break-of-day 
Gasca
 descended the Hill; his Horse being divided into two Wings, were Com∣manded, the left by 
Juan Savedra,
 and the right by 
Balthazar Castro; Mendoza
 led some Dragoons, 
Valdivia
 guarded the Guns, and 
Gasca
 himself march'd in the Front of the Musquetteers. On the other side, 
Pizarro
 plac'd the 
Peruvians
 on his right Wing, 
Cepeda
 and 
Acosta
 Commanded the Horse, 
Carvayales
 and 
La Torre
 the Foot, 
Sebastian Vergara
 and 
Peter Soria
 guarded the Field-Pieces: But the Battel was scarce begun, when 
Cepedo
 and a great part of the Horse deserting 
Pizarro
 went to joyn with 
Gasca,
 and immediately after the right Wing of the Musquetteers; at the same time 
Centeno
 and 
Mendoza
 fir'd amongst 
Pizarro
's main Body,
 of which some ran a∣way to 
Cusco,
 others with their Colours to 
Gasca
's Army. 
Pizarro
 seeing himself thus forsaken, cry'd out, 
Since all are fled to the Imperial Standard, I will also betake my self thither, where perhaps I may find Mercy:
 Whereupon 
Acosta
 answer'd, 
Let us rather fall in amongst the thickest of the Enemy, and die valiantly:
 To which 
Pizarro
 reply'd, 
No, now I have lost Honor and Goods, I must take care for my Soul, that that may not be lost also;
 which said, he lighted from his Horse, Caparison'd in Silver, and deliver'd himself and his Sword into the Hands of the Serjeant 
Villavicenzo,
 who found him Habited in curious Armor, a Golden Helmet with a stately Plume of Feathers, and a Corslet incircl'd with Emeraulds about his Neck: 
Gasca
 seeing him brought before him in this manner, said thus unto him, 
Have you not order'd your Business well, to waste so much of the Emperor's Treasure, and shed so much Blood, and all to confirm your self in your unlawful

Usurpation of
 Peru? To which 
Pizarro
 answer'd, saying, 
I have spent my own Estate in the Service of the
 Spanish 
Crown, and might lawfully take upon me the Government of
 Peru, 
having with the loss of my Brother's Life, and the hazard of my own, discover'd the same. Carvayales
 escaping out of the Fight, had hid himself in a Thicket of Canes, but being discover'd by his own People, was by them brought before 
Gasca,
 who the next day after the Battel caus'd him to be Quarter'd alive,
 and 
Pizarro
's Head to be cut off in Prison; the other Prisoners were most of them kill'd in cold Blood. 
Gasca
 thus become absolute Master of 
Peru,
 found an incredible Treasure left by 
Pizarro,
 of which he gave to every common Soldier above six thousand 
Ducats;
 and with this his victorious Army march'd to 
Cusco,
 where he employ'd his Execu∣tioners afresh, in Hanging, Drawing, and the like; some that were stigmatiz'd and condemn'd to the Galleys, accounted themselves happy that they had escap'd so. 
Gasca,
 though Victor, perceiv'd no small Troubles to threaten him, having twenty five hundred Men in Arms, of which every one for their faithful Service judg'd that they deserv'd some Office or other, there being then above a hundred and fifty to dispose of, 
Pizarro
 having Executed the chiefest Officers, and those that bore any Command under him being either fled or kill'd in the last Fight: but the small number of Officers that were wanting, was not to be compar'd to all those that gap'd for Commissions. The Revenues, which yearly amounted to eleven hundred thousand 
Ducats,
 went most of it away amongst the Officers, the common Soldiers getting onely a small Snip out of it; wherefore many began to murmur, and were upon the point of Mutinying, if 
Cianca,
 the Judge of criminal Causes, taking the chief of them, had not punish'd them in such a manner, that all the rest being terrifi'd, gave over their Complaints. After 
Gasca
 had spent above nine hundred thousand 
Ducats
 in the War against 
Pizarro;
 all which Money he took up upon Interest, which, after having setled the Kingdom in Quietness, he paid for the most part with the Goods taken from the Rebels. Next he made a Law concerning the 
Peruvians
 paying of Tribute, which before the 
Spaniards
 forc'd from them whensoe're and howsoe're they pleas'd, with the greatest Tortures imagi∣nable.


Gasca
 having again erected in 
Los Reyos
 the high Court of Judicature, in which sat the Imperial Judges, return'd home with an unvaluable Mass of Treasure for 
Charles
 the Fifth, and left the 
Peruvian
 Government to the Judge 
Cianca;
 since which time 
Peru
 hath been Govern'd by Vice-Roys, the first whereof, who succeeded 
Ci∣anca,
 was 
Antonio Mendoza,
 and after him successively 
Andreas Hurtado Mendoza, Diego Valasco, Lopez Garcias de Castro, Francisco de Toledo, Martin Enriques, Garcias Mendoza, Ludovico Velasco,
 and 
Juan Pacheco,
 under whom the 
Peruvian
 Kingdom hath enjoy'd Peace and Quiet, to the considerable enriching of the 
Spanish
 Inhabitants.


Thus much of the antient Transactions in 
Peru,
 it will now be requisite to give you a brief Account of the several Provinces in this mighty Kingdom.


The Countrey is generally divided into three 
Juridicial Resorts,
 as they call them, or Courts of Appeal, which are 
Quito, Lima,
 and 
Charcas;
 but the particular Pro∣vinces, as they are commonly observ'd by Geographers, are said to be six, 
viz.
 1. 
Quito.
 2. 
Los Quixos.
 3. 
Lima.
 4. 
Cusco.
 5. 
Charcas.
 and 6. 
Collao.






SECT. II. Quito.


THe first Province of 
Peru
 towards the North is 
Quito,
 or the new Kingdom of 
Granada,
 with which on that side it is bounded, having on the West, 
Mare del Zur;
 on the South, 
Lima;
 and on the East, 
Los Quixos.
 It lieth in a manner right under the 
Line,
 and is said to be seventy two Leagues in length, and in some places about twenty five in breadth.


The Winter begins here in 
October,
 and continues till 
March,
 in which fall mighty Showers, and on the Mountains abundance of Snow, but all the Summer long the Sun is seldom darkned with a Cloud. Many of the Inhabitants die of a Giddiness in the Head about the beginning and end of Summer. The 
POX
 also destroys many of the Natives; with which Disease they are often born, and give it to the 
Spaniards,
 who are not able to abstain from the 
Indian
 Women; they use 
Sassapa∣rilla
 and the Wood 
Guaiacum
 to cure themselves with.


Here grow also many poysonous Herbs, which the 
Peruvians
 make use of to poyson one another.


In the farthest parts of 
Quito
 grows the salt and cooling Fruit 
Quaba,
 two Hand∣fuls long, cover'd with a grey Rind, and within full of white Pulp and hard Kernels.


The Tree 
Guaiaba
 hath a pale smooth Bark, thick Boughs, hard and glittering Leaves, Flowers consisting of five Leaves, not unlike a Peacock's Plume, long Ap∣ples, woolly without, and within full of a pale red Pulp and eatable Stones; the Root, which spreads it self very much, is sweet, and when boyl'd cures the Bloody-flux. This Tree grows in most places, especially in low Grounds, the more be∣cause the Kernels which the Birds picking out let fall on the Ground, spring up in new Trees.


The 
Spanish
 Fruits, as Peaches, Cittrons, Figs, Pomegranates, Pears, Quinces, and Oranges, grow also here in great abundance, but when ripe are subject to rot.


Moreover, the Fields abound with Wheat, Barley, and 
Maiz;
 the Pastures af∣ford plenty of Grass for Oxen, Horses and Sheep, which bring forth Lambs twice in fourteen Moneths.


The Ocean and Rivers store of Fish; the Stream 
Barbara
 us'd formerly to pro∣duce Gold also.


In moist Grounds the Inhabitants find abundance of Salt-petre, the best that is for the making of Gun-powder.


For the Accommodation of Travellers, Inns call'd 
Tambos,
 are built near the High-ways, exactly five Leagues distant one from another, where all sorts of Pro∣visions are sold at a set Price.


The Natives antiently went Cloth'd in a Frock without Sleeves, as wide on the top as at the bottom, and pleited their long Hair. They are strong, well proporti∣on'd in Body, and subtile enough to learn any Art, but treacherous, inconstant, and inclin'd to Drunkenness: They were very hard also to be brought to receive the 
Roman
 Religion, so that most of them would not suffer themselves to be Baptiz'd till they lay a dying: They also drove a great Trade in Cotton, Wooll, and Cloth.


Between 
Pasto
 and 
Quito
 are several Villages, and the famous High-way, by the 
Ingas
 cut through the Wildernesses and Mountains, the Wall of an old Castle, and the wonderful Stone-Bridge 
Lumichaca,
 which Nature hath made over the swift






River 
Guaca;
 it consists of a hard Cliff, at the Foot whereof is a great Arch, through which the Water runs with exceeding force.


This Tract of Land produces 
Maiz,
 and abundance of 
Mortuanos,
 a Fruit resem∣bling Damask Prunes, which eaten in excess cause Drunkenness and Faintness.


The Lake 
Yaguarcocha,
 signifying 
Bloody-Water,
 because the Inga 
Guayanacava
 kill'd and drown'd twenty thousand there.


The chief Towns and Places of Note are, 1. 
Caranguez,
 antiently a Royal City, where stood a sumptuous and stately Palace of the Kings of 
Peru,
 now almost de∣serted. The Palace, built of Stone in a little Plain, without either Mortar or Iron∣work, manifests its former glory by its Ruines.


2. The Royal Castle of 
Atabalo,
 or 
Ottavallis,
 in the building of which the 
Ingas
 spar'd no Cost nor Charges; and indeed it is a Structure no way inferior to any of the antient 
Roman
 Edifices. Between this Castle and 
Cochequi,
 a stately House, lies a cold snowy Mountain. Moreover, the 
Spaniards
 have several Habitations along the Way to 
Quito,
 and especially in the Valley 
Annaquito,
 where the Vice-Roy 
Vela
 lost the Battel fought against 
Gonsalvo Pizarro.


3. 
Quito,
 commonly call'd 
St. Francisco de Quito.
 There stood formerly here cer∣tain Palaces, built by the 
Ingas,
 but the City was re-built by the 
Spaniards
 at the Foot of a certain Ridge of Mountains, which it hath on the North and North-West side of it, and are said by 
Laet,
 to cross the whole Countrey of 
Peru
 quite over from the South to the North Sea: It was soon after the Building inhabited by five hundred Families of 
Spaniards
 at least, besides Natives, and well fortifi'd, and might be thought a Town very well seated in all respects, but for the neighborhood of a Vulcan, which at times annoyeth it very much, as namely in the Year 1560. when it vomited out such abundance of flaming Cinders and other sulphureous Matter, that had it not been for a Shower of Rain unexpectedly falling, would have much damnifi'd, if not destroy'd the Place. The Natives about 
Quito
 are more Moraliz'd than other 
Peruvians.
 The Valleys which are warm'd by the Sun produce all man∣ner of Fruit-Trees and large Vineyards; and the Root 
Papas,
 not unlike Apples.

The 
Quintla,
 which is of 
 heighth, hath little Seeds, of which a pleasant Liquor is boyl'd. From 
Quito
 the High-way leads to 
Cusco,
 along which at every four Leagues distance stands a brave Palace; and from 
Cusco
 to 
Chili,
 being in all above a thousand Leagues long. The City, built on a sandy Soyl, is divided in the mid∣dle by a Moat, over which lead several Bridges: the Streets are large and 
eight, and full of handsom Houses, and at the ends of the four chief Streets four Market-places. Besides the Cathedral, are two other Churches, 
dicated to the 
 
Se∣bastian
 and 
Blas
.
 The Cloysters of 
Franciscan
 and 
 are 
 small Ornament to the City. Besides other stately Structures are the Resid
 
 the Re∣ceivers of the Kings Revenues, to which the 
Peruvians
 that live a
 
 be∣ing computed no less than fifty thousand in number; 
ay Tri
 and to keep them in subjection, the City 
Quito
 is always well stor
d with a
 
 of Ammu∣nition and Instruments of War. The chiefest Trade h
 
 Goats, and other Cattel, Cotton-Clothes, Cloth, Flax, Ha
s, 
 
gar and Salt; which Salt, being grey and bitter, springs out of a Fountain in 
 Coun
y 
Mira.
 The Oyl, Wine, and Drugs which are us'd here, are fetch
d from the South Sea up the River 
Ambato,
 and from thence with Carts into the City.


4. 
Thomebamba,
 famous for a Royal Palace, built there by some of the 
Ingas;
 It lies Southward from 
Quito
 in the Province of 
Canares,
 where two Rivers com∣mix their Waters, near a Plain abounding with Venison. There yet remain consi∣derable Ruines of this Palace, in which one may discern the vast Dimensions of di∣vers Rooms, in some of which Arms were kept, and in others Provisions and Clothes; of which kind of Buildings or Magazines the 
Ingas
 had erected above a thousand in 
Peru,
 especially along the High-way, that they might have their Am∣munition ready in all places if need should require. On the left side of 
Thomebamba
 appeal'd the famous Temple of the Sun, whose Gates were not onely curiously Painted, but also Inlay'd with Emeraulds. Both the Palace and Temple, adorn'd with Gold and costly Images of great Touch-stone and Jasper, contain'd within their Walls an unvaluable Treasure. These magnificent Structures are at this day fall'n quite to decay. The People of this Countrey, who wear long Hair, pleited on the top of their Heads like a Coronet, go Cloth'd in Cotton Coats and Buskins of Hair-cloth. The Women, indifferent fair, and great admirers of the 
Spaniards,
 Plough, Sowe, and gather in the Harvest, whilest the Men stay at home, Spinning, Weaving, and doing of other Female-Offices. 
Anno
 1544. they discover'd Mines here, which produc'd as much Gold as Earth.


5. 
Tacunga,
 where was formerly another stately Palace, about fifteen Leagues from 
Cusco,
 not far from the Mountain which some years since vomited Ashes and Stones into the adjacent Fields. Hereabouts was formerly a Cloyster, inhabited by the Nuns call'd 
Namaconas,
 the Ruines whereof are yet to be seen, with several Houses of Stone, but cover'd with Thatch. The Natives in this Place are of a brown Complexion, and of a very affable Nature.


5. 
Mulambato;
 7. 
Mocha;
 8. 
Rhiobamba,
 three small Villages, but each of them credited with a stately Palace. Opposite to 
Rhiobamba
 lies the Province 
Chumbo,
 from which a troublesom Way leads to 
Guaynacapa
 over the River 
Chongo.


9. 
St. Jago de Puerto Viejo,
 giving Denomination to the Territory about it, which produces abundance of 
Potatoe
 Roots, 
Maiz, Juca,
 three sorts of 
Guayavas, Cerezillas,
 and the Tree 
Tunas,
 which bears wild Figs. The 
Spanish
 Fruits grow here likewise in great plenty. The fore-mention'd Beasts like Hogs, whose Navels grow on their Backs, are also very common here. The Woods abound with Deer and all sorts of Fowls, amongst which one resembling a Goose, and call'd 
Xuta;
 and ano∣ther

nam'd 
Maca,
 somewhat lesser than a Cock, and which feeding about the House, may be reckon'd amongst the Poultrey of this Countrey. The Sea along the Coast affords them abundance of 
Bonito's,
 which eaten in some Seasons cause Agues. The People along the Sea-Coast are generally troubled with Pimples and Sores in their Faces, especially on their Foreheads and Noses, few of them living long, by reason of the unhealthfulness of the Place through excessive Moisture, for the Rain conti∣nues eight Moneths together.


10. 
Manta,
 lying upon the Southern Ocean, the chief of the Villages, formerly possess'd by the 
Caranes,
 betwixt the Promontory 
Passao
 and the River 
Dable.
 These People are said to this day to carve and cut their Faces from their Ears to their Chins; about their Necks and Arms they wear Chains of Gold and little red Co∣rals, call'd 
Chaquina,
 highly esteem'd by the 
Peruvians.
 This Town was formerly famous for a great Emerauld, which was religiously worshipp'd there.


11. 
Guayaquil,
 otherwise call'd 
Culata,
 built at a deep Inlet of the Sea, near the River 
Anebato,
 which with great swiftness falls down from the Mountains 
Quito,
 is surrounded with a fertile Soyl, and in the hollow Trees is found plenty of Honey. The Water of the fore-mention'd River, being of great virtue in curing the 
Morbus Gallicus,
 hath great resort of People from all places; who likewise gather the 
Sarsa∣parilla
 that grows along the Banks. The Bridge which the Inga 
Guaynacava
 began to lay cross this River, is also very remarkable, but he dying, it was left unfinish'd. The 
Guancabilcas
 were heretofore under the Jurisdiction of this City 
Guayaquil.


12. 
Castro,
 so call'd from a strong Fort built there by a 
Spanish
 Captain, and situ∣ate in the Valley 
Vili,
 not far from 
Guayaquil.


13. The City 
Loxa,
 built in the Countrey of the 
Paltas,
 a People that, went na∣ked, between two Arms of the River 
Catamayo
 under a wholsom Climate, 
ar the High-way that leads to 
Cusco
 in the Valley 
Curibamba,
 where no poysonous Beast was ever found. The Soil bears abundance of Oaks, Hazles, Ash, Willow, and Cedar-Trees; 
Maiz,
 Barley, and Wheat. Not far from the City springs a hot and sulphurous Fountain, which cures all sorts of Sores and Wounds. The Countrey hereabouts is likewise stor'd with Fowls, Venison, Cattel, and Fish. Moreover, the City receives no small lustre from two 
Dominican,
 and one 
Franciscan
 Cloyster. Eastward from which lie desolate Mountains, whose tops are continually cover'd with Snow. Not far from hence were formerly two noble Palaces, 
Piedras
 and 
Tamboblanco,
 besides several Villages.


14. 
Cuenca,
 wherein are also large Structures for the Monks and Priests: The Countrey about the same hath rich Mines of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Copper, Iron, and Sulphur.


15. 
Zamora,
 Eastward from the cold Mountains 
Andes,
 built in a Marshy Soyl, where the Inhabitants are never visited with Pestilential Distempers, and use no other Physick for such Sicknesses as they are troubled with, than Tobacco, and the Herb 
Aquacolla.
 But there is a certain Nut that grows hereabouts, which occasions sudden death, if eaten raw, but being boyl'd, is a wholsom Food. The Mines af∣ford great pieces of Gold, of which one weiging eighteen Pound, was presented to 
Philip
 the Second, King of 
Spain.
 The briny Springs produce good Salt. Three Rivers falling from the Mountains, are noted for their Golden Sands, and also afford delicious Fish. The Bees being here void of Stings, furnish the Inhabitants with plenty of Honey. The Tygers and little Lyons devour many of the Sheep 
Pacos,
 Goats, Hogs, and other Cattel, and sometimes the Natives themselves. The City it self is neatly built with Woodden and Stone Houses, and adorn'd with a Church and 
Dominican
 Cloyster, besides a stately Palace, the Residence for the King's





 Receiver. The Natives about this Place are a stupid and barbarous People, which before the 
Spaniards
 coming thither, would for a small trifle kill one another.


16. The City 
Yaen,
 situate in the Countrey 
Chuiquimayo;
 it is so call'd from a swift River, cross which the 
Peruvian
 Women and Children swim, to the great amazement of the 
Spaniards.
 They paint their Bodies black with the Juice of the Root 
Yaguas,
 and feed for the most part on the stamp'd Plant 
Yaca.
 On the other side of the Mountain, which rises on the Banks of 
Chuquimayo,
 lies the Countrey 
Pe∣rico,
 fruitful and well inhabited, against which juts the Golden Countrey 
Cherinos. Peru
 hath also several delightful Valleys, amongst which on the North the chiefest are the 
Tumbez, Solana, Poechos,
 and 
Piura,
 all of them very fertile, full of stately Buildings, and water'd by several Rivers.


17. 
San Miguel,
 the first City that was built by the 
Spaniards
 in 
Peru,
 situate in a sandy and dry Soyl, being extraordinary dusty in Summer, and very slabby in the Winter, because the hard Ground cannot soak up the Rain. The 
Ingas
 made a Way through this Valley fifteen Foot broad, between two Walls, and Planted Trees on each side.


18. Westward from 
Miguel
 appears 
Payta,
 near a convenient Haven in the South-Sea, which 
Anno
 1547. was burnt by 
Thomas Candish;
 since which it had been re∣built twenty eight years, when 
Joris Spilbergen,
 after a hard Engagement with the 
Spanish
 Admiral 
Rodrigo Mendoza,
 arriving in the large Haven before 
Payta,
 sent eight Sail with three hundred Armed Men up to the City, where finding the Enemy Encamp'd along the Shore, he return'd without any effect; but two of his Frigats, the 
Eolus
 and the 
Morning-Star,
 running close to 
Payta,
 fir'd whole Broad-sides at the same, whilest Captain 
De Wit
 took a 
Peruvian
 Fisher-man, who had been two Moneths out at Sea, and taken abundance of Fish. The Guns which the Ships fir'd upon the Town struck such a terror into the Citizens, that they fled with Bag and Baggage into the Mountains, and left the City for a Prize to 
Spilbergen,
 who setting fire on the same, in few hours burnt down two Churches, a 
Dominican
 Cloy∣ster, and several Alms-houses: But had not the Citizens been cowardly, they might

easily have kept off the 
Hollander;
 for the Vice-Roy 
Ludovico Velasco
 inform'd of 
Spilbergen
's Arrival, had stor'd the Place with Ammunition and Men, whose Cou∣rage failing, prov'd successful for the 
Hollanders,
 who whilest they Rid here at an Anchor, took a very strange Bird on the Island 
Lobos,
 lying before 
Payta,
 being two Yards high and three thick, in its Bill, Wings, and Claws resembling an Eagle, and having a large Crest on its Head. Not long after 
Donna Paula
 being Governess of 
Payta,
 a Lady famous in 
Peru
 for her Beauty and obliging Nature, sent Cabbages, Oranges, Cittrons, and other Provisions to the 
Hollanders,
 and requested the Re∣leasement of some of the 
Spaniards
 taken in the Engagement against 
Mendoza,
 but could not obtain her Request from the uncourtly 
Dutchmen.






SECT. III. Los Quixos.


THe Province of 
Los Quixos
 lieth South, and to the South-East of 
Quito,
 being border'd more directly Eastward with a part of the Province of 
Guiana,
 call'd by some 
El Dorada,
 or 
The Golden Countrey;
 on the South it hath 
Lima
 and 
Cusco.


This Province is subdivided into several lesser Territories, 
viz. Canela, Pacomores,
 and 
St. Juan de Salinas. Canela
 is so call'd, because it hath many great Woods, which produce the Fruit 
Canela
 in great abundance, the Owners whereof were most inhumanely dealt with by the 
Spaniards;
 for 
Gonsalvo Pizarro
 supposing to get store of Gold there, found nothing but Trees, bearing a Fruit like Olives, by the Na∣tives call'd 
Canela,
 with which they us'd to drive a great Trade, being otherwise poor and simple People, living in Huts, which 
Pizarro
 pulling down, caus'd the Inhabitants to be torn in pieces by his Dogs, because they could not furnish him with Gold, nor direct him where it was to be had.


Besides the 
Canela
-Tree, this Countrey also produceth in great plenty the Tree which beareth the Apples 
Granadilla,
 exceeding good against burning Feavers; the Leaves are like Ivy, the Blossom resembling the Sun, and the long Leaves speckled with Red and White, open three hours after Sun-rising, and close again before the Evening, just as if Nature took care to preserve the beauty of the Flower.


In this part of the Province the chief are, 1. 
Baeza,
 otherwise call'd 
Quixos,
 built in the Year 1559. by 
Ramires de Avila,
 eighteen Leagues from 
Cusco.


2. 
Archidona,
 twenty Leagues to the South-East of 
Baeza.
 3. 
Avila.
 4. 
Sevilla del Oro,
 all of them 
Spanish
 Colonies.


The Territories 
Pacomores
 and 
Yguansongo,
 otherwise call'd 
The Countrey of Juan de Salinas,
 are said both to extend above a hundred Leagues in length, and little less in breadth. The Fields afford store of Pasture for Cattel, the Plough'd Lands produce Wheat and all sorts of wholsom Herbs; and in some places are also rich Gold-Mines.


The Governor 
Layola
 built four Towns here, 
viz.
 1. 
Valladolid;
 2. 
Loyola;
 3. 
San Jago de los Montanas;
 and 4. 
Caruma.


The Jesuit 
Acosta
 relates, That not far from 
Caruma
 he found great Stones, some of which were full of Golden Veins, but were hard to be cut from the Rock. Most of the Gold is found in the Sand of several Rivers, the chiefest whereof flow through 
Quito, New Granada, Valdivita
 in 
Chili,
 and 
Caravaya
 in 
Peru.


On the Point of 
Quito,
 the River 
San Jago
 falls into the Southern Ocean; the Ground in the Mouth of the River being very uneven, for oftentimes the Ships are

fast aground at the Stern, and on Head they have above eighty Fathom Water; yet nevertheless the Shoals are no ways dangerous.


South-West from 
St. Jago
 lies the spacious Inlet 
Mattheo,
 and the Promontory 
Francisco,
 known by its Banks and high Grounds, which shew red and white at a great distance.


Not far from hence, exactly under the 
Equinox,
 appears 
Cape Passao,
 flat and low; between which and 
Mattheo,
 the great Rivers 
Los Quiximes
 fall into the Sea.


Behind 
Passao
 rises the high Mountain 
Quaque;
 and more Westerly the Bay 
Cara∣ques
 affords a secure Harbor for all manner of Vessels.


Next you come to the Town 
Puerto Viejo
 before mention'd, lying behind the Island 
Laurenso.


Five Leagues off at Sea, before 
Laurenoz,
 lies the Island 
Plata,
 formerly famous for a 
Peruvian
 Temple, in which the Natives Sacrifis'd Sheep, and sometimes Chil∣dren, and painted the Figures of divers Persons with the Blood; to which they also Offer'd Jewels, Gold, Silver, Wooll, Cotton Shirts, and Cloaks. 
Francisco Pizarro
 arriving here, got an invaluable Mass of Treasure; but at present it ly∣ing desolate, affords nothing but Brambles and wild Trees.


The next which come in view are the Havens 
Callo
 and 
Zalango,
 where there are safe Harbors, good Wood and Water.


The Cape of 
St. Helena
 makes also a secure Road on the North, and on its Shore hath a Spring, on the top of whose Waters swims a certain Gum, by the Natives call'd 
Copey,
 exceeding good to make Ships tight.


The River 
Tumbez
 falls into a large Bay, which on its North-East Point near the Main Land, hath the Island 
Puna,
 ten Leagues in circumference: The Soyl where∣of produces abundance of 
Maiz, Juca,
 and other good Roots, besides great Woods full of fruitful Trees, and 
Sarsaparilla.
 The Inhabitants of a brown Complexion, and middle Stature, wear Cotton Cloaks, and Chains of 
Chaquira
 and Precious Stones: They drive a great Trade, and formerly maintain'd Wars with the Peo∣ple inhabiting upon the River 
Tumbez;
 their great want is fresh Water in the Summer. 
Thomas Candish
 Landing here 
Anno
 1587. found a Ship hal'd ashore, and three Villages, in one of which stood a Palace belonging to a 
Casique,
 surrounded with Stone Galleries; and near it a large Store-house full of Tar-pots and Hemp to make Cables of: The Village consisted of two hundred Houses, and a fair Church with a Steeple, in which hung several Bells. The 
Casique
 Married to a 
Spa∣nish
 Woman being fled with the Villagers, 
Candish
 took many Oxen, fat Sheep, Pi∣geons and Ducks, the Bells, and what else was not convey'd aboard, with him, and afterwards burnt the whole Town; but whilest he was busie in making havock, a thousand 
Spaniards,
 and a considerable number of 
Peruvians
 fell upon the 
English
 on such a sudden, that they kill'd some, and took others Prisoners.


Somewhat farther off at Sea appears the Isle 
Clara,
 where those of 
Puna
 formerly buried their Dead.


The Inlet into which falls the River 
Tumbez,
 whose Shores are well inhabited, ends Westward at the Promontory 
Blanco;
 Southward from which lies the Isle 
Lo∣bos,
 where there are several Springs full of the same Gum, or 
Bitumen,
 a little above mention'd.


Beyond the Point 
Agua
 lie the two Isles 
Lobos Marinos,
 opposite to a low Coast; they are desolate, and barren of Grass, Trees, and all kind of Herbs, and destitute of fresh Water; but many Pelicans, Penguins, and other strange Birds.


The discovering of these Coasts belonging to the Jurisdiction of 
Quito,
 deserves a short Relation:




Whilest 
Pizarro
 kept the Inga 
Attabaliba
 Prisoner, he sent Captain 
Bevalcazar
 to the new Fort 
St. Miguel,
 where eighty Horse and a hundred Foot being arriv'd from 
Panama
 and 
Nicaragua,
 and he being inform'd that there lay a great Treasure in 
Quito,
 and that the 
Canares,
 the 
Spaniards
 Friends, were exceedingly oppress'd by 
Ru∣minagua, Attabaliba
's General, immediately march'd thither with the new arriv'd Forces before mention'd, to fetch the Booty, and to assist the 
Canares;
 but several things oppos'd him in his Design: for 
Ruminagua
 guarded the Way with twelve hundred 
Indians,
 digg'd Pits in the same, and filling them with sharp Poles, cover'd them slightly over with Canes and Earth; all which 
Bevalcazar
 shunning, went about, fell in upon the Rere of the Enemy, and after a small Resistance conquer'd the City 
Quito.
 Mean while 
Ferdinand Cortesio
 sent 
Petro Alvarado
 from 
New Spain,
 who taking 
Guatimala,
 receiv'd a Commission from the 
Spanish
 Court, to subdue the Northern parts of 
Peru.
 Soon after which 
Garcias Holgua
 being sent with two Ships to enquire concerning the State of 
Peru,
 brought News back, That 
Francisco Pizarro
 had gotten an unvaluable Treasure at 
Caxamalca;
 which so stirr'd up 
Alva∣rado,
 that he Landed five hundred Men at 
Puerto Viejo,
 march'd in great want of Provisions over the Mountains 
Acabucos,
 and had he not accidentally found a Pond of sweet Water in a Thicket of Canes, both Men and Horses had all perish'd; at last upon his approaching 
Quito,
 the Governor thereof, being 
Bevalcazar,
 not endu∣ing to suffer an Equal, drew up all his Men in Battel array; but some Persons in∣terceding between them,
 they were soon reconcil'd, and 
Alvarado
 being bought out with a great sum of Money, deserted 
Quito;
 where after 
Gonsalvo Pizarro,
 had re∣maind'd a considerable time he march'd Eastward of the Province, which produces abundance of Cinamon; whither he was accompanied by two hundred 
Spaniards
 and four thousand 
Peruvians;
 against whom the Natives dwelling on the Borders of 
Los Quixos
 fought very valiantly, till Night approaching, when they all ran away; after which resting a while, there arose a mighty Tempest of Thunder and Light∣ning, accompanied with a dreadful Earthquake, which swallow'd above five hun∣dred Houses, whole Woods and Fields, whilest an unknown River burst out of the Earth, and overflow'd all the Countrey, insomuch that 
Pizarro
 expected nothing but a speedy Ruine,
 in regard no Provisions were to be found in all the Countrey: at last getting on the top of the nearest Mountain he lost many of his Men, who were frozen to death with excessive Cold. From thence marching to the County 
Zumaque,
 he got plenty of Provision and Cinamon, which grows on great Trees in the Woods; the Leaves thereof resemble the Laurel; the Fruit grows in little Ber∣ries; the Root and Bark have a strong odoriferous smell. Thence travelling to the Town 
Coca,
 he found a mighty Cataract of Water, falling from a Rock above fifteen hundred Ells high; insomuch that the noise in calm Weather was heard six Leagues off. 
Pizarro
 leaving his sick People in 
Zumaque,
 went onely with a few Eastward from 
Coca
 to the Plain Countrey 
Guema,
 full of Moorish Grounds, the Inhabitants whereof went naked: at last he came to the great River 
Maranon,
 which falls from the Mountains near 
Quito,
 and extends with several windings above eight hundred Leagues in length, and at the Mouth thereof is fifteen Leagues broad, which at that time overflowing all the Countrey, he judg'd it convenient to build a Brigantine, making the Shoes of the dead Horses serve for Iron-work, his Mens Shirts for Sails, and a Gum, which was to be had there, for Tar, and having Lanch'd their Vessel, and put all their Baggage and sick People into the same, they Sail'd close along the Shore, on which 
Pizarro
 made his Way through Brambles and Canes, or went over in the Brigantine whensoe're he espy'd a better Path on the other side; in which manner they were gone two hundred Leagues down the River, with no other Food

but wild Fruit and Roots; when Captain 
Franciscus Orellana,
 was order'd to Sail away before with five Men, and seek out for Provisions, and at every Stream which fell cross-ways out of the Countrey into the great River,
 he was to leave a Mann'd Boat: but 
Orellana
 in few days drove down so far with the swift River, that he saw no likelihood or getting up again in a whole year, neither could he find any Provisions, but fought daily with the 
Indians,
 who came stoutly to Board him in little Boats: amongst whom he was inform'd also, that thereabouts liv'd the 
Amazon
 Women, that Warr'd continually against their Neighbors; and at last he came into the Northern Ocean. But 
Orellana
 Sailing to 
Spain,
 obtain'd a Com∣mission to be Governor of the 
Amazons
 Countrey, whither he steer'd his Course with five hundred Men in three Ships; but Landing at the 
Canaries
 they all ran a∣way from him, which so incens'd 
Orelland,
 that he soon after dy'd with Grief. Mean while 
Pizarro
 inform'd by a 
Spaniard
 whom 
Orellana
 had put ashore, that the Brigantine was by the strong Current carried into the Ocean, knew not what to do, his People since their departure from 
Quito
 having travell'd above four hun∣dred Leagues, had eaten most of their Horses: Many dy'd by feeding on unwhol∣som Herbs; others fell down dead for Hunger, or tir'd out with toilsom Travel; their Clothes, rotted by the Rain, hung upon them like Rags, their Shoes were worn out, their Feet full of Blisters, their Bodies sadly mangled with Brambles and Thorns, for no place afforded them a Boat. 
Pizarro
 leaving the River 
Maranon,
 went another Way, no less troublesom for steep Rocks and inaccessible Mountains. The Valleys through which they went, began now to be strew'd with dead and sick Bodies, who were not able to follow the Army, which march'd very fast, every one judging to be so much nearer his preservation the farther he could get: Those that fainted call'd continually on their Friends for help, but the Horses were grown too weak to carry them: Every one saw nothing but Death before his Eyes; wherefore, though call'd by their dearest and most intimate Friends that lay a dying, they never look'd back, their compassion towards others being turn'd into fear and care of themselves. The Forsaken implor'd their Saints, .and besought 
Pi∣zarro
 for aid, but finding their Complaints to be in vain, and raging through de∣spair, they wish'd all the rest the same success, and the like Friends, whenever they should be in the like Condition. 
Pizarro
 extreamly griev'd and troubled, that he had brought the People into this Misery, sent a few Horsemen before to 
Quito,
 to carry the sad News of his deplorable Condition, that they might immediately send Provisions to him; which he receiving when he was within fifty Leagues from the said City 
Quito,
 distributed amongst those that were left alive, who being also al∣most starv'd, eat so greedily, that several of them were chok'd; the remainder were kept a considerable time in Garrison under the Command of 
Pizarro
 in 
Quito.
 Which City, built in a pleasant place, grew very populous in the Year 1544. there being several Gold-Mines found about the same in that time. But this lasted not long, for 
Quito
 siding with the Vice-Roy 
Blasco Nunnez Vela
 against 
Gonsalvo Pi∣zarro,
 most of the Citizens were destroy'd by him, and their Houses burnt to Ashes. The like Destruction, and upon the same occasion, befel the three Villages in the Province 
Bracomoros,
 discover'd by 
Juan Parzel
 and Captain 
Vergara,
 together with the Countrey 
Chichiapoios,
 where 
Alphonso Alvarado
 built the Town 
Levanto,
 sur∣rounded with deep Caverns, through which, to the great strengthning of the City, flow several Rivers.


Round about 
Puerto Viejo
 the Natives dwelt in Trees, whom the 
Spaniards
 had much ado to bring under their subjection; for their Countrey being barren and mountainous, was not onely wanting in Provisions to feed an Army, but the 
Peru∣vians


also threw great Stones out of their Huts built in Trees, and likewise Javelins and Pots full of boyling Water, with which they did much mischief to their Ene∣mies that Storm'd them, who at last covering themselves with Boards, cut down the Trees, with which they falling, were torn in pieces by the 
Spanish
 Dogs.






SECT. IV. Lima.


LIma,
 call'd also 
Los Reyos,
 hath on the East, 
Collao,
 and some part of 
Cusco;
 on the North, 
Los Quixos;
 and on the South, 
Charcas.
 The Countrey ex∣tendeth it self in length upon the Coasts of the South Sea two hundred and fifty, some say, full three hundred Leagues in length, 
viz.
 from 
Cape del Aguia
 North∣ward, on the Borders of 
Quito
 as far as 
Arequipa
 towards the South, and runs East∣ward to 
Brasile
 and 
Rio de la Palma.


In this Province are several very pleasant Valleys, the first whereof is 
Motupe,
 to which a sandy Way leads from 
St. Miguel de Valverde,
 between barren Wilds, from whence several Streams falling are immediately drunk up by the Sand; wherefore all Travellers that go that way carry Water and Wine with them in 
Calabashes
 for twenty Leagues together, which they Walk or Ride by Night, because of the ex∣cessive heat of the Sun.


In the Valley 
Motupe
 grow abundance of Trees, which receive nourishment from a River that springs up near the same. Here is also much Cotton.


Not far from hence are the Valleys 
Xayanca,
 formerly very populous and full of Palaces: The River which flows through the middle is led in Trenches amongst the neighboring Fields.


The Valley 
Tuqueme
 is also very pleasant, and the decay'd Palaces, sufficiently testifie its former splendor.


The next being 
Cinto,
 is no way inferior to 
Tuqueme;
 and between both lie sandy Hills and barren Rocks, on which grow neither Trees nor Herbs, nor is any living Creature to be found upon them: the Way through which being a whole days Journey, cannot be travell'd without sure Guides.


The Valley 
Collique,
 water'd by a River of the same Denomination, and very thick set with Trees, was formerly very populous, but since the 
Spanish
 Wars it is become quite desolate; for not onely a considerable number of them were slain by the 
Spaniards,
 but also many destroy'd themselves, Wives and Children; of which 
Peter Martyr,
 Councellor to the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth, sets down several terrible Examples, of which two were remarkable above the rest; the first was after this manner:


The 
Spanish
 Captain 
Olandus
 Lying with the Daughter of an 
Indian Casique,
 que∣stion'd when she grew big with Child, Whether she was with Child by him? and that he might know the real truth by Torture, he caus'd her to be ty'd naked to a woodden Spit, and laid to roast against a Fire made of green Wood, so that she died in a most miserable manner; upon which her Father ran in a rage with thirty of his Companions to 
Olandus
's House, where he kill'd his whole Family, and locking all the Doors about the House, set fire on the same, into which when it was at its greatest heighth, he and his Associates leap'd into the middle thereof.


The second Accident is also very terrible, 
viz.
 An 
Indian
 Maid being Got with Child by a 
Spanish
 Ass driver, acquainted her Father and Mother with it, withal

telling them that she was ready to suffer Death for her Offence; and notwithstand∣ing they freely pardoning, and perswading her to the contrary, she eat raw 
Juca,
 which when boyl'd is a wholsom Food, but if eaten raw, certain though languishing Death; which she perceiving, ran to the next River, where after having wash'd her self, she broke off from a large Tree a Bough of five Foot long, and making the end thereof very sharp, fell upon the same, and so kill'd her self. Several other Ra∣vish'd Maids taking example hereby, hang'd themselves upon the Boughs of the same Tree.


But to proceed in our Description, next to 
Collique
 lies the Valley 
Zana,
 of the like bigness, and famous for the City 
Miraflores.


The next is 
Pascayamo,
 which exceeds all the former in fruitfulness, and popu∣lousness of Inhabitants, who before they were destroy'd by the 
Ingas
 were much fear'd by their Neighbors. This Valley also was adorn'd with several fair Tem∣ples, which are now turn'd into Cloysters. Cattel, Hogs, and Goats breed here in very great numbers. The chief Trade of this Place consists in Cotton and Linnen.


The Valley 
Chacama,
 in which the 
Dominican
 Monks inhabit a brave Cloyster, produces abundance of Sugar.


Four Leagues farther lies the spacious Valley 
Chimo,
 so call'd from an old 
Peru∣vian
 Heroe, which affords a pleasant Prospect, by reason of the many Banquetting-houses built there by the 
Ingas.
 No place in 
Peru
 is able to stand in competition with this for plenty of Provisions, the Ocean and Rivers producing store of Fish, the Countrey affording Cattel and all manner of Fruit. The Cotton which grows here is Shipp'd to the South Sea.


Chanca
 is a Valley chiefly considerable for the Town 
Arnedo,
 which is situate therein, of which more hereafter.


But the Valley 
Guanape,
 not far from 
Chanca,
 yields the best 
Peruvian
 Liquor 
Chica,
 and hath a convenient Harbor for Ships.


The Plain 
Santa
 being overflow'd in the Winter, is all overgrown for want of Inhabitants, who were all destroy'd by the 
Spaniards.
 The Woods hereabouts swarm with a sort of venomous Bug, which exceedingly torments the Traveller.


Next follow in order the Valleys 
Guambaico,
 very fruitful, and 
Guarney,
 abound∣ing with Horses, Hogs, and other Cattel.
 
Joris Spilbergen
 Landing here 
Anno
 1615. found the Haven secure against all Winds, and between the Shore and the Village 
Guarmey
 a Creek, and somewhat farther a fresh-Water Pool; on one side of which stood a decay'd Castle built of square Stone, whereon the 
Hollanders
 set the 
States
 Flag, and Garrison'd the same to secure those that fetch'd Water out of the fore-mention'd Pool. In the aforesaid Village stood a Church with a spiry Steeple; behind which rose high Mountains, and at the Foot thereof a great Wood, into which the Inhabitants fled with all their Goods, so that 
Spilbergen
 found nothing but a little Meal, a few Hens, Hogs, and Oranges in their Houses, which whilest he was sending Aboard, a small Body of Horse appear'd, but immediately fled into the Woods. The 
Hollanders
 staying here seven days, were inform'd, that the Galley 
Jesu Maria,
 Commanded by the Admiral 
Rodrigo Mendoza,
 and the 
Santa Anna,
 by the Vice-Admiral 
Peter Alvares Piger,
 were both lost, not one Man being sav'd.


Not far from thence lies the Valley 
Parmonga,
 which though it be fruitful and pleasant, yet it is quite desolate; the Walls of a large Castle still appear, as testi∣monies of its being formerly inhabited; and within the said Walls also are still to be seen the Ruines of spacious Halls and fair Chambers, whose Walls are painted with wild Beasts and Birds: The 
Spaniards
 have digg'd all about, and undermin'd





 the same, in hopes to find, together with the several dead Bodies, a Treasure bu∣ried. Two Leagues Southward from this Valley 
Parmonga
 flows the River, 
Guay∣man,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Rio del Falcon,
 from a Hawk which was seen there. When any store of Rain falls here, a great part of the Dale 
Barrana
 lies under Water.


Not far from hence lie the Valleys 
Gaura
 and 
Lima;
 which last exceeds all others in bigness, and was formerly exceeding populous; but since the Marquess 
Pizarro
 built the City 
Los Reyos
 here, the Citizens have taken the Lands from the 
Peruvians.
 The Mines hereabouts produce Gold and Silver. Amongst other things time Inha∣bitants highly esteem an Herb bearing yellow Flowers, which in a short time cures a putrifi'd Wound, whereas if laid on sound Flesh it eats the same to the Bone. The Natives heretofore us'd to spend their time in Hunting,
 and caught their Game after this manner, 
viz.
 three or four thousand of them would meet together, and by taking Hands make a Ring of three or four Miles in circumference, and at a certain Note or Tune Sung, or loudly Exclaim'd, they drew nearer and nearer, till at last they were within Shot of the inclosed Game, whatsoever it were.


The Countrey of 
Collao
 hath a low Point, from which a long Cliff runs into the Sea, towards the small Island call'd 
Isla de Collao:
 On each side of the Point the Coast runs sloaping in, the one side extending North-West from 
Collao,
 to the Cliffs 
Piscadores;
 the other South-East to the second Promontory; behind which is a large Bay, where the Valley 
Pachacama
 appears, famous for its exceeding fruitful∣ness, and a stately Temple built by the 
Ingas,
 where 
Ferdinando Pizarro
 found above nine hundred thousand 
Ducats,
 besides what the Soldiers and Commanders took, and what the Priests had hid, which none, though miserably tortur'd, would confess.


Opposite to 
Pachacama
 lies the Valley 
Chilca,
 where it never Rains, nor any Brook or Spring moistens the dry Soil, which nevertheless produces 
Maiz
 and Fruit-Trees. The Natives us'd to dig large and deep Pits, in which they Sow'd and

Planted, and at every Root laid the Head of a Fish call'd a 
Sardin,
 which they caught in Nets on the Sea-shore; wherein nevertheless nothing would have grown, but for the Morning Dews which fell. The 
Ingas
 also had curious Banquetting-houses here. In these Parts there grows a sort Tree call'd 
Mala,
 of which 
Acosta
 relates a strange Wonder of Nature, very remarkable, 
viz.
 That it flourishes and bears Fruit on that side which beholds the South, in that Season when it is Summer on the Mountains; the other which views the Sea; Blossoming and bearing Fruit when it is Summer on the Plains.


The Valley 
Guarco,
 spacious and full of Trees, produces especially the pleasant Fruit 
Guayaves
 and 
Guavas,
 as also the best Wheat in 
Peru;
 wherefore it is vended all over the Countrey. Here are also the Ruines of another stately Castle, built by the 
Ingas,
 the former lustre whereof is testifi'd by its remaining Walls, which consist of exceeding great Stones, so neatly joyn'd together without Mortar, that it appears like one entire Stone; and by the decay'd Structures of several Halls, much of the curious Painting whereof is yet to be soch, from the Castle a large pair of Stairs led down to the Sea-shore. Two Leagues farther the River 
Lunagun
 runs through the fertile Valley of the same Denomination. The fatness of this Soil is chiefly ascrib'd to the Dung of a Fowl call'd 
Guana,
 which the Natives fetch in great abundance from the Isles near the Main.


Next follows the Valley 
Chinca,
 one of the biggest in all 
Peru,
 and before the 
Spa∣niards
 Arrival very populous. In the time of the 
Ingas
 it also shew'd a magnificent Temple Dedicated to the Sun, built by 
Tepaja Jupangue;
 yet the Inhabitants still re∣main'd constant in the worshipping of their old Idol 
Cinciapema.
 Hither the 
Ingas
 sent their conquer'd Princes, who on a certain time were to appear in 
Cusco.
 The 
Dominicans
 at present possess here a neat Cloyster, from whence leads a plain Road to the Dale 
Ica,
 water'd by the River 
Pisco,
 which is dry in Summer; wherefore the Natives brought a Ditch from the Mountains, which since the 
Spaniards
 destroying the Inhabitants, is choak'd up with Sand.


Next the Valley 
Nasca
 comes in view, famous for the Castle 
Caxamalca,
 where the 
Ingas
 kept all manner of Ammunition for War, besides several Tombs, out of which the 
Spaniards
 took great Riches. This Valley is divided into several others, which for the most part produce Sugar-Canes; and through them all runs the Royal High-way, which is Wall'd in on both sides.


Beyond 
Nasca
 lie one behind another the Valleys 
Hacari, Oconna, Camana,
 and 
Quilca,
 all of them affording good Pasture for Cattel, and Fruit, yet are most of them desolate.


The County 
Los Motilonos,
 thinly inhabited for want of Provisions, and divided by two Rivers, separates 
Moyobamba
 from the Countrey 
Charasmal.


Southward beyond 
Caxamalca
 appear the Countreys 
Guamachuco,
 and a little far∣ther 
Conchucos
 and 
Piscobamba,
 all fruitful and pleasant, and adorn'd with several Structures built by the 
Ingas.


On the side of 
Piscobamba
 the County 
Guaraz
 extends it self over barren Moun∣tains, through which the 
Ingas
 cut a Royal High-way, and built a strong Castle at the Entrance into the Countrey; the Inhabitants whereof being very laborious, work very diligently in the Gold-Mines.


The Territory 
Pincos,
 water'd by a River, and famous for one of the stateliest of the 
Peruvian
 Structures, is surrounded by the Countreys 
Guayalcas, Turama, Bomba,
 and 
Conchucos.
 The Mountains, though dangerous to Travellers by Lyons, great Bears, and other ravenous Beasts, afford abundance of Silver; and the fruitful Soil produces Wheat, 
Maiz,
 Grapes, Figs, Oranges, Quinces, Cittrons, Cedars; and likewise feeds Goats, Horses, and other Cattel.




The Countrey 
Viticos,
 being within the Jurisdiction of 
Guanuco,
 lies amongst the Mountains 
Andes,
 whether 
Inga Mango
 fled, when the 
Spaniards
 made themselves Masters of 
Peru.


Towns and Places most observable and important in it belonging to the 
Spaniards,
 are 1. 
Miraflores,
 as the 
Spaniards
 call it, a well seated and wealthy Town in the Valley of 
Zanu,
 as above mention'd, five Leagues distant from the Sea, where it hath likewise a good Haven or Port.


2. 
Truxillo,
 two or three Leagues distant from the Sea; the Haven whereof is said to be large, but not safe. The Town it self is seated in the Valley 
Chinco,
 upon the Banks of a pleasant River, whose Water doth not onely run through several Chan∣nels to moisten the Fields, but also to accommodate every House in the City: It hath broad Streets, a great Market-place, four Cloysters, two for the 
Dominicans,
 one for the 
Augustines,
 and the other for the 
Franciscans;
 one great Church, five hundred Houses, and a Palace, inhabited by the King's Collectors, and many Ban∣quetting-houses about it. The good situation and fruitfulness of the Soil, mov'd the Marquess 
Francisco Pizarro
 to build this City here 
Anno
 1533. but the Haven be∣longing to the same lies open to all manner of Winds, so that the Ships Ride here in great danger.


3. 
La Parilla,
 otherwise call'd 
Santa,
 fourteen Leagues beyond 
Truxillo
 South∣ward, wash'd by the Southern Ocean, and one side by a fresh-water Stream, which being inclos'd between stony Cliffs, makes a secure Harbor.


4. 
Arnedo,
 seated ten Leagues Northward from 
Lima,
 amongst the Vineyards of the Valley 
Chancas;
 otherwise having no great matter in it remarkable, but a fair 
Dominican
 Cloyster.


5. 
Lima,
 by the 
Spaniards
 commonly call'd 
La Cividad de los Reyes,
 or 
The City of Kings,
 so nam'd because 
Pizarro,
 who built it, laid the first Stone on 
Twelfth-day, Anno
 1553. which they call 
The Feast of the Kings:
 It is seated in the Valley of 
Lima,
 (from whence the City is also so denominated) one of the fruitfullest Parts of all 
Peru,
 and so neatly built, that all the chief Streets of the City open upon a fair Market-place, or 
Piazza,
 of such a large Square, that upon the sides thereof are built, in a stately and convenient manner, the Cathedral, the Palace of the Arch∣bishop, the Vice-Roy's Palace and Courts of Justice, with the Exchequer or Pub∣lick Treasury, the Town-house or place where the City Magistrates meet and hold their Courts, the Publick Armory or Magazine, and a Free-School, wherein are taught by the 
Jesuits
 all Arts and Sciences, and also the 
Indian
 Language, and divers other fair Buildings of the Nobility and better sort of Citizens. No Countrey un∣der the Heavens affords a more fruitful or pleasanter Place than this; the tempe∣rate Climate neither troubling the Inhabitants with excessive Heats or great Colds, nor terrifying them with Thunder or Lightning, but having almost perpetual Sun-shine and fair Weather; onely the three Winter Moneths, wherein there falls a sweet-smelling Dew, which cures the Head-ache; and there die but very few of pestilential Distempers. The Countrey about the City is pleasant without ex∣ception. The Pigeons which are kept here in curious Houses built on purpose, flie a thousand in a Flight. The Fields abound also with Cattel. The Orchards and Gardens flourish with all sorts of Trees and Plants, whereof those that are brought hither from 
Spain
 grow better than in their natural Countrey. The West side of the City is wash'd by a pure & clear Stream, which stores the Market with great plenty of good Fish, it being distant but a Musquet shot, especially when the Water rises. This River is of great consequence, for it not onely waters the whole Valley of 
Lima
 with its several Branches, but also runs under every House in the City, being

built on Stone Arches; they are onely one Story high, because there is no Wood to be had in the Valley of 
Lima
 but what in three years becomes all Woorm-eaten; ne∣vertheless the Houses are very beautiful both within and without; the Walls being very thick and strong, have curious Arbors of green Boughs on the top, in which the Owners shade themselves from the Sun. Most of the Houses built in the high Streets have pleasant Turrets, which face the Market-place, where all sorts of Provisions are brought to Sale, as Oxen, Sheep, Venison, Sugar, Oranges, Cittrons, Grapes, and Wheat, which is ground in Water-Mills built near the River. This City is inhabited by many able Merchants, which often load Ships to 
Panama,
 that are valu'd at above two hundred thousand 
Ducats.
 To the Arch-bishop's See of this Place belongs the Bishopricks of 
Chili, Charcas, Quito, Cusco, Truxillo, Guanuco, Po∣paian, San Francisco, Panama, Nicaragua,
 and 
Rio de la Plata.
 The City is also adorn'd with two fair Churches, besides the Cathedral, and also other lesser Churches, four stately Cloysters, two Nunneries, and the 
Jesuits
 Palace, which is very magnificent. The Haven two Leagues distant from it, and call'd 
Callao de Lima,
 is large and se∣cure for Ships. 
Anno
 1579. Sir 
Francis Drake
 took twelve Ships from hence,
 one whereof was laden with Linnen and Silk, besides a great Chest full of Silver: Which Inconvenience to prevent for the future, the 
Spaniards
 have built two strong Forts, and fortifi'd them with Brass Guns. Thirty years after Sir 
Francis Drake
's Exploit, 
Joris Spilbergen
 coming to Anchor here, found the Place all inhabited,
 a Fort well stor'd with Guns, and a strong Castle before the Mouth of the Harbor, from whence they shot Bullets of thirty six Pound weight at the 
Hollanders,
 and so shatter'd their Frigat, call'd 
The Hunter,
 that she could scarce-keep above Water: Fourteen 
Spanish
 Merchant-men lying near the Shore, receiv'd little damage, 
Spil∣bergen
 not being able for Shelves to get to them, neither did he judge it convenient to Land, the Vice-Roy having at that time above four thousand Men in Arms, be∣sides several Troops of Horse; wherefore after having fir'd several Guns on the Fort, and against the Church, he set Sail to 
Guarmey.


6. 
Cannete,
 otherwise call'd 
Guarco,
 from the Valley wherein it is situate: It was built by the 
Spaniards
 out of the Treasure which they found in the Castle afore spo∣ken of in the same Valley.


7. 
Valverde,
 situate in a Valley of the same Name, where excellent Fruit may be had for a small Price; it is a well Traded and rich Town, about sixteen Leagues distant from the Sea.


8. 
Pachacama,
 situate in a Territory of the same Name, four Leagues South∣ward of 
Lima,
 memorable chiefly for 
Pizarro
's good fortune here, who is reported to have found in one onely old Temple of the Natives, the quantity of nine hundred thousand 
Ducats
 of Gold and Silver, besides what his Soldiers are suppos'd to have seiz'd on, and convey'd away before he came.


9. 
Castro Verreina,
 threescore Leagues distant from 
Lima
 to the South-East: It lieth in the Valley of 
Chocolocha,
 and is a rich Place, by reason of the good Mines of Silver which are about it, and abundance of the best sort of Tobacco.


10. 
Miguel de la Ribera,
 in the Valley of 
Camana.
 The Inhabitants whereof drive a great Trade in Wine, Figs, and Raisins.


11. The City 
Arequipa,
 which extends up towards the Mountains, is built in the Dale 
Quilca,
 which runs eleven Leagues from the Sea, under a healthful Climate; but in the Year 1582. it was wholly ruin'd by an Earthquake; the reason whereof is ascrib'd to the wet sulphurous Mountains, which burns continually, and some∣times vomits out Flames and Ashes. The Marquess 
Pizarro
 built this City forty six years before the fore-mention'd Earthquake, since which being re-built again,

soon attain'd to three hundred Houses, besides a Church and Cloyster; and though it be but a small Town, yet it is of a great resort, because the Gold and Silver is brought hither from the Mines 
Chancos, Porco,
 and 
Potosi,
 and from thence sent down the River 
Quilca,
 which washing the City Walls runs into the South Sea to 
Los Reyos,
 and from thence to 
Panama, Nombre de Dios,
 and 
New Spain.
 The Jurisdiction of this City 
Arequipa
 extends it self a vast way, 
viz.
 over the spacious Valleys be∣tween 
Hacari
 and 
Tampaca,
 and up in the Countrey beyond the County 
Condesuyo,
 full of Hamlets and Villages; the Inhabitants whereof heretofore worshipp'd the Sun. By the Way from 
Arequipa
 to 
Collao
 lie two great Lakes, but of one of which the River 
Aparima
 takes its original.


12. 
Caxamalca,
 rather a Fort than a Town, in a Territory of the same Denomi∣nation, built at the Foot of a Mountain wash'd with two Rivulets, over which lead several Bridges; near which also were formerly a stately Temple Consecrated to the Sun, wonderful Palaces and Baths for the 
Ingas,
 besides other magnificent Structures of Noble-men, which were the more famous for 
Attabaliba
's Imprison∣ment and Death. The Soil round about may compare with any part of the World for fertility. The Inhabitants are a peaceable ingenious People, and make curious woollen Hangings.


13. 
St. Juan de la Frontera,
 built by the 
Spaniards
 North-East and by East from 
Caxamalca
 in the County 
Chiachinpoyas,
 full of Gold-Mines and Cattel; to which be∣longs not onely 
Chiachinpoyas,
 but also the Countreys 
Guiancas
 and 
Cascainga,
 out of which above twenty thousand 
Peruvians
 pay Tribute to the 
Spanish
 King. These People especially the Women, are very comely and beautiful; for which reason the 
Ingas
 fetch'd their Wives and Concubines from thence. Eastward from 
Frontera
 rise the high Mountains 
Andes,
 behind which flows the great River 
Mayobamba
 by several poor Villages inhabited by a sottish kind of People.


14. 
San Jago de las Valles,
 built in an ill place amongst the Shrubs and over∣flowing Rivers. In this Countrey grows a Tree which bears a juicy Fruit, not un∣like an Almond in prickly Rinds, but resembling those which cover a Chesnut, concerning which Physicians have deliver'd their Opinions, That there is not a wholsomer Fruit in the whole World.


15. 
Leon de Guanuco,
 which receiv'd that Denomination from its Builder 
Vacca de Castro,
 who call'd it 
Leon,
 because he was born in the 
Spanish
 City 
Leon,
 and 
Guanuco
 from the stately Palace of the 
Ingas
 which was built here: The Houses are built of Free-stone, and cover'd with Thatch. The Citizens of 
Los Reyos
 were much against the building of this Town, because several Lands belonging to them were taken away and given to 
Guanuco,
 where the temperate Air grants long Life and Health to the Inhabitants. The High-way, in which stand several Store-houses, formerly full of Ammunition, runs through the middle of this Countrey, where in the time of the 
Ingas
 dwelt Astronomers, who by looking on the Stars pretended to tell future Events. Here the Women also us'd to be burnt alive with their Hus∣bands.






SECT. V. Cusco.


CUsco
 is the far greater part of the Province of 
Peru,
 containing generally all the 
Sierra,
 or 
Hill-Countreys,
 and those parts of the 
Andes
 likewise which lie Southward of the little Province or 
Cantred
 of 
Guanuco,
 being Coasted Westward and to the North-West with 
Lima;
 Eastward, with 
Los Quixos,
 and some







view of Cuzco


CUSCO






part of 
Guiana;
 and on the South, with 
Charcas;
 enjoying for the most part a tem∣perate and good Air, neither over-heated with the scorching Sun in the day, nor damp'd with any cold Mists or Dews in the Evening, as some parts of the Plains of 
Peru
 are, but well water'd with many fresh Rivers, which make the Valleys and lower Grounds of it good Pasturage, able to maintain great Herds of Cattel. The Woods are especially stor'd with the 
Coca,
 whose Leaf is accounted restorative, and with much excellent Venison.


In this Province also there are some lesser Divisions of Countreys necessary to be describ'd, 
viz.
 the cold and barren Countrey 
Bambon,
 jutting against 
Guanuco,
 inhabited antiently by a valiant People, especially near the Lake 
Chincacocha,
 which is ten Leagues in circumference; in the middle of it are several Cliffs and little Isles: And out of this Lake also the famous River 
De la Plata
 hath its original, and runs through the Valley 
Xauxa,
 receiving by the way the Streams 
Parcos, Bilcas, Abancay, Apurima, Yucay,
 and others.


The next Countreys in order towards the South are 
Tarana,
 abounding with Wheat, and the eminent Valley 
Xauxa,
 surrounded with snowy Mountains. The Inhabitants by a general Name call'd 
Guancas,
 were antiently divided into three sorts, 
viz.
 the 
Maracabilca, Laxapalanga,
 and 
Xauxa.
 Here were also several stately Houses built by the 
Ingas.


Upon this Valley borders the Village 
Acos
 near a Moorish place full of Canes; but before you approach the Village you come near a high Plain, where the Ruines of an antient Structure appear; and somewhat farther the Palace 
Pico:
 from whence the High-way directs to the Bridge 
Angoyaca,
 which leads cross the River 
Xauxa;
 near which the 
Ingas
 had several magnificent Structures, and Baths of warm Springs. Not far from hence is the Village 
Picoy;
 between which and 
An∣goyaca
 the Arm of the River 
Xauxa
 is cut with a Bridge, because in the Winter it glides so swift that they cannot Ferry over it.


From 
Picoy
 you go to the Wild, in whole Center stands the antient Castle 
Pucara,
 (which in the 
Peruvian
 Tongue signifies 
Invincible Fort
) where the 
Ingas
 receiv'd their Tribute from the neighboring People that live amongst the snowy Mountains.


The Banks of the great River 
Vinaque
 are crown'd with the Ruines of antient Structures, which (as the Natives relate) were built by foreign People; which As∣sertion of theirs seems to be confirm'd by the form and manner of Building, differ∣ing from the 
Ingas
 Structures, which us'd to be long and narrow. Moreover, seve∣ral sweet Streams, abounding with Fish, especially Crabs, glide through the Plain-Countrey out of the Mountains 
Andes.


Not far from hence appears the Plain 
Chapas,
 and the Palaces 
Pilcas,
 of which now nothing remains but a heap of Rubbish, which lies in the Center of 
Peru.
 A fresh-water River, which gives the fore-mention'd Palaces their Denomination, glides out of 
Soras,
 and washes the High-way and stately Temple of the Sun.


The Countrey 
Soras,
 exceeding fertile, and stock'd with Gold and Silver Mines, is inhabited by a People which go Cloth'd in woollen Cloth, and for their Valor formerly much esteem'd by the 
Ingas.


Those that inhabit the Countrey 
Uramar
 are call'd 
Chancas,
 whose Neighbors possess a long Tract of Land abounding with Cattel and Fruit, but of late are most of them destroy'd by the 
Spaniards.


The River 
Abanca,
 which takes its original in the Mountainous County 
Parina∣cocha,
 washes several Royal Buildings, and at last discharges its Waters into the Ri∣ver 
Xauxa.


On each side of the great River 
Apurima
 are erected two wonderful Stone Pillars,

over which lies a most artificial Bridge built by the 
Ingas;
 from whence the High∣way, being cut through hard Rocks, leads up into the Countrey; where the stately Buildings of 
Limatambo
 shew themselves; and beyond the Mountain 
Bilcaconga
 the Valley 
Xaquixaguana,
 inclos'd between high Rocks, comes in view, where the 
Ingas
 us'd to recreate themselves in their Banquetting-houses; from whence the High∣way, which is Wall'd in on both sides, runs directly through deep Moorish Grounds to 
Cusco.


Eastward from 
Cusco,
 behind the 
Andes,
 are many large Countreys, which to dis∣cover the 
Spaniards
 spar'd neither trouble, danger, nor charge: between both they found vast Wildernesses, inaccessible Mountains, and overgrown Countreys; yet at last they opened four ways thither: the first whereof runs through the Valley 
Paquil
 to 
Tono,
 a Village in the middle of the Mountains; from thence to the River 
Opotazi,
 along which it is very troublesom travelling, because of the thick Woods and steep Rocks: lastly to the hot and fruitful Valley 
Abisca,
 and so to vast Wilder∣nesses, overgrown with Brambles and Bushes, which prevented any farther Disco∣very. The second Way runs thirty Leagues farther to the Southward, through the Countreys 
Sandia, Camata
 and 
Caravaya,
 to 
Zama.
 Through this Way, 
Anno
 1538. 
Peter Anzurez
 travell'd;
 setting out from 
Zama,
 he found many desolate Mountains, barren Wilds, and close Woods, through which he entred into the County 
Tacana,
 and from thence to the River 
Omapalchas,
 inhabited on both sides by the 
Cheriabones
 and 
Marquires,
 who oppos'd him in his crossing over the River; but meeting with no∣thing but barren Commons, he travell'd up along the River, and view'd the Coun∣treys 
Moios, Cochabamba,
 and 
Chuguiabo,
 from whence he return'd to 
Collao,
 having lost most of his People by Hunger and Hardship. But not long after others went over the 
Andes
 to the Countreys which extend themselves East and West, some whereof travell'd through 
Camata,
 and others through 
Cochabamba.


The principal Towns and Places of Trade in it are, 1. 
Bombon,
 situate upon the Lake 
Chinchacocha,
 said to be ten Leagues in compass, begirt round about almost with Hills, and having neighborhood with many other lesser, but pleasant Villages.


2. 
Parcos,
 once a Palace Royal of the 
Ingas,
 seated on the top of a little Hill, en∣compass'd with other Rocky and higher Mountains on all sides.


3. 
San Juan de Vittoria,
 which the Marquess 
Pizarro
 built 
Anno
 1539. to secure the Way between 
Lima
 and 
Cusco,
 from the Assaults of the 
Peruvians,
 before he abso∣lutely conquer'd this Kingdom: the Walls are wash'd by a sweet Stream, to the great convenience of the Citizens.


4. 
Guamanga,
 a City lying in a pleasant Plain under a healthful Climate, built with Stone-houses cover'd with Tyles; the Owners whereof have great store of Land, which they Sowe with Wheat, and also breed plenty of Cattel. To this City, which is adorn'd with three Churches, five Cloysters, and a large Alms-house, above thirty thousand 
Peruvians
 bring annual Tribute. The Mines produce Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Sulphur, and Load-stones; near which grows the poysonous Herb 
Mio,
 which kills the Cattel that chance to eat thereof. In the Woods also hereabouts feeds a Beast, whose Piss stinks at a Miles distance. This City is by some deliver'd to be the same with 
San Juan de la Vittoria
 above mention'd.


5. 
Bilcas,
 another Palace of the 
Ingas,
 now a good Town of the Natives, and si∣tuate, as is suppos'd, in the very midst of the Countrey of 
Peru.


6. 
Guancavelica,
 a new Town, rais'd from the condition of a very poor Village, to a Place of very great Importance and Traffick, onely by the Mines of Quicksil∣ver, which were first discover'd there in the Year 1566. by 
Amador Cabrera,
 through the assistance of a 
Peruvian
 nam'd 
Mavincopa:
 This 
Cabrera
 selling his Interest for a

hundred and fifty thousand 
Ducats,
 Su'd the Buyer, upon pretence that he had sold it above one half under the value: whilest this was depending, 
Peter Ferdinando de Valasco
 came from 
Mexico
 to 
Guamanga,
 to make trial of the cleansing of Silver by Quicksilver, and finding it to succeed according to his expectation, he sent great quantities of it to 
Arica,
 and from thence by Land to 
Potosi.
 The King of 
Spain
 is said to receive from this Mine of 
Guancavelica,
 all his Charges defray'd, above a thou∣sand Pound 
per Annum
 for his usual fifth part: But the antient Natives regarded not these Mines so much for the Quicksilver as for the Vermilion which is found mix'd with it, wherewith they delighted very much to paint their Bodies: There is great Art now us'd in the separating of the Quicksilver from the Vermilion.


This Town was long since inhabited by two thousand 
Spaniards
 at least, and twice as many Natives.


7. 
Cusco,
 which is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of 
Peru,
 built on a hard Ground, surrounded with Mountains, under a cold, yet wholsom Climate, and wash'd by two Rivers, which on the East side of 
Cusco
 parting, one runs direct West, and the other Southward.
 One part of the City antiently bore the Denomi∣nation of 
Haran-Cusco,
 and the second, 
Oren-Cusco,
 where the chief Nobility and most antient Families dwelt. Concerning the original of this Place, the 
Peruvians
 say, That several Ages past there appear'd three Men, call'd 
Ayrache, Aranca,
 and 
Ajarmango,
 and with them three Women, nam'd 
Mamacola, Mamacona,
 and 
Mamara∣gua,
 all of them very richly Cloth'd; that 
Ayrache
 had a Precious Stone at the end of a Truncheon, which by holding up he rais'd the Mountains to the Skies, and when he let it fall, levell'd them with the lowest Valleys: 
Aranca
 and 
Ajarmango
 concluded to build a stately City, and sent for People from remote Countries to inhabit it; with which Design the Natives thereabouts seem'd to be well pleas'd: but before they went to work they judg'd it convenient to destroy 
Ayrache,
 whose great Power they envy'd: This being resolv'd upon, they invited him to a deep narrow-mouth'd Cave, that there they might worship the Sun his Father (for so Descended he took upon him to be), he was no sooner entred but the rest shut the Mouth of the Cave with great Stones, hoping so to starve him to death; which 
Ayrache
 observing, stood amaz'd a while, till at last he threw off all the Stones, and flew with great and divers colour'd Wings up into the Air, crying aloud, 
Fear not,
 Aranca 
and
 Ajarmango, 
though you have design'nd to take away my Life, but build a City in this place, and call it
 Cusco; 
for in it shall stand the Seat of the
 Ingas, 
under whose Jurisdicti∣on on extending far and near, many great Nations shall bow. The Temple which the Gods have there design'd shall not onely exceed all other Structures in the World, in Art and Costliness, but be famous for strange Offerings to the Sun. If the Citizens build Altars for me, burn Myrrh, and make Offer∣ings to me, they may certainly expect to vanquish all their Enemies, and increase their Power. According to my Example bore Holes through your Ears, as a sign of Obedience.
 All which 
Aranca, Ajarmango,
 and the fore-mention'd Women promis'd to perform. Where∣upon 
Ayrache
 gave them a rich Diadem with a Tassel, which was to be the Head-Ornament of the succeeding 
Ingas;
 which they had no sooner receiv'd, but 
Ayrache
 and 
Aranca
 were turn'd into Stones, yet retaining their former shape; which 
Ajar∣mango
 observing, fell straight, together with the three Women, upon building the City 
Cusco.
 After the Deluge breaking out of the Hole 
Tambo,
 he chang'd his Name of 
Ajarmango
 for 
Mangocapa,
 that is, 
Mighty Lord,
 and made himself, as they say, the first 
Peruvian
 King. The City 
Cusco
 was divided into four Wards, the East call'd 
Andosayo,
 the South 
Callasayo
 the North, 
Chinchasuyo,
 and the West 
Condesayo,
 every one one so call'd from the Countreys, to which the Gates of the four Wards are oppos'd.


If any one coming out of another Countrey, setled himself in 
Cusco,
 as it hapned

daily, he was permitted to dwell no where but in that Ward which fronted his na∣tive Countrey. The four high Streets, which through, these Wards one way fall in∣to the Market-place, being in the middle of the City, are the other way answera∣ble to the four principal High-ways, 
viz.
 that which leads to 
Quito
 and 
Pasto,
 through 
Chinchasuyo;
 to 
Arehuipa,
 through 
Condesuyo;
 to the Mountains 
Andes,
 through 
Andesuyo;
 and to 
Chili,
 through 
Collasuyo.
 The two Rivers before mention'd, which part at the East end of the City, are pass'd over with divers Bridges. The narrow Streets are full of Stone Houses, built in good Order. In several places are Vaulted Cellars under Ground, in some of which are buried great Treasures: they had been formerly the Habitations for Necromancers and Soothsayers; for this sort of People were once in great esteem amongst the Inhabitants, who co∣ming from 
Chili, Pasto, Bocamores, Topona, Bombon, Charcas, Collao, Chiachiapoias, Con∣chucos,
 and other 
Peruvian
 Countreys, receive great benefit from the fresh Water, and from the Corn-Mills built on the Streets through the City.


The stately Palaces which the 
Peruvian
 Nobility have at several times built in 
Oren-Cusco,
 being one part of the City, are very wonderful, the Owners whereof were forc'd by the 
Ingas
 to appear at Court at Set-times, that so he might prevent all In∣surrections: Also he caus'd the Children of the prime Lords to be brought up in 
Cusco,
 under pretence that they might learn the 
Cuscoan
 Tongue perfectly, in which the 
Ingas
 would always be spoken to; whenas their Design was to keep them as Hostages in their own Jurisdictions, that their Fathers might not rebel; by which means it hapned, that in most places of 
Peru,
 which amongst the several Tribes and Principalities had several Languages, the 
Cuscoan
 Tongue was understood and spo∣ken. But the 
Spaniards,
 who are the present Possessors thereof, have alter'd and re∣pair'd most of the ordinary Houses, which are now neatly built of Stone. Above all the old Structures, the Palace of the 
Ingas,
 and the Temple of the Sun, are the most magnificent; the Palace lies inclos'd within a square quadruple Wall, each corner whereof is adorn'd and strengthned with a Tower: The Palace it self is built round, and with Arches; but that which chiefly amazes the Beholder, is to see how the Stones, which are so big that forty Horses are notable to stir one of them out of its place, were brought thither by the Labor of the Builders from the neighboring Mountains; for the 
Peruvians
 never made use of any laboring Beast, except their Sheep 
Pacos,
 not knowing the use of Horses, Camels, Oxen, Ele∣phants, or the like, before the 
Spaniards
 coming thither. The Halls within the Pa∣lace were Wainscoted with Golden Plates: yet the 
Inga
's Apparel was not answer∣able to the rest of his Pomp; for in stead of a Crown they bound their Heads about with a red woollen Sash, with which they almost cover'd their Eyes; at the end of the Sash hung certain Ribbands, which they gave the Governor as occasi∣on offer'd, that by this Sign, as by a Commission, they might exercise their Offices; the sight of which String caus'd such Obedience, that if the 
Inga
 had commanded the Inhabitants of a Town or Countrey to murder themselves, none durst deny. The 
Inga
 was generally carried by a hundred of his Noble-men, of whom if any one had accidentally chanc'd to stumble, he was immediately put to death. No man durst presume to look him in the Face, or speak to him without a Present.


The Temple 
Curicanche,
 Dedicated to the Sun, was certainly the most rich and sumptuous that ever the World boasted, it being Govern'd by the Chief Priest 
Villanoa.
 The Inga 
Guainacava
 spent an invaluable Treasure in the building of this Structure, for he cover'd the Roof and Walls with thick Plates of massie Gold and Silver. At his return home from the Conquest of the Province of 
Quito,
 from whence the Inhabitants, according to an antient Custom of the 
Ingas,
 were carried to

one of the remotest Countreys in 
Peru.
 But 
Guainacava
 enamor'd of a 
Quitoan
 Maid, staid a considerable time in the City 
Quito,
 and kept a splendid Wedding at the Marriage of his Bride, who bare unto him the famous 
Attabaliba,
 whom he lov'd beyond all his other Children, and a little before his death made him King of 
Quito.
 But 
Huascar
 after 
Guainacava
's Decease would not suffer his Brother to live in the late conquer'd Kingdom of 
Quito,
 but gave him Battel in the Plain of 
Tome∣bamba,
 which lasted three days and three Nights, and after much Blood-shed, 
Atta∣baliba
 being defeated was taken Prisoner, and not long after making his Escape by the help of an antient Woman (whilest 
Huascar
's Commanders and Soldiers re∣joyc'd with Cups full of 
Chica
 for their gotten Victory) he made his Subjects in 
Quito
 believe, that he being transform'd into a Serpent, crept through a little Hole out of the Prison; and that he had a Promise from Heaven to obtain Conquest over 
Huascar;
 which being believ'd, stirr'd up all his Subjects to take up Arms, and valiantly to go and meet the Enemy, whom they not onely defeated, but took 
Huascar
 Prisoner.


Huscar
 being destroy'd by 
Attabaliba,
 and 
Attabaliba
 by 
Pizarro, Mango Inga
 their youngest Brother took the Government upon him, made continual Sallies upon the 
Spaniards
 from inaccessible Mountains, and at his Decease left the remaining part of 
Peru
 to his Son 
Zaires Topa;
 who seeing no good to be done by force of Arms, submitted himself freely to the King of 
Spain
's Jurisdiction in the Year 1557. since which the 
Spaniards
 have been sole Masters.


There are at this day four great Churches in 
Cusco:
 Also the 
Dominicans, Fran∣ciscans, Augustines,
 and the Monks 
De la Merced,
 have each of them stately Cloysters here: but the 
Jesuits
 Structure exceeds all the other.


Above forty thousand 
Peruvians
 pay annual Tribute to this City. In the Valley about the City feed abundance of Cattel; also Wheat, and all manner of Herbs grow here in great plenty. The Gold and Silver-Mines have not that resort which they had formerly, most of the Workmen being remov'd to 
Potosi.


Concerning the Service which they perform'd in the fore-mention'd Temple of the Sun, and their superstitious Opinions about their Idol 
Con,
 they are much of the same ridiculous nature with what hath been already Discours'd of in other pla∣ces. Five Leagues Southwardly from 
Cusco
 lies the Valley 
Yucay
 between high snowy Mountains, under a temperate Climate and pleasant Soil. Not far from hence the 
Ingas
 built a most invincible Castle on a Rock, which was surrounded with many cliffy Walls one above another; these Walls were also Carv'd with Images of Lyons, Tygers, and other wild Beasts, which held Lances in their Paws; the 
op of the Rock was crown'd with a Royal Structure built of Stone, through which ran Golden Veins, joyn'd together with a certain Gum, by some call'd 
Jews-Lime.
 To the Province of 
Condesuyo
 belong the valiant People 
Chumbibalcas
 and 
Ubinas.
 In the County 
Pomatambo
 they make Carpets of fine Wooll, curiously Painted.


8. The City 
Francisco de Vittoria,
 which lies in the rough Valley 
Vilcabamba,
 and is inclos'd by the Mountains 
Andes,
 belonging to the Jurisdiction of the Province 
Andesuyo.


9. The Village 
Juan del Oro,
 which is the chief Place of the Countrey 
Caravaya,
 and so call'd by the 
Spaniards
 from the fine Gold which is found there in great abun∣dance.


Along the Sea-Coast of 
Peru
 belonging to the Jurisdiction of 
Los Reyos,
 lie the following Havens, Isles and Points.


South-East from the Promontory 
Aguya,
 rises the Isle 
St. Roque
 out of the South-Sea,









Sea, surrounded with Rocks, and abounds with Birds of prey; through the midst of it runs a River which divides the Island.


The Haven 
Malabrigo,
 ill defended against the Winds, cannot be entred by great Vessels, unless in calm Weather.


Next follow the Harbors 
Guanape
 and 
Santa,
 where the Ships us'd to furnish themselves with Water out of a fresh River; 
Casuya
 and 
Guarmay,
 both inhabited by 
Peruvians.


Near the Mouth of the Road 
Guara
 stands a large Salt-pan, the Salt about which is found in great hard Pieces. The Island 
Collao
 secures the Haven before 
Lima.


Behind 
Cape Guarco
 lies the 
Lobos;
 and not far from hence the Harbor 
Sangallan,
 being so commodious that the 
Spaniards
 consider'd a long time whether they should build the City 
Los Reyos
 here.


The Promontory 
Nasca
 affords also good shelter for Ships; and the Haven 
Hacari
 yields store of Refreshments. Moreover, the Streams 
Oconna, Camana,
 and 
Quilca
 discharge their Waters into the Sea.


The Haven 
Arequipa
 appears at its Mouth like a little Pool, surrounded with Mountains.


Between 
Quilca
 and the River 
Tamboyalla
 lies the Isle 
Nuli;
 and a little more Southward the Haven 
Paracca
 and 
Pisca;
 and up in the Countrey the Village 
Yca,
 where the most and best 
Peruvian
 Wine is to be had.






SECT. VI. Los Charcas.


LOs Charcas
 is the farthest Countrey Southward of the Kingdom of 
Peru,
 reach∣ing up as far as 
Chile,
 with which on the South it is border'd, having on the North, 
Lima
 and 
Collao;
 on the West, 
Mare del Zur;
 and on the East, some Countreys not yet well discover'd, which lie betwixt it and the Province of 
Paraguay,
 or 
De la Plata.
 The Countrey is said to be in length about a hundred and fifty Leagues, measuring it directly, or in a right Line from North to South; but measuring it about along the Sea-Coast, much about two hundred: It is not very rich either in Corn or Cattel, although in some parts it wanteth not good Pa∣sturage; but of unparalell'd Wealth, in respect of the Mines of Gold and Silver which are here digg'd, the principal whereof are those of 
Potosi
 and 
Parco.


The Mountains hereabouts are inhabited by the 
Cavinas,
 who dwell in Stone Houses. Their Neighbors the 
Canches
 are a subtile, good natur'd, and painful Peo∣ple, breed many Sheep, sowe Corn, and catch plenty of Fish out of the Rivers. Next comes in view the cold Countrey 
Conas.
 On the right side towards the Sou∣thern Ocean, the great Wilderness 
Parinacocha
 extends it self a vast way; the Moun∣tains round about are continually cover'd with Snow, and the Dales have many deep Moors.


Chief Towns and Places of note in this part of 
Peru
 are, 1. 
Plata,
 otherwise call'd 
Chuquisaca,
 from the Countrey whose Metropolis it is, situate under a tem∣perate Climate, in a fruitful Soil for the production of all manner of Plants, and especially Wheat, Barley, and Grapes. In this City the High Court of Judicature of 
Los Charcas
 is kept, being a principal part of 
Peru,
 and inhabited by the richest 
Spaniards
 in the whole Kingdom, having gotten an incredible deal of Treasure out of the neighboring Silver-Mines, which from the time of the 
Ingas,
 or Kings of 
Peru,
 to its Discovery by the 
Spaniards,
 held out and continu'd so rich, that 'tis







view of Potosi


POTOSI.






thought 
Pizarro,
 if Reason could have rul'd him, might here onely have rais'd him∣self a Rent of two hundred thousand Ducats 
per Annum;
 but his desire and hopes, first to find more at 
Potosi,
 and afterwards his ambition and greediness to have and command all, carried him to violent Courses, which prov'd his Ruine, as hath been said. The Town is conveniently seated in a fruitful Soil, honor'd with the Resi∣dence of the Governor of the Province, and with a Bishops See, said to be the richest of 
Peru, viz.
 of fourscore thousand Ducats 
per Annum.
 The Cathedral and divers Cloysters give also a great lustre to the City. The antient Inhabitants of this Countrey, especially about those parts where now this City stands, were the 
Charcas
 and 
Charanques,
 both valiant People, who by Command of the 
Ingas
 fetch'd invaluable Treasures out of the neighboring Mines of 
Porco,
 where a thousand Men were continually kept at work. In 
La Plata
 were reckon'd long since, besides 
Spaniards,
 above sixty thousand 
Peruvians
 which pay annual Tribute.


2. 
Oropesa,
 a place of good Metal, as a man may perceive by the Name; It lieth in the rich and pleasant Valley 
Cochobamba,
 twenty Leagues distant from 
La Plata.


3. 
Potosi,
 eighteen Leagues Westward from 
La Plata,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
The Imperial City,
 built at the Foot of a Mountain bearing the same Denomination, on a barren Soil under a cold Climate, though but twenty one Degrees to the South-ward of the 
Equinoctial Line:
 the Cold proceeds from the high Lands, which lie bare to the bleak and sharp Winds call'd 
Tomohavi,
 which blow every year very fiercely from 
May
 till 
September.
 But though the barren Countrey produces no Fruit, yet no place in 
Peru
 hath greater plenty of all Provisions and Dainties than this, the Markets being always full of Fruit, Salt-Meat, 
Maiz, Papas,
 Wheat, Sugar, Sweet-meats, and all things that are requisite for the subsistence of Man-kind, which are brought thither from all parts for the Silver, which is there in such plenty. As to what concerns the famous Mountain 
Potosi
 in the Countrey of 
Charcas,
 it is of an Ash colour, and rises above the adjacent Mountains in the form of a Sugar-Loaf; on the top of it stands a Chappel, to which leads a craggy Path, which with a little care may be rid up with a Horse; the heighth thereof is a thou∣sand six hundred and twenty four Rods, or a quarter of a League: at the Foot thereof appears the Mine call'd 
Guaina Potosi,
 that is, 
The young Potosi;
 near which the City 
Potosi
 stands, being two Leagues in circumference, and is adorn'd with a Church and Cloyster for the 
Dominicans,
 and exceedingly resorted to by Traders.


In the time when the 
Ingas
 Govern'd 
Peru,
 the Silver-Mines at 
Porco
 were very famous; but it was not till after the arrival of the 
Spaniards
 that Silver was found in 
Guaina Potosi,
 and by degrees the Silver Veins which lay hid in the great 
Potosi;
 the manner of which Discovery was as followeth:


A 
Peruvian
 call'd 
Gualpa,
 who work'd in the Mines at 
Porco,
 going a Hunting, it chanc'd that the Game ran up the steep Mountain of 
Potosi,
 which prevented his pursuing of it any farther; but the Mountain being overgrown with Trees, he got hold from one Bough to another to help himself up, and at last taking hold of the Bramble call'd 
Quinua,
 he pull'd the same out of the Ground, and finding it heavy, look'd upon it, and espy'd a great lump of Silver hanging at the Root of it; whereupon viewing the Hole, he discover'd a rich Silver Vein; of which taking some pieces home, and melting them, he found that it was the best Sil∣ver that ever he had known; wherefore he privately got a greater quantity, and by degrees grew extraordinary rich: but though he carried his Design never so close, yet he was at last suspected, and especially by his Neighbor 
Guanca,
 born in the Valley 
Xauxa,
 who was the more jealous of him, because he sold greater Bars of Silver than any were cast at 
Porco;
 whereupon he resolv'd to speak to him, and

getting out the Secret, it came to this Agreement between them, That they should both be Partners and share the Booty; 
Gualpa
 was to keep the Vein, since call'd 
The Rich Vein,
 and 
Guanca
 was to have another, at present nam'd 
Diego Centeno:
 but they agreed not long; for 
Guanca
 finding much labor upon his Vein, by reason of the hardness, and that he could get no share in what 
Gualpa
 got, acquainted his 
Spanish
 Master 
Vilaroel
 with it, who rested not till he had found out the truth there∣of; for which 
Vilaroel
 obtain'd (according to the Custom of 
Porco
) several Rods to work for himself, onely paying the King one fifth part of what he got, and so re∣main'd Owner of the Mine 
Centeno.


This Discovery of the rich Mine 
Potosi
 is said to have hapned on the twenty fourth of 
April, Anno
 1545. Soon after which they found the Silver Vein 
Del Estanno,
 which though it was very rich, was difficult to be digg'd, because of its hardness. The first Vein which 
Gualpa
 search'd after stood upright from the bottom of the Mine, and contain'd above three hundred Foot in length, and thirteen in breadth, and continuing good for two hundred Foot in depth, after which the Silver begins to lessen.


The 
Peruvians
 relate, That the 
Ingas
 first began to dig in 
Potosi,
 but gave it over because the Workmen heard a terrible Voice, saying, 
Leave off doing what you are about; the Treasures which lie hid here, are reserv'd for a People out of foreign Countreys.


These Mines produce yearly for the King's fifth part, forty thousand Pieces of Silver, each valu'd at thirteen 
Ryals,
 each 
Ryal
 being four Shillings, besides what he is defrauded of, which is perhaps half as much more.


The Mines of 
Potosi
 exceed all other, because the Diggers never meet with any Water, notwithstanding they work above two hundred Fathom under Ground, whereas the other Silver Mines suffer great damage by the Water; which was also the reason why the 
Spaniards
 left off digging of Silver in 
Porco,
 because they were not onely forc'd to cut through hard Rocks, but ran greater danger, or at least be∣stow'd extraordinary labor to get out the Water which broke in upon them.


The four Silver Veins of 
Potosi, viz. The Rich, Centeno, Del Estanno,
 and 
Mendieta,
 lie on the East-side of the Mountain, and extend North and South. The great Veins produce lesser, not unlike the Body of a Tree, from which shoot forth seve∣ral degrees of Boughs. Each Vein is divided into several parts, possess'd by several Owners; the least part is open'd four Rods, and the biggest eighty; for none are permitted by the Law to open a bigger Hole. In the time of the Jesuit 
Joseph de Acosta,
 an Eye-witness, who 
Anno
 1587. went from 
Peru
 to 
Spain,
 the 
Rich Vein
 was reckon'd to contain eighty seven Mines, of which some were digg'd two hundred Fathom deep. The 
Spaniards
 judge that at the Root of the 
Rich Vein
 is an incredible Treasure, though Experience hath hitherto taught us, that the Silver lessens in price and quantity the deeper they dig in the Ground.


For the more easie working in the Mines, the 
Spaniards
 have digg'd Trenches (which they call 
Socabonos
) at the Foot of the Mountain towards the West, cross through the Mountain to the Mine, each of them being eight Foot broad and a Fathom deep, and lock'd up with Gates, through which the Silver is carried out, whereof the Owner of the 
Socahon
 receives a fifth part. The 
Socabon
 which leads to the 
Rich Vein,
 was begun 
Anno
 1556. and finish'd in twenty nine years, extends it self two hundred and fifty Rods in length. The Miners work by Candle-light both Day and Night by turns. those that work in the Day, sleep in the Night, and those that work in the Night, sleep in the Day. The Oar, which is as hard as a Stone, is cut out with Pick-axes, beaten in pieces with an Iron Crow, and carried upon their Backs on Ladders made of Leather: Each Ladder hath three Fastnings

about the thickness of a Cable, stretch'd out by Sticks, so that one goes up on one side, whilest another comes down on the other. Each Ladder being ten Fathom long is pitch'd upon its several Floor on which the Laborers rest before they go up higher, for they make divers Floors according to the depth of the Mine. The Laborers carry the Oar in Bags fastned before oh their Breasts, and falling back over their Shoulders three and three together, the foremost whereof ties a lighted Candle to his Thumb, and thus they help themselves with both Hands. It is a wonderful thing to consider, how the 
Peruvians
 are able to scramble up and down continually a hundred and fifty Fathom: But besides many other Inconveniences, the Mines often fall in, or at least great pieces, which bury all the Diggers. The Mines also, being excessive cold, occasion to those that are not us'd to them, a 
Vertigo
 in the Head, and Vomiting. The Silver runs for the most part between two Rocks, as it were, in a long Channel, of which one side is as hard as Flint, and the other much softer. This Silver is of different value; the belt, call'd 
Cacilla
 or 
Tacana,
 resembles Amber in colour; the worser sort is blackish, and sometimes of an Ash-colour. The pieces of Oar are carry'd on the Backs of the Sheep 
Pacos
 to the Mill, where being ground to Powder, they are put into Furnaces to melt; of which there were once above six thousand on the top of 
Potosi;
 but since the Quick∣silver was found to cleanse the same, not a third part remains pure.


In former times the Mines at 
Porco,
 two Leagues from the little Lake 
Aulagas,
 produc'd those vast Treasures gather'd by the 
Ingas,
 which afterwards for the most part fell into the 
Spaniards
 Hands.


As concerning the Sea-Coast of 
Los Charcas,
 it lies as followeth: Southerly from the River 
Tambopalla
 puts forth a three-pointed Rock into the Ocean, and makes the Haven 
De Ylo,
 into which falls a fresh River. Next follow the round Hill 
Morro de los Diabolos,
 and the Inlet before the Town 
Arica,
 secur'd from all ex∣cept a Westerly Wind, where the Silver that comes from 
Potosi
 is Shipp'd for 
Lima.
 Since the 
English
 Admiral Sir 
Francis Drake
 took three Barks out of this Inlet it is fortifi'd with a Castle, which is stor'd with Brass Guns.


Nine Leagues Southward the 
Pissaqua
 falls into the Ocean; and next you come to the little Village 
Hicahic,
 situate on a high and barren Tract of Land; as also the Haven 
Terrapaca,
 which by an Inland is made very secure.


Not far from hence appears the Foot of 
Piqua,
 where the Coast begins to rise very high; the Head of 
Tacama,
 the Stream 
Lottoya,
 otherwise call'd 
De Loa,
 whose Banks are inhabited by poor People; the River 
Montelo,
 the Promontory 
Morro Moreno,
 beyond whose utmost Point opens a Bay, secur'd from all Winds by an Island. The Inhabitants here feed on raw Fish.


Next the River 
Claru
 comes in view, which is taken for a Boundary between 
Peru
 and 
Chili.


Eastward up into the Countrey you come to 
Santa Cruiz,
 built at the Foot of a Mountain in a Plain near a Brook, which rushing forth from a Rock glides through the City to a Lake full of delicious Fish. The Houses of Stone, are covered with Palm-Tree Leaves. and besides the Church there is also a Cloyster, inhabited by the Monks 
De la Merced,
 In former times the 
Peruvian
 Houses were built of Clay, and were often destroy'd by their Neighbors the 
Cheriguanacs
 and 
Titanes,
 who made Feasts with as many as they took of them. The People about this Place are meek and poor spirited, and speak besides four Languages, the 
Diagnitan
 Tongue, com∣mon amongst all of them. Before the Arrival of the 
Spaniards
 they went Cloth'd in Ostritch'es Feathers, but since taught to weave Cotton, they now make their Apparel of the same, and upon the account of Barter, drive a great Trade in it:

They Dye their Cotton with the boyl'd Roots and Leaves of a little Tree.


Eastward beyond 
Santa Cruiz
 lies the Countrey 
Paicanos,
 eminent for the great 
Calabashes
 which grow there, exceeding good to keep both wet and dry Meats in.


The Countrey receives a vicissitude of excessive Cold and intolerable Heat; the hard Winters taking beginning in 
May,
 and continuing till the beginning of 
August.
 In the middle of our Summer a South-wind blows seven Weeks together here, to the great prejudice of all Plants, which are during that time often wash'd away by continual Rains. About 
Christmas
 they Sowe, and gather in their Harvest in 
March.
 During the rainy Season the Ways cannot be travell'd, being all overflow'd by the Rivers; neither doth the 
Palm-Wood,
 which is four days Journey in length, permit any access to the said City 
Santa Cruiz,
 because the conflux of Waters makes it a Moor all over; besides which, the Tygers Bears, and Serpents, make the Ways dangerous, especially at that time.


Through this Countrey the 
Spanish
 Captain 
Nusco de Chavas
 travell'd, when he discover'd the 
Taguamacis,
 a numerous People, which dwell along the great River 
De la Plata.


The Countrey about 
Santa Cruiz
 produces all manner of Fruit, but few Trees, because of the want of Rain; but Corn, 
Maiz,
 Wine, 
Granadillas, Luiumas,
 and 
Tu∣cumay,
 as also the Plant 
Hachalindi,
 in the 
Latine
 Tongue call'd 
Mirabile Peruanum,
 grow here in great abundance; which 
 shoots up to the bigness of a pretty large Body, full of Juice, and of a yellowish colour, out of which shoot knotty Boughs, and about each Knot two Leaves resembling the Herb 
Nightshade;
 the Flowers which hang at the ends of the Boughs are long, and pleasant to the Eye, by reason of their mixture of Purple, White, and Yellow, and also of a sweet smell. It is a strange Secret in Nature, that this Flower opens at Midnight, if any Light come near the same: The Root also is accounted an effectual Medicine against the Dropsie.






SECT. VII. Collao.


COllao
 lieth Southward of those Countries, which go under the general Name of the Province of 
Cusco,
 having on the West, 
Lima;
 on the South, 
Charcas;
 but Eastward, and to the North-East, it is shut up by a Ridge of Moun∣tains, running in one Body or continu'd Tract from the Confines of 
Collao,
 as far as the City of 
Cusco,
 where they divide. The Countrey is generally plain, commo∣diously water'd in all Parts with fresh Rivers, and consequently affording rich Pa∣sturage and good Herds of Cattel.


The Chief Towns and Places of note are, 1. 
Chuquinga,
 a great Town, and held to be naturally almost impregnable, as being environ'd round about either with deep unfordable Waters, or with Mountains unpassable, and having one onely Cawsey leading to it, reported to be for two or three Leagues together no broader than to permit one single Person to march conveniently upon it.


2. The City 
Pucara,
 which was formerly well inhabited, but at present nothing remains of it, except the ruin'd Walls of great Houses, and large Images of Stone.


3. 
Ayavire,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Las Sepulturas,
 being a Place especially enobled by the stately Monuments of the 
Peruvian
 Nobility which were found there.


4. 
Hatuncolla,
 the Metropolis or chief Town of this Province, seated upon the Banks of the River 
Caravaya,
 whose Streams are very much fam'd for Gold.








view of Lima


CALLAO de LIMA








The River 
Caravaya,
 which glides from the 
Andes
 Eastward to the City 
Juan del Oro,
 produces much fine Gold, but not without the loss of many People, which are kill'd by the unwholsom Air and Damps that arise here.


The Lake 
Titicaca,
 which washes the Countrey 
Collao
 on the North, the Province of 
Omasuy
 on the East, 
Chaquito
 on the West, and 
Chuquiabo
 on the South, is one of the greatest Lakes of 
America,
 being eighty Leagues in circumference, and in seve∣ral places as many Fathom deep; wherefore it is exceeding rough in windy Wea∣ther. Into this Lake ten great Rivers discharge their Waters, which run away again through a narrow, but very deep Channel, in which the Stream runs so strong, that no Boats are able to abide in it.


5. 
Chinquita,
 a Colony of 
Spaniards
 upon the Banks of 
Titiaca,
 having many small Islands in it of a good and fruitful Soil, abounding in Fish and variety of Sea-Fowl; it is suppos'd to be fourscore Leagues distant likewise from the South Sea, haying onely one 
Estuary
 or Mouth, which is something strait, but of such a deep Water and violent Stream, that (as 
Acosta
 testifieth of it) it is not possible to build a Bridge of Stone or Timber over it; but the Natives in stead thereof have laid a Bridge of Straw upon it, which serves as well, 
viz.
 so many great Bundles of Straw, Sedge, or such like matter, well and surely made up and fastned together, as will reach from one side or Bank of the 
Estuary
 to another ; at which likewise ha∣ving made them sure, they cast some good quantity of more Straw and Sedge up∣on them, and have a Bridge very convenient, upon which they both securely pass themselves, and also drive Cattel, and do other necessary Business. The Water is neither bitter nor brackish, yet is not drinkable because of its muddiness. Several Islands that lie in the Lake serv'd formerly for Store-houses of the chiefest Goods, which the People thereabouts living near the High-way would not trust in their Villages.


Here grows a certain Broom-Plant call'd 
Totara,
 good for many uses, and is also wholsom Food both for Man and Beast; moreover, they cover their Houses with the same, burn it on their Hearths, and make Boats. The 
Uros,
 a salvage People, made Floats of 
Totara,
 which they ty'd together, and built Villages on the same, which drove to and again, according as the Wind blew.


The Lake also breeds abundance of Fish, and especially two sorts, 
viz. Suches,
 which are very pleasing to the Palate, but unwholsom; and the 
Bogas,
 which though less, and full of Bones, are a much better Food. There likewise breed plenty of Fowls about the same, especially wild Geese and Ducks.


When the 
Peruvians
 intend to Entertain any Person, they go to catching of Fowls (by them call'd 
Chaco
) after this manner: They make a Circle with the Floats nam'd 
Balsas,
 and Rowing close to one another, take up the inclos'd Fowl with their Hands.


Moreover, the fore-mention'd Channel, through which the Lake 
Titicaca
 dis∣charges its Water, ends in a little Lake call'd 
Aulagas,
 likewise full of desolate Isles, but hath no visible place into which to empty its Water, therefore it must needs, according to the course of Nature, fall under Ground, where it commixes with a Stream whose original is unknown, though it be seen to fall into the South Sea.


The Town is a Place of extraordinary Wealth and Trading, and so consider∣able, that the Governor thereof is always nam'd by the King of 
Spain
 himself, and his Place estimated at fifty thousand Ducats 
per Annum.


6. 
Tiaguanaco,
 at the 
Estuary,
 or Mouth of the Lake, memorable onely for the Ruines of certain great and stupendious Buildings which antiently have stood there, some of the Stones whereof are said to have been of thirty Foot length

apiece, fifteen Foot broad, and six or seven Foot thick. There were likewise found the Statues of certain Men excellently Carv'd and Wrought, of a Gigantick stature or bigness, and likewise vested in foreign and strange Habits, not at all us'd, nor ever known to have been us'd by the 
Peruvians
 themselves, or by any other of the Natives of 
America.


7. 
Nuestra Sennora de la Paz,
 or 
Our Lady of Peace,
 otherwise call'd 
Pueblo Nuevo:
 It is but a small Town, yet pleasantly seated upon the Banks of a River in a fair and fruitful Plain, full of Springs, Fruit-Trees, 
Savanas,
 and Fields of 
Maiz,
 having Mountains on either side: It lieth almost in the middle of the Province 
Chuquinabo,
 fourteen Leagues distant from 
Cusco,
 and as many from 
Potosi.
 The Province 
Chu∣quinabo
 it self (which in the 
Peruvian
 Tongue signifies 
Inheritance of Gold
) hath many rich Gold-Mines, good Salt-pits, and a temperate Climate, except from the begin∣ning of 
December
 till 
March,
 in which time the continual Rains cause Feavers and Agues. The Inhabitants being very poor People, us'd to go naked in the Sum∣mer Season.


8. 
Copavana,
 two and twenty Leagues beyond 
Lopoz:
 It is onely inhabited by 
Peruvians;
 amongst whom an Image of the Virgin 
Mary,
 long since erected there, hath been ever in great veneration, especially by reason of a Tradition of a great Miracle there perform'd: for the 
Spaniards
 affirm, That 
Johannes Anachoreta
 going a Journey of several Weeks from home, plac'd a lighted Candle before the Image, which during the time of his absence did not at all diminish.


An Accident which fell out in this Countrey is very remarkable, 
viz.
 The Ground of an old Village call'd 
Angoanga,
 then inhabited by eminent Necroman∣cers, began on a sudden to swell, and the Earth to run like a broken Wave two Leagues, overwhelming the Houses in Sand, and filling up a neighboring Lake.


Eight years before this terrible Earthquake here, there hapned in the County of 
Hereford
 in 
England
 almost the same kind of prodigious Motion: for not far from the Town 
Ledborough,
 arose 
Marcely Hill
 to an exceeding heighth, and moving along bury'd all whate're it met with, after which manner it continu'd for the space of three days, to the great terror of all that beheld it.


9. 
Chilane;
 10. 
Acos;
 11. 
Pomata,
 and some others, all of them good Towns, but not so considerable as those other.


Concerning the Roads or High-ways, it may well be said, That none of the seven Wonders of the World can compare with any one of them; neither was the Way that 
Appius Claudius
 made from 
Rome
 to 
Brundusium,
 upon the repairing of which the Em∣perors 
Julius
 and 
Augustus
 spent great sums of Money, fit to stand in competition with the Roads made by the 
Ingas
 in 
Peru:
 for who cannot but admire at the consi∣deration of so many Valleys fill'd with Mountains, the hardest Rocks cut asunder, Moors damm'd up, great Stone Bridges laid over swift gliding Streams, and through vast Wildernesses a Way made of twenty Foot broad, inclos'd in high Walls, extending from 
Quito
 to 
Chilo,
 a thousand Leagues, and at the end of every ten Leagues brave Houses or Magazines, stor'd with Bowes, Arrows, Halberds, Axes, Clubs, Clothes, and Provision for twenty or thirty thousand Men. Some relate, that 
Guainacava,
 when he return'd Victor from the conquer'd Countrey 
Quito,
 suffer'd great Inconveniences on the pathless Mountains, and thereupon commanded his Subjects to make the fore-mention'd Way. But it is more probable, that this Master-piece was not the work of one 
Inga,
 especially since besides the Way from 
Chili
 to 
Quito
 there leads another through the Mountains over the Plains from 
Cusco
 to 
Quito,
 forty Foot broad, and five hundred Leagues long, inclos'd within two Walls.




The 
Peruvians
 relate from the testimony of the 
Quipos,
 much more concerning these High-Ways, and other Buildings on them, made by 
Guainacava.
 These 
Quipos
 are Rowls of divers colour'd Strings, full of all manner of Knots, which serve in stead of Characters to keep their Chronicles; in which were employ'd the 
Quipo-Camayos,
 who being in the nature of our Secretaries, Registred all Transactions, performing the same with the several Strings and Buttons, with which they gave Obligations, Discharges, and the like: but besides the 
Quipos
 they also us'd Rings full of little Stones for the same purpose; and knew with 
Maiz
-Seed how to cast up an Account as well as the best Arithmetician with Figures.


Their Account of Time hung on the twelve Pillars 
Succanga,
 erected on a Moun∣tain beyond 
Cusco
 by the Inga 
Pachacuma,
 that is, 
The Regulator of the Year,
 to shew the Course of the Sun, and according to that their appointed Feast-days, times of Sowing and Harvest: Their Year begins in 
December.


The 
Spanish
 Government in the Kingdom of 
Peru
 is setled at present in great tranquility and splendor. The Vice-Roy, who keeps a splendid Court in 
Lima,
 otherwise call'd 
Los Reyos,
 Commands over 
Chili
 and 
Terra Firma,
 and never comes abroad without a Guard of forty Halberdeers: when he travels by Land he is ac∣companied by the Arch-bishop, and guarded by his forty Halberdeers, a hundred Pike-men, and fifty Musquetteers. His Reign is generally not above six or eight years, during which time he receives forty thousand Ducats 
per Annum
 out of the King's Exchequer.


The City 
Los Reyos
 hath been of late years very much enlarg'd and brought to a most flourishing Condition, being exceeding populous, and extending four Miles in length, and half as much in breadth? In the biggest Market-place is the City Hall and the Exchange, where all things are brought to be sold. Of the other three Markets, two have their Denominations from 
St. Anne
 and 
St. Jacob;
 the fourth is call'd 
El Santo de los Cavallos,
 because nothing but Mules, Asses, and Horses are sold there. The chief Church is Consecrated to 
St. John
 the Evangelist; the other Three to 
Marcellus, Sebastian,
 and 
Anna.
 The 
Franciscans
 inhabit three Cloy∣sters; the 
Dominicans, Augustines,
 and Monks 
De la Merced,
 each of them two, besides two costly Structures for the 
Jesuits.
 Other Orders have also five Cloysters here, 
viz.
 the 
Creation, Conception,
 the 
Holy Trinity, St. Joseph,
 and 
St. Clara;
 the three first have each of them a Church built hard by the several Cloysters, Dedicated to the 
Santas Virgines del Montserratto, Del Prado,
 and 
De Loretto.
 Each Cloyster contains above two hundred and fifty either Monks or Nuns. Here are also four large Hos∣pitals, the chiefest whereof call'd 
Andrias,
 hath seldom less than four hundred Sick, which are kept and cur'd on Charity. The second is for 
Peruvians
 onely, call'd 
The Hospital of St. Anna.
 The third, built in honor of the Apostle 
St. Peter,
 is for poor old Clergy-men. The fourth, nam'd 
The House of Love,
 is for sick Women. Besides these there stands another Structure near the Walls of the City, Consecrated to 
La∣zarus,
 where those that have the Leprosie are cur'd. The House call'd 
The Holy-Ghost,
 receives all sick and wounded Sea-men. The King maintains twenty four Students at his own Charge in the Royal Colledge, and the Arch-bishop as many in the Colledge call'd 
St. Toronius;
 but in the Colledge of 
St. Martin
 reside above six hundred, which are brought up in all manner of Arts and Sciences. Two hun∣dred Students are also taught in the high School, where they chuse a new Gover∣nor every year. Here also is kept the King's Treasure, and the Court of Inquisi∣tion. The River which washes the City Walls runs so exceeding swift, that not long since it carried away a new Stone Bridge with nine great Arches.


The 
Dominican
 Monks were the first that Landed on 
Peru,
 the first which came

thither with 
Francisco Pizarro
 being 
Vincent de Valle Verde,
 who was follow'd by 
Sancio Martino, Martino de Esquivele, Dominico de Sancto Thoma, Pedro Ulloa, Alphonso de Montenegro, Reynaldo Pedraza,
 and many others, who were stirr'd up by the report of the 
Peruvian
 Riches; amongst whom were four 
Franciscans,
 viz. 
Pedro Portuguese, Jodoco de los Angelos, De la Cruiz,
 and 
De Sant Anna,
 who were soon after follow'd by twelve Monks of the 
Augustine
 Order. 
Anno
 1552. Landed also at 
Los Reyos,
 Colonel 
Andreas Salazar,
 accompanied with 
Antonio Lozano, Juan de Sancto Petro, Hie∣ronymo Melendez, Didaco Palamino, Pedro de Espeda, Andreas Ortega, Juan Canto, Juan Chamorro,
 
Francisco de Treyas, Juan Ramirez,
 and 
Balthazar Melgarego. Salazar
 soon after his Arrival sent the Priest 
Juan Ramirez,
 and 
Balthazar Melganego
 to 
Guamachuco,
 where he Baptiz'd and Instructed the Inhabitants in great numbers. Afterwards travelling to 
Moyabamba,
 he got a great esteem amongst those Idolaters, and (as it goes for currant amongst them) wrought many Miracles, amongst which this is reported for one: He being inform'd by an old 
Peruvian,
 that his Daughter nam'd 
Curi
 had hid several Idols; enquiring after it, he tax'd her with what her Father had told him; which she denying, and being rebuk'd by 
Ramirez,
 is said to have become immediately dumb, to have foam'd at the Mouth, at last falling down dead like a second 
Saphira
 in the presence of many, which caus'd many to forsake their Idolatry. But the Necromancers endeavor'd by all means possible to raise a disesteem on 
Ramirez,
 and with the assistance of their Master the Devil, so wrought their Inchantments, that the Tygers came in great Herds out of the Wildernesses to 
Moyabamba,
 and devour'd not onely Men, Women and Children in the High∣ways, but also tore them out of their Houses, yet did not the least hurt to any 
Spa∣niard;
 whereupon 
Ramirez
 valiantly went with a Company of his Proselytes to a Herd of Tygers, which when he approached held the Cross to them, which it seems so affrighted the Devil-Tygers, that they climb'd up the Trees. They farther relate (if you will believe them) to make the Miracle the greater, That 
Ramirez
 call'd to the Multitude, saying, 
Go and revenge the Deaths of your devour'd Pa∣rents, Children and Relations;
 whereupon he throwing a Stone, and all the rest fol∣lowing his Example, the Tygers leap'd out of the Trees, stood still, and suffer'd themselves to be kill'd like Lambs. Six years after the fore-mention'd twelve 
Au∣gustine
 Monks follow'd eleven others, who set Sail out of the 
Spanish
 Haven 
St. Lucar,
 and arriving at 
Peru
 went to the Village 
Tauca,
 where they broke the Image of the Goddess 
Huarella,
 being as it were the 
Peruvian Venus,
 or Patroness of amorous De∣lights, reported to have given Responses from the Wood in which she was wor∣shipp'd. They also destroy'd the Idol 
Chanca
 in the Countrey 
Conchucos,
 which be∣ing worshipp'd by the 
Indians
 in the shape of a Man, had yearly a fair Maid, aged fourteen years, given to him in Marriage, a solemn Wedding being kept, and seve∣ral Sheep kill'd.


The 
Augustine
 Monks are believ'd to have wrought also another Miracle in the Province 
Conchucos,
 upon this occasion: A Conjurer call'd 
Chaumango,
 boasted him∣self to be 
God,
 deny'd our 
Saviour,
 in testimony whereof he gave out that he would kick a Mountain to pieces, with his Foot; which Report spreading all over the Countrey, all the adjacent People flock'd to see this strange Wonder on an appointed Day, on which 
Charimango
 being, it seems, as good as his word, and kicking the Mountain, caus'd it to rent from the top to the bottom, and the pieces to flie all about the People, who were exceedingly amaz'd; but the Sorcerer upon the 
Augu∣stine
 Monk's rebuking him was (as they affirm) immediately eaten up with Worms.


Many other Stories of Miracles go currant amongst them, as of 
Marco Garcia
 and 
Didaco Ortez
 driving the Devil from a white Stone which hung over a Fountain







map of Chile


CHILI




1. P.
•
 de Talcaguana.


2. I. Quiriquina


3. R. Biobio


4. R. Ilandalien


5. R. de la Laxa








in 
Chiquipalpa,
 and several others, but it would be very impertinent to dwell too long upon Discourses of this nature, especially since we are not oblig'd to make them a part of our Creed.


To conclude our Description of this famous Kingdom of 
Peru,
 the People there∣of at the 
Spaniards
 first Arrival viewing their Shipping, their Guns, and other Accoutrements, unknown to them before, had them in great admiration, as Men de∣scended from Heaven; but when they began to be oppress'd by their Tyranny, and to be tortur'd by them, they look'd upon them as the Spawn of Hell, and curs'd the Sea that had brought so wicked a People to them.








CHAP. V. Chile.


FOllowing the Coast of 
Mare del Zur,
 or the South Sea, the next great Province pertaining formerly to the Kingdom of 
Peru,
 is that of 
Chile.
 This is the most Southerly Province of the whole Countrey of 
America,
 reaching up as far as the 
Magellane
 Straights, with which to the Southward it is bounded; North∣ward it hath a Desart, and an undiscover'd Countrey lying betwixt it and the Con∣fines of 
Peru,
 call'd 
Atacama;
 on the West it hath 
Mare del Zur;
 and on the East, up to 
Rio de la Plata,
 the 
Atlantick,
 or North Sea, with some Countreys undiscover'd, which interpose betwixt it and 
Paraguay
 to the North-East: It lieth all of it be∣yond the 
Tropick
 of 
Capricorn,
 in a temperate 
Zone,
 and extendeth it self in length from the Borders of 
Peru,
 to the Mouth of the 
Straights
 five hundred Leagues or more; but the breadth of it neither equal nor certain: They say 'tis call'd 
Chile
 from the word 
Chil,
 which signifies 
Cold
 it seems in their Language as well as ours, it being generally a cold and bleak Countrey, the Air in many parts of it so ex∣treamly sharp and piercing, that both Horse and Rider sometimes in travelling are frozen to death, as the 
Spaniards
 found by experience in their first Search and Disco∣very of the Countrey, under the Conduct of 
Diego Almagro,
 who is said to have left the greatest part of his Men dead behind him: But this is chiefly towards the 
Andes,
 and on the Sea-Coast, the more Inland parts of it, though mountainous also in some parts, yet are more temperate, and being also well water'd with Rivers, are much more fruitfull than the other, affording both Wheat and 
Maiz,
 and likewise other Grain, excellent Pasturage in many places, and great store of Cattel, Wine, Honey, and not without many and rich Mines both of Gold and Silver.


The Natives of this Countrey were found to be the most stout and warlike of all the 
Americans
 that the 
Spaniards
 had hitherto met withal, fighting with them, and oftentimes defeating them in the open Field, surprizing and sacking their Towns, and last of all taking their Captain and Commander in Chief Prisoner: This was 
Pedro Baldivia,
 one of those good Men that consented to the death of 
Atta∣baliba,
 the last King of 
Peru,
 after a greater Ransom accepted and paid, then per∣haps the King of 
Spain
 could well raise on a sudden, if he had occasion to use it for himself.
The 
Arucans
 (for so are the People call'd that had him Prisoner) are said to have Entertain'd him for a while with great Jollity and Feasting, but for his last Draught gave him a Cup of melted Gold, which the poor Man was forc'd to take down, and so died a cruel, though costly Death.




The whole Province generally is divided first into 
Chile,
 specially so call'd, and secondly 
Magellanica,
 or that part which lieth more Southward down to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan.




SECT. II. Chile, properly so call'd.


CHile,
 specially so call'd, is border'd Northward with the Desart and barren Countrey of 
Acatama
 above mention'd; on the South, with 
Magellanica;
 on the West, with 
Mare del Zur;
 Eastward, and to the North-East, with some parts of 
Paraguay,
 or rather with some undiscover'd Countreys lying betwixt them both: The length of it from North to South is reckon'd to be little less than three hundred Leagues, and generally of a fruitful Soil, affording besides abun∣dance of Gold and Silver, both Corn, Cattel, Vineyards, and divers sorts of Fruits, equal both for kind and plenty to 
Spain
 it self, and sundry other parts of 
Europe.
 The Air likewise temperate, and the People in their Manners and Conditions come much nearer to the Civility, and likewise subtilty of the 
Europeans,
 than other 
Americans
 did; which doubtless may be attributed to the conformity of the Climates under which they lie, agreeable to those of 
Europe;
 though otherwise in respect of the Sphere and Seasons of the Year, there be a diametrical difference betwixt us; As for Example, their 
Spring
 beginning in 
September,
 which is our 
Autumn,
 and their 
Autumn
 in 
March,
 which is our 
Spring;
 their longest Day being that of 
St. Lucy,
 on the eleventh of 
December,
 which is our shortest; and their shortest being 
St. Barna∣bas, viz.
 the eleventh of 
June,
 which is our longest, 
&c.


The Towns of chiefest note and importance in this Province, are 1. 
Gopiapo,
 an old Town in the most Northerly parts of this Province towards the Sea, where it hath a very commodious Haven belonging to it.


2. 
La Serena,
 a Town situate on the Banks of 
Coquimbo,
 a pleasant River a little above its Influx into the Sea, built by 
Baldivia
 in the Year 1544. the Countrey about very rich in Mines of Gold, and the Town it self so well Garrison'd for fear of the Natives, that when the 
English
 under Sir 
Francis Drake,
 about fourscore years since, attempted the gaining of the Place, they found hot Service of it, being stoutly resisted and beaten back again to their Ships, by a Sally of no less than three hundred good Horse and two hundred Foot.


3. 
St. Jago,
 the principal Town of the Province, a Bishop's See, and the ordi∣nary Residence of the Governor, lying on the Banks of the River 
Tapocalma,
 in the thirty fourth Degree of Southern Latitude, fifteen Leagues distant from the South Sea, at which it hath a very commodious and much frequented Haven, which they call 
Valparayso,
 and where the 
English
 met with better fortune, as hath been said al∣ready in the report of Sir 
Francis Drake
's Voyage.


4. 
La Conception,
 a strong Town, seated on the Bay call'd 
Penco,
 sixty or seventy Leagues distant from 
St. Jago
 towards the South, a Place not a little fortifi'd both by Nature and Art, having the Bay and a certain Ridge of high Mountains begirt∣ing it almost round about; and where it is otherwise accessible, a Castle, and cer∣tain Bulwarks with Ordnance, besides a Garrison of five hundred Soldiers at least continually in it, and all little enough to defend it against the 
Araucanes,
 their deadly Enemies, who live thereabouts, and are ever and anon making Incursions almost up to the Walls of it. Over against this Place in 
Mare del Zur,
 but very near the Shore, there lieth a certain Island call'd 
St. Maries,
 exceeding plentiful in Swine







map of Cape Horn


TABULE MEGELLANICA, QUA TIERRAE DEL FUEGO, 






and all sorts of Poultrey, which the Garrison of 
La Conception
 make good use of.


5. 
Los Confines,
 a Fronteer Town, built by the aforesaid 
Baldivia,
 for defence of the rich Mines of Gold at 
Angol,
 a Place near adjoyning.


6. 
La Imperiale,
 another strong Garrison of this Place on the Banks of the River 
Cauten,
 near to which that great Battel was fought, where 
Baldivia,
 with divers other Soldiers, were taken Prisoners, who were no otherwise overcome, but by be∣ing over-wearied with killing of their Enemies, and by that means not able to make their Retreat.


7. 
Villarica,
 another Colony of the 
Spaniards
 in these Parts, sixteen Leagues di∣stant from 
Imperiale,
 and twenty five from the Sea.


8. 
Baldivia,
 so nam'd from the Commander 
Pedro Baldivia,
 who built it in the Valley of 
Guadallanquen,
 two or three Leagues distant from the Sea, where it hath a good and capacious Port; but nearer to it the best Mines of 
Peru,
 so rich, that 'tis said they yielded 
Baldivia
 every day so long as he could enjoy them, twenty five thousand Crowns.


9. 
Osorno,
 a Town lying in the Bay of 
Chilue
 in a barren Soil, but otherwise nei∣ther less rich, nor less populous than 
Baldivia
 it self.


These three last mention'd Towns, 
viz. Baldivia, Imperiale,
 and 
Osorno,
 were in the Years 1596, 1699, and 1604, surpriz'd by the 
Araucanes,
 and other Salvages confederate with them, sack'd and burnt; and though the 
Spaniards
 be said to have recover'd and Garrison'd some of them with fresh Soldiers, yet how long they were able to hold them, or whether they be Masters of them at this day, we cannot say.


10. 
Castro,
 the most Southerly Town of the whole Province, built on a certain Island within the Bay of 
Chilue.


11. 
Mondoza,
 and 12. 
St. Juan de la Frontera,
 both which lie towards 
Paraguay
 and 
Rio de la Plata,
 but on the other side of the 
Andes,
 forty Leagues distant from any of those we have spoken of, and perhaps more, not above a hundred from 
Buenos Ayres,
 and the 
Atlantick
 Ocean.






SECT. III. Magellanica.


MAgellanica,
 the other part of this Province, is bounded Northward, with 
Chile
 abovesaid, and some parts of the Countrey 
De la Plata;
 on the South, with the narrow Sea call'd 
Magellans Straights;
 having 
Mare del Zur
 on the West, and on the East the 
Atlantick
 Ocean. It contains in length from the Borders of 
Chile
 to the Mouth of the 
Straights,
 a hundred Leagues, and in breadth from the North to the South Sea, somewhat more, 
viz.
 towards 
Chile
 and the North-West parts of it, for towards the South and South-West it straitens still more and more, insomuch that they who resemble the Southern part of 
America
 to the form of a Py∣ramid revers'd, make this part of the Countrey to be the Spire or top thereof. It beareth the Name from 
Ferdinand Magellan,
 a 
Portuguese,
 who first discover'd that narrow Sea, so famously known by the Name of 
Magellans Straights.
 It is a large Countrey, and suppos'd not to be altogether barren of Metals; but as yet no great Discovery hath been made of it, partly by reason of the excessive Cold to which 'tis thought to be subject, and partly perhaps by reason of the difficulty of the Enterprize, it being so far remote, and very hardly passable in many places, by reason of the huge Mountains the 
Andes,
 which bar it as it were against all Adven∣turers; but chiefly by reason of the stoutness and untameableness of the 
Araucanes


and other Natives of 
Chile,
 through whose Countrey the March lieth, and who must first be conquer'd, so that very little can be said more of this Countrey, than onely to name the Ports and Places upon the Sea-Coasts,
 at which the 
Spaniards,
 and likewise some other Nations at several times have touched, the chief whereof upon the South Sea are, 1. 
Cabo de las Islas,
 a Promontory or Foreland, twenty six Leagues distant from that of 
St. Felix
 on the Confines of 
Chile.


2. 
Puerto de San Stephano,
 fifty Leagues from that, towards the South.


3. 
La Villa de Nuestra Sennora,
 or 
Our Ladies Dale,
 a large and secure Bay, eighteen Leagues Southward of 
St. Stephens.


4. 
La Punta Deglada;
 5. 
Puerto de los Reyos;
 and 6. 
Ancona Sin Salida,
 all of them opening towards the 
Straights.
 There is also at the opening of the Straights, 
Cabo de la Vittoria, Cabo Desseado,
 and some others.


Upon the North Sea, and up towards 
Rio de la Plata,
 the chief Places observable, are 1. 
Rio de la Crux,
 and the Cape which they call 
De las Rameras,
 about thirty Leagues distant from the 
Straights
 Mouth.


2. The Bay of 
St. Julian,
 forty Leagues Northward of the former.


3. 
El Puerto Desseado;
 4. 
Puerto de los Leones;
 5. The Bay of 
Anegada,
 all of them good and capacious Havens for the security of Shipping upon these Coasts, and lying at a distance of thirty or forty Leagues one from another, up towards 
Rio de la Plata,
 and the Countrey of 
Paraguay,
 of which we are next to speak.


As for the Straights themselves, so much spoken of, and likewise so necessary to be known by those who frequent these parts of the World, they are a narrow Sea or Frith, by which the 
Atlantick
 Ocean, or rather some parts of it, doth fall into 
Mare del Zur,
 or the South Sea: the Passage is long, running, as 'tis commonly suppos'd, well nigh a hundred Leagues together, almost in a paralel Line, or in the same Degree of Latitude from one end to the other; and likewise extreamly difficult by reason of the many windings and turnings of the Sea, which force them to be ever and anon altering of their Course, and a mountainous high Countrey on both sides of it, from whence it is almost continually beaten with Storms, both dangerous and terrible: They were first discover'd by 
Ferdinand Magellan,
 by Nation a 
Portu∣guese,
 but in the Service of the King of 
Spain,
 and by him nam'd 
Magellan's Straights;
 who although himself liv'd not to return into 
Spain,
 being slain in the Conquest of the 
Molucca
 Islands, yet his Companions did, in the Ship call'd 
Vittoria,
 from whence the Cape 
De la Vittoria
 abovesaid took its Name. The Mouth or Entrance of them, by the 
Atlantick
 Ocean, lies in fifty two Degrees of Southern Latitude, and hath not above fifty three and some Minutes at the 
Exit,
 or opening into the South Sea.


There is likewise since this, and but of late times, 
viz.
 about the Year 1615. ano∣ther 
Straight
 discover'd by the 
Dutch,
 and call'd from the Discoverer 
Fretum Mairi,
 or 
The Straights of le Maire,
 four or five Degrees more to the Southward than those of 
Magellan,
 and suppos'd to be a much easier and safer Passage.


The Intention by the discovery of these 
Straights,
 was to have found a shorter Way to the 
East-Indies,
 and the Kingdoms of 
Cathay
 and 
China,
 than that which was then onely us'd, 
viz.
 by the 
Cape de Buena Speranza,
 and the Coast of 
Africk,
 but by reason of the great difficulty, as 'tis to be suppos'd, and uncertainty of the Passage, neither the one nor the other is much frequented, the 
Spaniards
 for the most part serving themselves of their 
American
 Ports upon the South Sea, from whence they make their Voyages and Returns to and from the other 
Indies,
 and from thence home to 
Spain;
 and the 
English,
 with other Nations of 
Europe,
 Trading still by the Coast of 
Africk
 and 
Cape of Good Hope,
 or else by the way of 
Alexandria
 and the 
Persian
 Gulf, as heretofore.








map of Paraguay


PARAQVARIA 
Vulgo
 PARAGVAY. Cum adjacentibus.














CHAP. VI. Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata.


VVE have seen in 
Magellanica
 the farthest, that is, the most Southerly part of the 
New World,
 and before it in order all the Western Coasts of 
America
 that lie either upon or towards 
Mare del Zur, viz.
 from 
Pa∣nama,
 the first Province of this Southern part down as far as the 
Straights.
 We are now to return and take a view of the Eastern Coasts, and those Countreys which lie upon the 
Atlantick
 Ocean, steering our Course henceforth Northward, not di∣rectly, but as the Coast leads us for a while Eastward and by North, forasmuch as the Land of 
America,
 from the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan
 up as far as 
Brasile,
 and almost to the 
AEquator,
 runneth out with a long Point, little less than three thousand Leagues together.


The first Province we meet with on this side next to 
Magellanica,
 is the Countrey of 
Paraguay,
 oftentimes call'd 
Rio de la Plata,
 from the Name of an huge River, which runneth for the most part through the midst of it: It is border'd, as we said, to the South and towards the 
Straights
 with 
Magellanica;
 on the East, with the 
Atlantick
 Ocean; more Northward, or to the North-East, it hath 
Brasile;
 and on the West those undiscover'd Countreys of the Province of 
Chile,
 of which we have spoken.


The Countrey on both sides the River is reported to be a very lusty and fruitful Soil, bearing besides those which are proper and native, all sorts of 
European
 Fruits and Grain in great abundance, with Sugar-Canes, both large and good, as any other Province of the 
New World.
 Nor is it excell'd by any other for good Pasturage and great Herds of Cattel, Sheep, and Swine; in particular, Horses are said to have multiply'd so here, that of thirty Mares, and about six or seven Stal∣lions, which the 
Spaniards
 left there, in forty years the whole Countrey thereabouts was fill'd with the Breed of them, running wild in great Companies together, through all the Woods and Forrests of the Countrey, and being of excellent Met∣tle and Service if they could be tam'd. It affordeth likewise great store of wild Deer and Stags, some Lyons, Tygers, 
&c.
 nor is it without good Mines, some both of Gold and Silver; but chiefly, as to what is yet discover'd, of Brass, and Iron; and the People altogether salvage.


The River 
De la Plata,
 which (as we said before) divides this Countrey, is one of the largest of the whole World, rising, as 'tis suppos'd, out of the Lake call'd 
De los Xarayes,
 three hundred Leagues or more within Land, and falling into the 
Atlantick
 Ocean, or North Sea, in thirty four Degrees of Southern Latitude, with an 
Estuary
 or Mouth of thirty, or two and thirty Leagues over.


The whole Countrey is usually subdivided into three inferior Provinces, which 1. 
Rio de la Plata
 properly so call'd. 2. 
Tucuman.
 3. 
La Crux de Sierra.






SECT. II. Rio de la Plata, properly so call'd.


RIo de la Plata,
 properly so call'd, is that part of the Countrey which extend∣eth it self on both sides the River, in length many Leagues together, but not answerable in breadth.


The chiefest Towns of note in this Province, are 1. 
Buenos Ayres,
 by some call'd 
La Trinidad,
 on the Southern Banks of the River 
De la Plata,
 sixty four Leagues, as they say, from the Mouth of it: It is seated commodiously at the foot of a little Mountain, and fortifi'd with a Mud-Wall, a little Castle, and some Pieces of Ordnance.


2. 
San Fe,
 in English 
St. Faiths,
 fifty Leagues above 
Buenos Ayres,
 upon the same River, and a richer Place, chiefly by reason of their Cloth, of which there is here one of the greatest Manufactures of all these parts of 
Peru.


3. 
Nuestra Sennora de la Assumption,
 commonly call'd 
Assumption
 onely, lying yet higher up the River almost a hundred Leagues, a well built and well frequented Town, long since inhabited by two hundred Families at least of natural 
Spaniards,
 besides 
Mestizos,
 as they call them, which are the Breed of 
Spaniards
 by the 
American
 People, Men or Women, and 
Mulattos,
 which are likewise their Race, but begotten upon 
Negro's,
 of both which there are reckon'd to be here some thousands.


4. 
La Cividad Real,
 or more commonly call'd 
Ontiveros,
 fourscore Leagues North∣ward from 
Assumption,
 seated on the Banks of the River 
Parana
 in a fruitful Soil, as the Countrey generally is about all these Places; but the Air hereabouts is not so healthful.


5. 
St. Anne,
 upon the same River; and 6. 
St. Salvador.






SECT. III. Tucuman.


VVEstward of 
La Plata
 lieth the Countrey of 
Tucuman,
 extending it self as far as the Borders of 
Chile,
 a Countrey not yet well discover'd either to the North or the South. That part of it which lieth towards 
Chile
 is well Manur'd and Husbanded, and likewise very fruitful; but that to∣wards 
Magellanica,
 neither the one, nor the other, remaining altogether untill'd and barren.


The chief Towns and Places of note, are 1. 
St. Jago de Esteco,
 the principal Town of the Province, and a Bishop's See, seated upon the River 
Esteco,
 a hundred and fourscore Leagues distant from 
Buenos Ayres.


2. 
St. Michael de Tucuman,
 seated at the foot of a huge rocky Mountain, but otherwise in a Soil the fruitfullest and best, both for Corn and Pasturage, in all this Countrey, twenty eight Leagues distant from 
St. Jago.


3. 
Talavera,
 or 
Neustra Sennora de Talavera,
 as the 
Spaniards
 call it, situate upon the Banks of 
Salado,
 in a good Soil, and inhabited by an industrious People, grown ex∣ceeding rich and wealthy, chiefly by their Manufactures of Cotton-Wooll, where∣of they have great plenty, and by which they drive a Trade as far as the Mines at 
Potosi,
 and other parts of 
Peru.


4. 
Corduba,
 another rich Town of this Province, and of great Trade, as lying







map of Brazil


BRASILIA.






at an equal distance, 
viz.
 of fifty Leagues, both from 
San Fe,
 as they call it, or 
St. Faiths
 in the Province of 
La Plata
 abovesaid, and from 
St. Juan de la Frontera
 in the Country of 
Chile,
 and almost in the Road-way from 
Potosi
 and those parts of 
Peru,
 to 
Buenos Ayres
 and the North Sea.


5. 
Chocinoca;
 6. 
Sococha;
 7. 
Calebinda;
 8. 
Morata,
 and others, but belonging for the most part to the reduced Natives.






SECT. IV. La Crux de Sierra.


LA Crux de Sierra
 is a little Territory (at least in comparison to some others) lying towards 
Peru,
 and reckon'd by some for one of the Provinces of 
Peru:
 It lieth betwixt the two great Rivers 
Paraguay
 and 
Guapay,
 a hundred Leagues distant, as 'tis said, from 
Charcas,
 to which yet in some Causes it is subor∣dinate.


The Soil of this Countrey is abundantly fertile in all sorts of 
American
 Fruits, besides good plenty both of Wheat and 
Maiz,
 and scarsity of nothing useful for Man's Life, unless it be fresh Water in some places.


The chief Towns of this Province, are 1. 
San Crux,
 situate at the foot of a great Mountain or Hill, but opeing upon a large Plain, whose thirsty driness is well re∣fresh'd by a certain Brook or Torrent, which issueth out of a neighboring Moun∣tain, and a few Leagues distant from the Town maketh a pretty Lake, which sup∣plieth the Countrey thereabouts, both with fresh Water and Fish in good plenty.


2. 
Barranea,
 a Town suppos'd to be not above threescore Leagues distant from 
Potosi.


3. 
Nova Rioia,
 once a Colony of 
Spaniards,
 bu
sack'd and spoil'd by the Salvages of these Parts about the Year 1548. and the first Discoveror of the Countrey, namely 
Nunno de Chaves,
 treacherously murder'd by a Native, since which time 'tis said to have been deserted.








CHAP. VII. Brasile.


Brasile
 by 
Capralis
 call'd 
San Cruz,
 because it was discover'd on the Day dedi∣cated to the holy Cross, but generally 
Brasile,
 from the red Wood, which it produces in great abundance, extends, according to the Account of the 
Portuguese,
 between the Rivers 
Maranon
 and 
De la Plata:
 But according to the Di∣vision which Pope 
Alexander
 the Sixth made upon the Approbation of the Kings of 
Castile
 and 
Portuguese, Brasile
 extends not so far; for it begins in the North along the Stream 
Para,
 and ends at the River 
Capybora,
 two Leagues beyond the Town 
St. Vincent:
 Eastward it is wash'd by the Northern Ocean, and on the West separa∣ted from 
Peru
 by desolate Mountains: It lies between 4 and 22 Degrees of Sou∣thern Latitude. Historiographers differ much concerning the first Discoverer; but without contradiction the first honor belongs justly to 
Americus Vesputius,
 who being sent out by 
Ferdiaand,
 King of 
Castile,
 in the Year 1497. arriv'd first with four Sail





 at 
Brasile;
 whither he was follow'd two years after by 
Vincent Aynez Pinzon,
 Associ∣ate to 
Christopher Columbus;
 but with ill success, for two of the Ships were cast away in a Storm, and the other two return'd sadly weather-beaten into the 
Spanish
 Haven 
Palos,
 yet not before he had made a farther Discovery of 
Brasile
 than 
Americus Vespu∣tius;
 which so stirr'd up 
Emanuel,
 King of 
Portugal,
 that he sent 
Pedro Alvarez Capralis
 thither with five hundred Men in thirteen Ships, that so he might get sure footing on 
Brasile;
 where Landing he erect
d a Stone Cross, and inform'd the King of his whole Proceedings by 
Gasper Lemnius,
 with whom he sent over two 
Brasilians,
 a Man and a Woman, the strangeness of whose Garb caus'd great admiration in 
Portugal
 amongst the Spectators: the Man, having a flat Nose, went stark naked, and in his nether Lip hung a Stone call'd 
Matara;
 through each Cheek there was stuck a piece of 
Brasile
 Wood, on his Shoulders he carry'd three long Darts, and on his Head he wore divers colour'd Feathers; the Hair about his Privities was all pluckt out, and his 
Membrum Virile
 ty'd about with a String call'd 
Tacoaynhaa,
 which he unty'd when he Urin'd; his Body was strong and well proportion'd, and paint∣ed with several Colours. The Woman wore a Lappet girt about her Middle, in which Girdle stuck a Cane Tobacco-pipe; the Lappet reach'd just to the top of her Knees, the rest of her Body was also naked; on her Head she wore a broad Hat made of Feathers, on the top of which stuck two Plumes; in her Ears hung Bells, and about her Neck three Strings of Pearl; and her Body was also painted with red and yellow Colours. 
Lemnius
 also gave so much Information concerning the fruitfulness of 
Brasile,
 that several 
Portuguese
 Families went thither, accompanied with some 
Italian
 Fryers, which scattering up and down, began to build several Villages, but were soon after most of them kill'd and eaten up by the 
Indians.


Anno
 1549. King 
John
 the Third fitted out a great Fleet, which set Sail from 
Lisbon
 under the Command of 
Thomas de Sosa.


Also the Jesuits 
Aspilcueta, Antonio Pireo, Leonardo Nonno, Didaco Jacobo, Vincent Rode∣rico,
 and 
Emanuel Robrega,
 were sent thither by Pope 
Paulus
 the Third, and 
Ignatius Loyola,
 whose Fleet came to an Anchor in the Bay afterwards call'd 
Bahia de Todos

Sanctos,
 where 
Sosa
 built the City 
Salvador;
 since which the 
Portuguese
 have spread themselves farther and farther over 
Brasile.


The 
United Netherlands
 also sent Colonies thither with good success, for they took several vast Countreys from the 
Portuguese,
 by force of Arms, and built new Forts and Towns in several places. But we will first give you a general Description of it,
 that so we may the better render a Relation in particular of every Province thereof, it being a considerable part of the 
New World,
 and both pleasant and fruit∣ful, and the Sea-Coasts refresh'd by Easterly Winds, which begin before Day∣break, when the North Sea ebbs or flows, for then the Wind rises with the Sun, and continues till Mid-night: Towards the West, where the Mountains divide 
Brasile
 from 
Peru,
 it is made temperate by Westerly Winds, which though judg'd unwhol∣som, because they seem to arise out of the Moorish Grounds, yet they hurt not the Inhabitants along that Coast, because they either break against the high Moun∣tains, or are driven by the strong Wind which blows from the Sea.


The difference between Summer and Winter, shorter and longer Days, in the main part of 
Brasile,
 is scarce discernable, warm Weather lasting all the year round; and for the length of the Day and Night, the Sun being hid under the Horizon twelve hours, shines for the most part just as long, the greatest difference never being above an hour. Three hours before Day-break the Dew makes it exceeding cold till Sun-rising; wherefore the 
Brasilians
 make Fires in the Night near their Hammocks, not onely to keep wild Beasts from them, but also against the Cold. After the coldest Nights follow the fairest Days, and the contrary after sultry Nights; nevertheless (except in the rainy Season, which begins with 
March
 and ends about 
August
) the Skye is generally clear, yet it Lightens much towards the Evening. Rainbowes often appear in the Skye, and bout the Mooon 
Halos.
 The Rain generally falls in great Drops, and with a mighty noise; before which it is generally very sultry hot, or else soon after. The Dew, which is fruit∣fuller than in 
Europe,
 is saltish, which makes it oft to rot things that lie in the open Air. During the rainy Moneths, a South-East Winds blows from a cloudy Skye, much stronger than the Northern in Summer, The South-East Wind drives the Stream to the North, as the North Wind drives it to the South: And more than this, there is little to be discern'd of the Seas ebbing and flowing hereabouts: At the highest Tides the 
Brasilians
 go several Leagues from the Shore to Fish, upon Planks made of the spungy Wood call'd 
Jangada
 fastned together. The Sea, which seems to burn in the Night, is so clear in the Day, that the Fish may be seen to swim above twenty Fathom deep. A calm Ocean when the Days and Nights are of an exact length, and especially when dark Clouds appear, is a certain sign of a dreadful Storm. At Full or New-Moon the Sea rises twelve Foot, and con∣tinues either a longer or shorter time, according as it is more or less turbulent, and the Rivers fall stronger or more gently into the same.


Before most part of the Coast of 
Brasile
 lies a Stone Cliff of above twenty or thirty Paces broad, which is never cover'd with Water, though in the time of Spring-floods. In this Cliff Nature in several places hath made a Gap, through which the Ships sail near the Shore, and ride safe at an Anchor.


The whole Countrey of 
Brasile
 is divided into thirteen 
Praefectures,
 or Lord∣ships, and hath about as many Rivers, which more or less empty themselves into every one of these Countreys. The Eastern part hath several Brooks and Foun∣tains, which afford good Water both for Man and Beast. In some parts the Water is so strong, that the wild Beasts making themselves Drunk therewith, are easily taken. During the Winter Season the Rivers glide with great force, and swell on a

sudden, overflowing all the neighboring Countrey, onely the River 
San Francisco
 runs strongest and rises highest in the Summer Season, whenas in the Winter it flows low, and poures but little Water into the Ocean. The original of this Ri∣ver is as yet unknown, yet is by most believ'd to come out of a great Lake lying near the 
Peruvian
 Mountains: The 
Hollanders,
 who sail'd forty Leagues up the same, found it every where broad and deep, and scatter'd full of Isles and Rocks. The 
Portuguese
 sailing ten Leagues farther, discover'd the great Rocks 
Cocoeras,
 from which the said River falls down with great violence, and extends it self North-West. In the other 
Brasilian
 Streams, though wide at the Mouthes, which generally are not above two or three hours walking from their Fountains or Springs, no Barque is able to Row up, they being exceeding shallow, although much Rain falls into them; the reason whereof is because the barren Mountains lying be∣tween 
Brasile
 and 
Peru,
 discharge abundance of Water through the Rivers of 
Ama∣zones, Maranon, Francisco, La Plata,
 and the 
Juaeiro,
 with such force into the Ocean, that they keep their sweetness for thirty Leagues. Near the Sea side are seve∣ral Lakes and Pits which are drinkable, and others up in the Countrey that are brackish.


The Countrey differs exceedingly, for where it extends in Plains the Soil is fat and clayie, and produces all sorts of Fruit, but especially Sugar-Canes. During the rainy Seasons the Trees flourish most; after which the heat of the Sun, and fer∣tility of the Soil speedily ripen the Fruit: wherefore they Dung not their Land, but on the contrary endeavor to make it lean with Sand, that the Plants might not have too many Leaves, and wither before the Fruit can be ripened. They Sowe in the beginning of the rainy Moneths, and especially take care that the Seed lie not too deep in the Ground, because then the Sun-beams being not able to come at it, suffer it to perish in the cold Ground.


The high 
Cocoa
 and 
Palmito
-Trees, are transplanted all the year round, the Roots being onely cover'd with a little Earth, because they can endure no cold.


Several Trees here bear a cooling Fruit, as if kind Nature took care to provide against excessive heat.


All manner of Plants and Herbs brought hither from 
Angola, Portugal,
 the 
Nether∣lands,
 and the 
East-Indies,
 grow here very plentifully. But the Countrey generally would be much better, if some way could be found out to destroy the innumera∣ble company of Pismires, which though three times bigger than the 
European,
 re∣semble them very much, and cover the Paths in Woods and Fields for three or four Miles together; and raising Hillocks, make them hollow, and fill them with Corn: in the Full of the Moon they gather an incredible quantity of Grain, which they bite at each end, because it should not sprout: against the rainy Moneths they stop up their Holes,
 that the Water may not damnifie their Store. But these Animals have a mortal Enemy of the 
Tamanda,
 of which there are two sorts, the bigger call'd 
Guaca,
 the lesser 
Miri;
 the 
Guaca,
 notwithstanding it is no bigger than an or∣dinary Dog, yet it destroys Tygers, and other wild Beasts, with such a raging fury, that it never lets go what once it hath got hold of, but holds it fast so long till some∣times it dies of Hunger. The 
Guaca
 differing from the 
Miri
 onely in bigness, hath a broad Tail full of grey and black Bristles, which sticks up when he is vex'd, but when he goes to sleep, covers himself with the same. The 
Miri
 winds his long smooth Tail about the Boughs, by which hanging he searches the Holes in the Trees with his Tongue, which being thin and round, hath a Gutter in the middle, in which when it feels any Pismires, it suddenly swallows them down: If he per∣ceives them to have their Nests under Ground, then he scratches up the Earth, and

puts his Tongue in at the Holes. Both the 
Guacu
 and 
Miri
 have a thick Skin, and a broad black Streak from their Breasts on each side up half way their Bodies, and through the black runs also a white Streak. No Beast in the World is hardier than this, for though it fasts twelve days, and is afterwards flay'd alive, yet it will live several hours after.


The Lakes in 
Brasile
 are for the most part overgrown with Weeds just like a Field, yet are exceeding full of Fish and Fowl. Where the Sea runs into the Lakes, great multitudes of Crabs are seen crawling along the Ground, and the Oysters hang in Clusters on the Boughs of a Plant call'd 
Manyle
 or 
Mangues,
 which grow with their Roots either near or in the Water, in such a manner, that new Bodies still shoot from the old Roots, which prevents easie access to the chief Plant, on whose uppermost Leaves after Sun-rising sticks very white Salt, which in the Night, or in a cloudy Day turns to a brackish Dew. Moreover, those places where 
Brasile
 rises with Hills and Mountains, are likewise very fruitful, except the barren tops of some, which seem to kiss the Skyes; and though the fruitful Mountains flourish in the time of the rainy Months, yet many of the Trees which grow on them die in Summer, and their Ashes being burnt by the Inhabitants, are us'd in stead of Dung. Some Woods extend themselves three hundred Leagues in length, and are full of Trees, so tall, that an Arrow shot upwards falls short of the top of them, and a Boat may be made out of the Body, which can carry a hundred and fifty Men. On the great Boughs of these mighty Trees grow other excrescent Shrubs after the manner of Misseltoe, which proceed from the Kernels swallow'd and muted upon them by the Birds that light there. In some places also grow also Sweet-wood Trees, which afford either excellent Gums or Wood to Dye with; amongst which the chief is the 
Ibiripitanga,
 which yields the 
Brasile
 Wood, that gives Denomination of 
Brasile
 to this vast Tract of Land.
 The Tree 
Ibripitanga
 is tall and spreading, hath sad colour'd Bark full of short Thorns; the Leaves are green, and differ in form but little from the Box-Tree Leaf; the Boughs shoot forth other lesser, full of yellow and sweet-smelling Flowers, which falling off are succeeded by a flat long Cod, of a dark grey colour, full of little red Pulse; the upper part of the Tree is not good to Dye with, but onely the lower part of the Body, which because the Tree grows far up in the Countrey, is not transport∣able without much trouble. But the 
Tatai-iba
 grows in the Woods along the Shore;
 the Bark being of an Ash-colour, invests a yellow Wood; the Leaves are sharp and notch'd, the Fruit not unlike Mulberries, pale, juicy, and full of white Seed; the Wood boyl'd Dyes a pure Yellow. It is observable not onely of this Tree, but generally of the Trees of this Countrey, that they neither flourish, nor shed their Leaves all over at once, nor do several Trees of the same kind, and growing here germinate or fade together; for whilest one is fullest of Blossoms, the other is without Leaves; and whilest the same Tree sheds its Leaves on one side, the other side is newly Budded.


The 
European
 Plants and Herbs with soft Roots, being once Planted in 
Brasile,
 come to be hard and lignifi'd. There is also great difference, according to the Ground in which they are Planted; for such Plants and Trees as in the Plains are but small and tender, grow ten times higher if Planted in the Woods.


All sorts of 
Indian
 Pulse grow higher than the tallest Trees, like high Arbors, under which both Men and Beasts may shelter themselves from the Sun or Rain.


We find not upon Record or Tradition, that 
Brasile
 was ever troubled with an Earthquake, which is the reason that it hath neither Silver nor Gold-Mines, because sulphurous Fires are found under Ground, which are a cause of the production of





 Gold and Silver, so likewise they occasion Earthquakes: yet in that part of 
Brasile
 call'd 
Ceara,
 there are some Mines of Silver, out of which the 
Hollanders
 would have got greater Riches, had not they been employ'd in the Wars against the 
Portuguese.


Far up into the Countrey amongst the Mountains, inhabit 
Canibals,
 or Man-eaters. The 
Europeans
 that first travell'd that way, found the Countrey very fertile and full of People, especially in the Valleys, but somewhat incommoded by the want of Water, and the excessiveness of the Heat in the Day, and of the Cold in the Night. In some places the Countrey is so over-grown with Brambles, that they are forc'd to cut their way through the same. But there are a sort of Thistles, which having concave Leaves, receive the Dew and Rain for the accommodation of the Natives.


Besides Serpents and Dragons, the Tygers are most of all to be fear'd when hungry, but once satisfi'd are easily taken.


Dogs, Oxen, Sheep, and Horses thrive also exceedingly in most parts of 
Brasile.


The 
Brasilians
 live to be very old without being Bald or Grey: There are sel∣dom or never to be seen squint-ey'd, lame, decrepid, or any deformed People, not∣withstanding the Children are never Swath'd but thrown into cold Water as soon as born. The Men generally have a very near resemblance one with another, as also the Women, so that there is not such a difference betwixt Man and Man there, as amongst other People. There is scarce any Sickness heard of in these Parts; for besides a long Life, they enjoy the benefit of Health so long as they live. They trouble not themselves with much Business; and in one Hut, whose Covering con∣sists of Palm-Leaves, dwell several Families together.


The general Bread of the 
Brasilians
 is the stamp'd Root 
Mandihoka;
 besides which they also eat all manner of Fruit and Plants, and many times Flesh, which they either eat boyl'd, broyl'd, or stew'd; their Boyling is after this manner: First they kindle their Fire with two Sticks, the one of hard, and the other of soft Wood; the hard they make sharp at the end, and fix the same into the soft, which setting on fire they immediately lay Cotton thereupon, or else dry Leaves, and so boyl the Flesh in round Earthen Pots call'd 
Camu:
 but they account that better which is

stew'd in a Pot, the bottom whereof is cover'd with Leaves, on which they lay the Flesh, then stopping the same close on the top with Earth and Leaves, they make Fire over it so long till they think the Flesh to be sufficiently stew'd. Their Broyl∣ing they perform by fixing forked Stick into the Ground, over which they lay seve∣ral others like a Gridiron, and upon them the raw Flesh, cut in long Slices, and Pepper'd and Salted, then make a Fire under the same till it is enough; and their Meat so dress'd keeps good fourteen days. Their Fish either boyl'd or broyl'd is eaten with the Sawce 
Juquitinga.
 The little Fish 
Piaba
 and 
Piquitinga
 they make up in Rolls, and lay them under hot Ashes. Both with their Flesh and Fish they eat for Bread, as hath been said, the Meal of the Root 
Mandihoka,
 which they taking up with three Fingers throw into their Mouthes so dexterously, that not the least scrap falls besides. They never observe any set hours to eat, for they make several Meals in the Day and sometimes in the middle of the Night, if their Appetite serves, and neither drink nor speak whilest they are at their Meat. They sleep in spread Hammocks made fast between two Poles, near which burns a constant Fire with which in the Day-time they dress their Meat, and at Night keep themselves warm, the Nights being there somewhat cold, because of their equal length with the Days. Their usual Liquor is cold Water, taken out of the Fountains, Rivers, or Brooks;
 but to Carouse they make the Drink 
Caoi,
 of the Fruit of the 
Ocaiiba
-Tree, which being stamp'd in a woodden Mortar, is strain'd, and at first looks like Milk, but after a few days standing turns to a darker colour, and is strong enough to make Astronomers of those that drink largely of it, but if long kept, it turns to be excel∣lent Vinegar.


They have another Drink call'd 
Aipu,
 which is made two several ways; the first is thus: An old Toothless Woman chews the little cut Root 
Aipimacaxera
 to a a Pap call'd 
Caracu,
 which spitting in a Pot they pour Water on the same, and after∣wards boyling it leisurely, stirring it all the time it stands over the Fire. The other way of making this 
Aipu,
 which is much the more cleanly, is to boyl the said Root so long, till it comes to be like Butter-milk, and then letting it stand till it hath done working, it will be no unpleasant Drink.


Another sort of Drink amongst them is their 
Pacobi,
 made of the Fruit of the Tree 
Pacobebe
 and 
Pacobucu;
 besides others made of the Tree 
Abatu,
 of 
Indian
 Bar∣ley and 
Maiz.
 Also their Liquor call'd 
Jetici
 is press'd out of 
Potato
-Roots.


In like manner the Plant 
Nana,
 by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Ananas,
 makes the Drink 
Nanai,
 which is exceeding strong and heady, but good against Faintness, Vomit∣ing, Gravel, and stoppage of Urine, as also against Poyson.


The 
Tapuiyans,
 sur-named 
Cariri,
 meet at a certain time to make the Liquor 
Aipu,
 whereof each takes as much to his Hut as falls to his share, and when it hath done working, they begin in the Morning very early at the first House in the Vil∣lage, and drink out every drop which they find there, and so from House to House till they have drunk one another drie; and he is look'd upon to be the best Man that hath drunk and evacuated most.


The 
Brasilians
 take generally very strong Tobacco, which they first drie in the Sun, and afterwards before the Fire, the better to rub it in pieces: Their Tobacco-pipe is a Cane and a hollow Nut cut off at the top, and a round Hole bor'd in the middle, into which they put the Cane. They forbear not to take Tobacco even in the midst of their religious Ceremonies, which are perform'd with Singing and Dancing in this manner:


The 
Tapuaiyans
 making a round Ring at an equal distance one from another, all of them being stark naked, tie divers colour'd Plumes of Feathers on their back-sides





 with a String made fast on their left Shoulders and about their Wastes; about their Legs they have Cotton Garters; each in his turn bowing to the Left, stretches down his left Hand to the Ground, and puts his right Hand in between the Strings which tie the Plume of Feathers, and stamps continually with his right Foot, whilest all the rest begin to Sing a doleful Song, which by degrees they change into a merry one, not without some appearance of understanding the Art of Musick. Their Songs contain first a mournful Relation of a general Deluge, which drowned their Predecessors, all but some few, who escap'd by climbing up high Trees and Mountains; next the Acts of those old Heroes from whom they boast themselves Extracted, who lost their Lives, or valiantly fought for the publick good, and were rewarded with the enjoyment of all pleasures and Delights, of Sing∣ing, Playing, Dancing, and the like, in a remote Countrey, whither after their Deaths they hope to be translated: Whilest they thus Sing over all their Songs, three Priests stand in the middle of the Ring, each holding the Idol 
Maraka
 (in their left Hand) resembling an old Ostritch's Egg stuck full of Feathers on the top: about their Wastes they wear a Girdle of rich Plumes, on their Heads also a Crown of Feathers; the middle Priest looks with a stern Countenance, and holds up his left Leg from the Ground, whilest the other two standing on each side of him, hold in their right Hands a Pipe, out of which blowing Tobacco-smoak in one anothers Faces, they utter these words, 
Receive the Spirit of heroick Strength:
 The Dance ended, they Entertain their Priests with Meat and Drink eight days together, and also put Meat before their Idol 
Maraka,
 who is the chief Deity they adore.


Their Arms consist of Bowes made of hard Wood, Strung with twisted Cotton Thred; their Arrows they make of the Cane 
Tacaara,
 made very sharp at the end, or headed with some Beasts sharp Tooth, or pointed with the Bones of the Fish 
Iperu.
 Some of the 
Tapuiyans
 use great Darts, and long Clubs of black Wood, broad before, and full of sharp Spikes; the Handles being wound about with Cotton Strings call'd 
Jatirana,
 under which hangs a Tuft of the Bird 
Arara's
 Feathers, as also about the middle. Their Trumpets, call'd 
Canguenca,
 are the Shin-bones of Men, though

they have others also made of great Shells and Canes. They us'd to be continually at War one with another, which they wag'd neither for Lands nor Riches, but either to make themselves eminent, and to be accounted valiant Soldiers, or most especi∣ally for the sake of Man's-flesh to feed upon, which they love beyond all things in the World, wherefore they fatten all their Prisoners for the slaughter. Their Battels are always cruel, for they fight very desperately. 
Emanuel de Moraes
 relates, That he saw a 
Brasilian
 fight with three Armed 
Portugueses,
 who slew him not till after he had wounded them all three.


The Languages of the 
Brasilians
 are several, each Countrey speaking a peculiar Tongue, but so different that they cannot understand one another. The 
Tabuyans
 are divided into above eighty. Tribes, each speaking a peculiar Language, which have no resemblance one with another; nevertheless they have a general Lan∣guage which is understood by most of them. The Jesuit 
Joseph Anchieta
 publishing a 
Brasilian
 Dictionary in 
Conimbrica, Anno
 1595. shewed that the fore-mention'd Language wants the Letters 
f, l, s, z, r,
 and hath no double Consonants in any word, except 
mb, nd, ng,
 so that the sound of the word falls generally on the last Vowel. The fore-mention'd 
Moraes
 well experienc'd in the 
Brasilian
 Tongue, writ an Alphabet of all the most familiar words thereof us'd in common Discourse, of which it will not be unnecessary to give this following Extract:




A.


ABa,
 a Man, 
also
 Hair.


Acu,
 the Left-hand.


Acuabeimae,
 Sweet.


Amaberaba,
 Lightning.


Amacuminga,
 Thunder.


Amandiba,
 Hail.


Anama,
 a near Relation.


Anga,
 the Soul.


Angabara,
 Lean.


Angaipata,
 Angry, 
or
 Wic∣ked.


Angaturama,
 Thankful, 
or
 Acceptable.


Apara,
 a Crown.


Apecum,
 the Tongue.


Apicaba,
 a Stool.


Ara,
 the Time, Skye, 
or
 Day.


Ara-ibi coquime,
 Noon.


Araya,
 Grandmother.


Atapuana,
 Light.


Atapuatia,
 Swift.


Atucupe,
 the Back.


Atyba,
 the Shoulder.


Ay cig,
 a Mother.


Ayura,
 the Neck.






B.


Boya,
 a Slave.






C.


Cama,
 a Sucking-Breast.


Canga,
 a Leg.


Caraibebe, apiabebe,
 an An∣gle.


Caruca,
 the Evening.


Capii,
 Grass.


Capii goacu,
 Straw.


Catu,
 Dainty.


Cay,
 an Ape.


Ceba,
 a Loaf.


Cibera,
 the Buttocks.


Cemiracoaobae,
 a Widower.


Ceo,
 a Breast.


Ceteeimibae,
 a Ghost.


Cig cygra,
 an Aunt.


Coaraci,
 a Son.


Cobra,
 a Serpent.


Coemitanga,
 the Dawn.


Coriba,
 Rejoyce.


Coya,
 Twins.


Cunha,
 a Wife.


Cunhaiba,
 a Bride.


Cunumigoacu,
 a Youth.


Cunumi,
 a Boy.






E.


Ecatuaba,
 the right Hand.


Eyruba,
 a Bee.






G.


Giba,
 an Arm.


Guaibino,
 an old Woman.


Guirarupia,
 an Egg.






I.


Jaci,
 the Moon, 
or
 Month.


Jacitata,
 a Star.


Iba,
 a Tree.


Ibiaia,
 the Heavens.


Ibatinga
 and 
Ibitinga,
 a Witch.


Ibateba,
 High.


Ibi,
 the Earth.


Ibitira,
 a Mountain.


Ibitu,
 the Wind.


Icapi,
 the Dew.


Ig,
 Water.


Iguaba,
 a Cap.


Ipeca,
 a Goose.


Igue,
 the Side.


Ita,
 Iron, 
or
 a Stone.


Itacira,
 a Spade.


Itapigua,
 a Nail.


Juba,
 Yellow.






M.


Maupiara,
 the Gall.


Mbabeaubora,
 Sick.


Mbiu,
 Meat.


Mbo,
 a Hand.


Membeca,
 Softly.


Menearaa,
 a Wedding.


Micu,
 a Toe.




Mita,
 the Heel.


Mocu,
 an Eel.


Mormotara,
 Angry.


Muapendaba,
 a Joint.






N.


Nbia,
 the Heart.






O.


Opacatumha,
 the World.






P.


Potia,
 the Breast.


Paranga,
 Fair.


Porerobiara,
 Faithful.


Porucuicobora,
 Poor.


Potivi,
 a Duck.


Poxi,
 Ugly.


Pi,
 a Foot.


Pia,
 the Liver.


Pira,
 Fish, 
or
 a Skin.


Piquiira,
 Younger in years.


Pitanga,
 a Child.


Pua,
 a Finger.


Pua-guacu,
 a Thumb.


Purva,
 the Navel.


Puou,
 Long.


Putuma,
 the Night.






R.


Roig,
 Cold.






T.


Tagica,
 a Vein.


Tagui,
 Blood.


Tagira,
 or 
Membira,
 a Daughter. The first of these words is us'd by the Fathers, and the other by the Mothers.


Taira,
 Children, 
or
 a Son.


Tamua,
 a Grandfather.


Tata,
 Fire.


Tecoacu,
 Luck.


Tecoateima,
 Covetousness.


Temerico,
 Man 
or
 Woman.


Tendiba,
 a Chin.


Tendi,
 Spittle.


Tendipia,
 a Knee.


Tecobecatu,
 Wholsom.


Tema,
 a Shin-bone.


Tete,
 a Body.


Tiaya,
 Sweet.


Tibira,
 Younger: for so the Brothers call one another, but the Sisters name their younger Brothers 
Quibira,
 and Brothers their younger Sisters 
Teindira.


Tigue,
 the Belly.


Tique perg,
 the Guts.


Tinga,
 White.


Tipiba,
 Melancholly.


Tiquera,
 eldest Sister.


Tiquiera,
 eldest Brother.


Tuba,
 Parents.


Tutira,
 Father's Brother.


Tubei-ima,
 an Hospital Boy.


Tuibaem,
 an old Man.


Tupana,
 God.


Ty,
 Piss.


Tyuris,
 the Bladder.






U.


Uba,
 the Hip.


Unhapuapem,
 a Nail.






Y.


Yja,
 a Fountain.


Ymeneoba,
 a Widow.


Yyaobuamba,
 Naked.




The Words for Action, are these following:




A.


ABi,
 Erring.


Abiqui,
 Coming.


Acanhem,
 I die.


Acoy,
 Covering.


Aei,
 Missing.


Ami,
 Squeezing.


Amotareima,
 Hating.


Anduba,
 Opinion.


Anguipaba,
 Sinning.


Abba mandeba,
 To put on.


Apina,
 Shaving.


Apition,
 Binding.


Aroca,
 a Lesson.


Ayaima,
 Feigning.






B.


Beraba,
 Shining.






C


Coanga,
 Measuring, Pro∣ving, 
or
 Speaking.


Cacaba,
 Passing by.


Cae,
 Curing.


Capucaya,
 Calling, 
or
 To be vex'd.


Carom,
 Hoping.


Caruca,
 Pissing.


Cauccuba,
 Loving.


Cecaraya,
 Forgetting.


Cema,
 Going out.


Cenduba,
 Hearing.


Cenoya,
 Naming.


Cepiaca,
 Seeing, Punish∣ment.


Cerura,
 Carrying.


Cetuna,
 Smelling.


Ceyara,
 Relating.


Cica,
 Ploughing.


Cipya,
 Making wet.


Ciquye,
 Fearing.


Co,
 Going.


Cobaitim,
 Meeting.


Coquendaboya,
 Opening.


Cuaba,
 Knowing.


Cupira,
 Performing.


Cuu,
 Defending.






E.


Ecatu,
 To be able.






G.


Genonheca,
 Praying.


Goameenga,
 Biting.


Guapua,
 Sitting.


Guata,
 Walking.


Gueena,
 Vomiting.






I.


Jababa,
 To run away.


Jecoacuba,
 To remember.


Jenumuna,
 Spitting.


Jerure,
 Demanding.


Igtaba,
 Swimming.


Igu,
 Drinking.






M.


Maenduara,
 Thinking.


Mano,
 Dying.


Maramonhanga,
 Warring.


Mayaoca,
 Dividing.


Mba-eraca,
 Buying.




Mubacu,
 Eating.


Meenga,
 Delivering.


Menbirara,
 Barring.


Moaibaba,
 Bewitching, 
or
 Preventing.


Mongueba,
 Putting out.


Moanga,
 Thinking.


Moaquima,
 Making wet.


Mobibua,
 Sowing.


Moete,
 Praising, 
or
 Ho∣noring.


Moendi,
 Setting on fire.


Mogiba,
 Boyling.


Mogyco,
 Polishing.


Momiya,
 Moving.


Momita,
 Lodging.


Monberaba,
 Bruising.


Monbeu,
 Delivering of a Message.


Monbuca,
 To bore through.


Monbuja,
 Boring.


Mondoca,
 To cut, take a∣way, or cleave asun∣der.


Mondoroca,
 Breaking.


Monguy,
 Grinding.


Monguya,
 Making loose.


Monhanga,
 Doing.


Moperua,
 Being cold.


Mopotaya,
 Buttoning.


Moriba,
 Consenting.


Moropiana,
 Changing.


Moeyeceara,
 Mixing.






N.


Nheangeru,
 Sighing.


Nheenga,
 Speaking.


Nhemboe,
 Learning.


Nhengara,
 Singing.






P.


Paepua,
 Answering.


Paraboca,
 Chusing.


Paronduba,
 Enquiring.


Pea,
 Abstaining.


Pitu,
 Remaining.


Pitanga rempi,
 To cast off.


Pitera,
 Kissing.


Pitibo,
 Helping.


Aittiba,
 Anointing.


Poacema,
 Mourning.


Pobana,
 Spinning.


Pocuaba,
 To use.


Pocaucuba,
 Dreaming.


Porabiqui,
 Working.


Potara,
 Lying.


Potareima,
 Refusing.


Potara,
 Desiring.


Puama,
 Rising.


Puaya,
 Commanding.


Puca,
 Laughing.


Pura,
 Using.






Q.


Quera,
 Sleeping.


Querara,
 Waking.






R.


Raba,
 Untying.


Qereco,
 Having.


Rura,
 Coming.






T.


Tara,
 Catching.


Tecobe,
 Living.


Tiguioca,
 Bleeding.


Tiu,
 Disgracing.


Tima,
 Ploughing, War∣ring, 
or
 Burying.






Y.


Yaceo,
 Crying.


Yeaoboca,
 Pulling off.


Yeupira,
 Climbing.


Yuca,
 Killing.




These are of the most usual words of the general Language in 
Brasile,
 besides which every distinct Tribe or Division of People hath its peculiar Tongue, as hath been said, of which the chiefest and most eminent are the 
Tupinambu, Tabaiaras, Potigi-iguaras, Marhuites, Waimoores, Tomonimenos, Waitaquazes, Wainasses, Topinaques, Po∣ries, Molopaques, Motaias, Biheros, Wainawasons, Tamoies, Tocomans,
 and the 
Cariogs;
 of all which the 
Tupinambu
 are the most comely, especially their Women, which (ac∣cording to the testimony of the aforesaid 
Emanuel Moraes,
 an Eye-witness) may stand in competition with the 
European
 Beauties. These Women accompany their Hus∣bands when they go into the Wars, and carry their Provisions, especially store of Tobacco. In the Lips both of the Men and Women hang little Stones. The Men take as many Wives as they please; and amongst the generality of the fore-men∣tion'd Nations, there is scarce any sign of Religion to be discern'd.


The 
Tobaras
 arc accounted the best Horsemen; but in Singing and Discourse, the 
Potigi-iguaras
 exceed all the other 
Brasilians:
 They place twenty or thirty Singers in a Row, which observing Time, Sing the Transactions of their Prede∣cessors with good Voices.


The 
Waimoores
 are a strong People that inhabit the large Tract of Land between 
Bahia
 and 
Isleos,
 and having well timber'd Bodies, can keep pace with a Horse run∣ning full speed. Five or six of them often set upon a Sugar-Mill, though a hun∣dred Men be at work in the same: They are all over bedaub'd with Dirt, because they lie like Beasts on the Ground: They wear long Hair, and have no certain Abodes.




The 
Tomonimenos,
 living about 
Spirito Santo,
 are more civilis'd; they make Walls of Stone about their Huts; and these Walls are full of Holes, through which they shoot Arrows at those that Invade them; their Bodies are Painted red and black, and cover'd with Feathers. The 
Portuguese
 taking sixteen thousand of them Priso∣ners at once, kill'd most of them, and destroy'd the Countrey all along the River 
Paraiva.


At the South and North Point of 
Cape Frio
 dwell the 
Waitaquazes,
 bigger and stronger than the 
Waimoores;
 and they also sleep like Hogs on the Ground about a Fire, hold all People for their Enemies, and their Flesh for the greatest Dainty. The Women Arm'd with Bowes and Arrows stand by their Husbands in Battel.


On 
Isla Grande
 reside the 
Wainasses,
 a little People, which have very long Bellies, go stark naked, shave the Crown of their Heads, and let the other part of their Hair hang down long on their Shoulders. The Women, which are of gross Bo∣dies, colour themselves Red with 
Vruca,
 which is a wild Plant, but much us'd a∣mongst them: the Kernels are inclos'd in Husks full of red Fibres. These Kernels are not onely mix'd with the other Ingredients of the 
Chocaletta
 Drink, but also us'd to Dye of a red Colour: The Wood of this Plant is very white, and the Bark grey, like the Hazle; the Leaves being of a deep Green, resemble a Heart; at the end of the Boughs grow several Blossoms, each as big as a Rose, consisting of five Leaves, parly red and partly white, in the middle whereof are yellowish Threds with pur∣ple Points, which give little or no smell: after the Flower follows the Fruit, two Fingers long; when it begins to be ripe it grows still redder and redder, each Cod containing thirty or forty round Kernels, which being touch'd leave a red tincture upon the Fingers; the Cod when ripe opens of it self, and shews the Kernels speckled white, which dry'd, pounded, and mix'd with Piss, Dye so strong a Red, that Linnen dipt into the same will never receive any other Colour. This Root also boyl'd in Broth, makes it not onely red, but gives it a pleasant taste.


The 
Topinaques,
 which dwell about 
St. Vincent,
 are a strong and gross People, go stark naked both Men and Women: when they kill any of their Enemies they Paint themselves with the Fruit 
Janipano,
 put a great Plume of Feathers on their Head, and two Sticks in their Mouths, Dancing with strange motions of the Body, inclining sometimes towards the right, and sometimes towards the left side, for three day together; during which time they drink a filthy kind of Liquor. The Women, who have well proportion'd Bodies, onely covering their Heads with a Cap, about which they tie a bread of Hair, to which a square Basket being fastned, hangs below their Backs when they travel.


The Mountains along the Ocean, which inclose much Gold, are inhabited by the 
Pories,
 a peaceable People, molesting none of their Neighbors; they sleep in Nets of Flags, and have no other Houses than three Poles plac'd triangular, and cover'd with Palm-Leaves; they feed on Pine-Nuts and 
Eyrires,
 Apples that have Shells like a Walnut, and have also the precious Balsam-Oyl in great abundance.


Along the River 
Paradiva
 inhabit the 
Molopaques;
 the Men strong and well timber'd, have Beards long enough to cover their Privities. The Women also fair, modest, prudent, and never laughing, tie their Hair, painted with several colours, round about their Middle with a Cord, so that it serves in stead of an Apron. They observe a set-hour for Dinner and Supper, which is not us'd by any other 
Brasili∣ans.
 The Mountains in these Parts consisting of a black Mold, have plenty of Gold, but it is of no esteem or regard amongst them, onely that which is wash'd down by the Rain they gather up, but put to no other use than to make Hooks to hang their Nets on.








The 
Motayas,
 being of a low Stature and brown Complexion, shave off the Hair of their Heads, or else pluck it up by the Roots; they are eaters of Man's-flesh.


Not far from whose Dominions appear the Mountains 
Pinos
 up in the Coun∣trey, which abounding with Gold and Precious Stones, are inhabited by the 
Bihe∣ros,
 otherwise call'd 
Lopos,
 which live under the Trees like Beasts.


The 
Waianawasons
 have little Villages, built along a nameless River; they are a Gigantick People, but very ignorant. Thirteen 
Portuguese
 undertaking some years ago to travel through this Countrey to the South Sea, found on some Mountains abundance of Gold and Precious Stones; and amongst many strange things they saw a Crystal Mountain ten days before they came near it, over which they could not travel because of its steepness; at the foot thereof sprung a broad Stream, ma∣king a great noise. From thence travelling forward,
 they came to the 
Tamoyes
 Countrey, the Men whereof, being well proportion'd, wore great Bunches of Fea∣thers on their Heads: The Women, exceeding fair, had carv'd Breasts. The said 
Portuguese
 being taken here, were put into Prison, and all slain and eaten, excepting one, who escap'd after this manner: Thirty thousand 
Tamoyes
 falling into the Countrey of the 
Amazons,
 by the 
Americans
 call'd 
Mandiocuysyams,
 made a great Feast with three hundred of them, whilest the rest fled to the River 
La Plata,
 where they got help from the 
Portuguese,
 who kill'd ten thousand of the 
Tamoyes,
 made the rest Slaves, and releas'd their imprison'd Countreyman.


The 
Tocomans,
 a little People, dwell between 
La Plata
 and 
St. Vincent.


The 
Caryogs
 possess much Gold and Precious Stones.


The 
Maraquites,
 by the Western 
Indians
 sur-named 
Tapuiyers,
 that is, 
Wild People
 are divided into seventy six sorts, all differing in their Languages; amongst which the chiefest are the 
Arodera, Cajau, Maquaru,
 and 
Poyme,
 which all live without Law, Religion, setled Abodes, or Friendship with any Neighbors; and the Women Fight as well as the Men. 
Jacob Rabbi,
 who dwelt a considerable time, and con∣vers'd amongst these People, describes their Customs thus:


Their King 
Jandui,
 sir-named 
Otshicayayna,
 from the River which flows through

the Countrey of the 
Tapuyans,
 causes (if he thinks fit) to be publish'd through the the whole Camp of the Enemy, whither he will go the next Morning, and what he will do ill the Day following, having first consulted with his Council of Sorcerers. Before they march they wash their Bodies in the River; rub them∣selves all over with Sand, and afterwards wash it off again, then stretch them∣selves till all their Joynts crack, run to the Fire, and when throughly warm, scratch their Bodies with certain Fish-Teeth, insomuch that the Blood gushes out of several places, all which they judge to be good against wearisomness. About a Stones-cast from the King's Tent lie two thick Logs, a large Stride one from the other, against which the whole Multitude stand divided into two Par∣ties, each of whom chuse the strongest Man accounted amongst them to carry the Log for a Wager, and when these two are tir'd, they are releas'd by others, and he that comes last to the appointed place with the Log, is laugh'd at by the Party to which he belong'd that was there first, where they all stay for the Youths that bring their Arms, which when they have deliver'd, they all fall to work, cutting down Trees, breaking off the Boughs, sticking them in the Ground, and tying them together on the top for Tents, which are built in rows one against another, leaving a broad Path between. Mean while the Women and Children coming with their Baggage, the Men run to Fish and Hunt, or to seek Honey. The old Women dig up Roots, which stamp'd serve them for Bread, whilest the young Women help one another to prepare the Meat in the Huts. Moreover the Men spend their time in several Exercises, as Wrestling and Running, of which two Women, appointed for that purpose, are the Judges. When the Evening draws on upon them, then the Youths dividing themselves into Companies, go Singing from one Tent to another, and are follow'd by the Maids Dancing and Leaping, every one standing behind him whom she loves best; and this is look'd upon as a singular sign of affection. When a young Man is inclin'd to Marry, he carries Honey and Venison to his Mistresses Father, who if he hath more than one Daughter acquaints the Soothsayers with it, who inform the King concern∣ing it; he then causes all the young Men and Maids to be call'd together out of the Camp, sends them into the Woods to Hunt out a wild Beast, which they no sooner see, but they return and acquaint the Multitude therewith, who immedi∣ately surrounding the Place, soon catch the Beast, whose Entrails they pull out and throw to the Dogs; and give the Flesh to the Women to roast, which when ready they make merry with, Singing and Dancing after they have eaten; then if the Youth hath behav'd himself well in pursuing of the wild Beast, the King grants him the Maid which he desires for his Wife: Four days before the Wedding they bore a Hole through each of the Bridegrooms Cheeks with a sharp piece of Wood, which done they solemnize the Marriage; at which the King himself distributes the Meat to every Guest as he thinks fit; after Din∣ner they extol the Mothers Care, in preserving her Daughters Virginity for the Bridegroom in strange Songs. If a Maid be Marriageable, and no Suitor comes to her, then the Mother draws red Strokes under her Eyes, and conducts her to the King, who sets the Maid down by him on a Mat, warms his Hands against the Fire, then stroaks himself and the Maid, and also blows Tobacco-Smoak on her and himself, which done, he performs the part of a Husband with her. But their making Holes through their Ears and Lips is done whilest they are Chil∣dren, after this manner: The Boys who undergo this Ceremony, come to the Place appointed, where the whole Multitude Dance and Sing, and the Conju∣rers (who are the onely Priests they have) sit in two rows opposite to one ano∣ther;

one of them starting up, takes a Boy by the Head, ties him Hand and Foot that he cannot stir at all; which done, a second Sorcerer comes to his assistance, and with a sharp-pointed Stick bores Holes through his Ears and Lips, whilest the Mother of the Boy makes a sad Lamentation. Women refuse to have any familiarity with their Husbands as soon as they perceive themselves to be with Child; and as soon as any Woman is Deliver'd, she runs into a neighboring Wood, where with a Shell she cuts off the Childs Navel, which boyling she eats with the After-birth; then washes her self and the Child every Morning and Evening in cold Water; as long as she gives Suck her Husband lies not with her, unless it be a Man that hath but one Wife. If a Woman commit Adultery, her Husband beats her out of his House, but if he takes her in the Act, it is law∣ful for him to kill both. In the middle of the King's Tent stands a great 
Calabash
 full of Stones call'd 
Kehnturah,
 cover'd with the corner of a Mat, which none dares approach without the King's leave, unless it be to smoak the same with Tobacco, or to lay Venison or Honey before it.


It is also remarkable how the Sorcerers deal with their Sick; the aforesaid 
Jacob Rabbi,
 an Eye-witness relates, That the King 
Drarugh
 being extreamly troubled with pains in his Sides and Legs, and finding no help amongst his Sorcerers, who pretended to be Physicians, went to the neighboring King of the 
Tapuyans,
 where three undertook to cure him, which they did after this manner: One of them blew To∣bacco-smoak on his Body, suck'd his Knees, roar'd like a Lyon, and after much ado vomited a little Eel into his Hand, which he pretended had put the King to so much pain; whilest the second suck'd his Belly, and also roar'd exceedingly, and vomited forth at last a Stone, on which appear'd a Rose; the third suck'd his left Side, till he vomited something like a Root; after which the King is said imme∣diately to have recover'd.


There is but little Ceremony of Religion to be found amongst the 
Tapuyans,
 onely they shew Reverence to the Seven-stars when the Fruits of the Field are ripe, after this manner: First they spend three days in Dancing and Singing, then the Youths prepare themselves to Fight with Lances and Clubs, tie tough Twigs about their Legs, pour Honey on their Heads, tie their Hair behind in Knots after it is pow∣der'd with red Powder, Paint their Faces and Bodies with several Colours, stick a long Feather in their Necks betwixt their Hair, and on their Heads set Garlands of red Feathers pleited, down their Backs hang Bundles of Branches like Tails, and have their Arms adorn'd with the Wings of the Bird 
Kosetug;
 thus dress'd they fight three days, at the end whereof the Conquerors shew great joy.


It deserves special observation what the Learned 
Gerard Vossius
 relates of them from the Mouth of 
Christopher Arcisseusky,
 a 
Polish
 Nobleman, famous for his hetoick Exploits for the 
United Netherlands
 in 
Brasile.


The 
Tapuyans
 (saith he) are a People that range up and down, never staying long in one place, between 
Siara
 and 
Meranthon,
 a vast Tract of Land, and go al∣most naked, having onely a slight Covering about their Middle. When the 
Hol∣landers
 gave them Clothes, they admir'd the strange Fashion thereof, and after two days return'd them again: In their Lips, Nostrils, Ears and Cheeks they hung Ornamentals of Wood, Bones, Feathers, or Stones; a great Club, and a strong Bowe made of hard Wood serve them for Arms; Gold and Silver they esteem'd not, wherefore they barter'd whole Chests full (buried there by the 
Por∣tuguese
 and discover'd by them) with the 
Hollanders
 for Greyhounds: They judge themselves to be better than other Man-eaters, because they eat not the Flesh of their Enemies, but of their own Relations, and those neither kill'd in the Wars,





 nor dying a natural Death; by which they pretend to express their exceeding love to the Deceased, who else would, say they, be eaten by the Worms and rot, wherefore they rather chuse to eat them, that they may receive the nourishment themselves.


The same Author relates also, That he saw a 
Tapuyan
 yield up the Ghost not far from the Castle 
Rio Grande,
 after which his nearest Relations taking the Body, wash'd the same, together with the Entrails, and cutting the Corps into several pieces, roasted the same on a Spit, preserving the Fat that dropt from it in Pans, and eat the Flesh with a greedy Appetite. None were admitted to this Feast but his chief Relations; and that which they could not eat, as the Hair, Teeth, Nails, and Bones, they burnt to Ashes, which gathering up they mix'd with their Liquor till it was all drunk up.


The 
Tapuyans
 acknowledge two Deities, the one good and the other bad; to the good they shew no Reverence, because, say they, he is bountiful of himself, and doth them no hurt; whereas on the contrary they zealously call upon their Devil-Deity, because they think he destroys all those who worship him not.


They never Travel nor go to War before they have consulted with their angry God, and that not without great Ceremonies; whereupon they ascribe to them∣selves the knowledge of future things; and indeed they often foretel future things which are beyond humane apprehension; as a testimony whereof that may serve which 
Sapo Amama,
 a 
Friezland
 Gentleman, found by experience: for he keeping Guard before 
Conjahu
 with a Troop of Horse against the 
Portuguese,
 had several 
Ta∣puyans
 in his Service, who foretold, That the following day the Lieutenant 
Amama
 and a Trooper should be kill'd by a Shot from a great Gun; which, though slighted, was confirm'd by the exact fulfilling of the Prediction. The like Passages hapned daily, and amongst many 
Arcisseusky
 relates one very remarkable Accident, 
viz.
 He remov'd a considerable number of Men out of the Garrison 
Rio Grande,
 to sur∣prize the 
Spanish
 Fort 
Barra-Canium,
 and nothing could more promote the Design than secrecy; but fifty 
Tapuyans
 having joyn'd with the 
Hollanders, Arcisseusky
 fear'd

they might discover his Plot, wherefore he charg'd them that they should not stir a foot from his Company, which they accordingly promis'd, and having march'd three days through By-ways, they daily perform'd their Devotion in open view, and 
Arcisseusky
 desir'd that they would call him when their Devil appear'd, which they granted, on promise that he should not do him any hurt: On the third day the Army being sufficiently refresh'd, he being call'd, found the 
Tapuyans
 sitting in a Semi-Circle, with their Feet spread asunder; opposite to them sat their Priest on the Ground, whom they ask'd concerning all manner of Affairs, and he questi∣on'd them again, on which they gave their several Answers, but could not be un∣derstood for want of Interpreters; for those whom the 
Hollanders
 us'd spake only two Languages, one of which is us'd commonly by the 
Brasilians
 along the Sea-Coast, and the other by the 
Portuguese,
 in which they Interpreted to the 
Hollanders
 as much as possibly they could understand of what the 
Tapuyans
 said, whose Language dif∣fers very much from the vulgar 
Brasile
 Tongue, because they live up in the Inland, and are divided into divers Tribes, so that the Interpreters could not understand the 
Tapuyans,
 but judg'd their meaning more by nodding of the Head, and the like signs: after the Assembly had done speaking, the Priest rose up and went out of their sights into the Wood, where with a loud voice he call'd three times upon the Devil; but he not answering, the Priest return'd to his Company, who began their Questions and Answers afresh, which could not be understood by the Inter∣preters; and soon after the Priest (seeming to be commanded by the rest) went again to the Wood, but calling still in vain, return'd; then going a third time, and calling as before, was by a small, but shrill Voice, answer'd from the middle of the Wood, from which the 
Tapuyans
 concluded that their Business would come to perfection, and that the Devil would soon appear to them: The Priest hereupon going backwards and forwards three times one after another to his Company, they began to talk as before; at last going into the Wood again, they all spoke louder, and with more vehemency than before, whilest the fore-mention'd shrill Voice approached nearer and nearer, and at last the supposed 
Daemon
 came forth with the Priest, who commanded him to sit opposite to the Congregation, which had a great deal of Discourse, and sometimes the Priest speaking was answer'd by the Devil in his shrill Voice; but some of the People calling aloud, catch'd up their Arms, and threatned to beat the Devil, as they often us'd to do upon the like occasions. At the departure of the 
Daemon,
 the Multitude conducted by the Priest into the Wood, cry'd out in so terrible a manner, that they affrighted the 
Hollan∣ders,
 who judg'd it rather to be Lyons and Tygers that roar'd than Men. During these Transactions, a 
German
 Soldier in the Rere quitted his Arms and fled, but being miss'd was pursu'd, found in a Hedge, and laid Hold on as a Person suspected to carry Advice to the 
Spaniards,
 and being brought before 
Arcisseusky
 and Exami∣ned, gave such ridiculous Answers as increas'd the suspicion, insomuch that he was led to a Tree to be tortur'd; where as he stood ty'd he solemnly declar'd, That the reason of his running away, was because he had not Pray'd in ten years, so that he was exceedingly afraid, lest when he saw the Devil amongst the 
Tapuyans,
 he would have known him, and carry'd him away to the Place prepar'd for all such Wretches.


The Learned 
Gerard Vossius
 made a particular Enquiry after this Story, whether the Spirit's appearance were a Reality, or an Imposture; and the truth is it was no better than a subtile Cheat, and so it was apprehended by 
Arcisseusky,
 who not long after, on a convenient time, ask'd the 
Tapuyans
 why they feign'd him to be a Devil that was a Man, whom he had often seen before? which they denying, affirm'd

that it was a real Devil; but 
Arcisseusky
 knew their pretended Friend, who spake so shrill by reason of a Grass-blade which he held in his Mouth. However, though the main of the Fable was acted by Man, yet the Devil without doubt play'd his part with them, as appear'd by those Predictions, which no Man could possibly know, 
viz.
 That the 
Portuguese
 Fort should with the loss but of three Men fall in∣to the 
Hollanders
 hands; for so accordingly it hapned. But because the Devil can∣not foresee all things, therefore they often erre: for they said that the 
Hollanders
 should cross the Moat on Boards nail'd together in stead of a Bridge, and that the Enemy should not perceive it; and indeed 
Arcisseusky
 had resolv'd so to do, but was discover'd by the 
Portuguese,
 who defended themselves with great Guns, which so affrighted the 
Tapuyans,
 not us'd to such a noise, that they ran away and never returned, so that by Morning the Fort was conquer'd, and all things quieted.


After this 
Arcisseusky
 burnt several 
Portuguese
 Ships in the River 
Monguoape,
 and kept one, carrying ten Demi-Cuiverins, laden with Sugar and 
Spanish
 Wine; which to carry to a safe Harbor a short Way, he requir'd the 
Tapuyans
 assistance; but they refus'd to enter, pretending the Ship would perish by some or other unfortu∣nate Accident, which accordingly hapned as they had said; for the Ship was split against a Rock in the Mouth of a narrow Haven, insomuch that nothing of it was sav'd; all which the 
Tapuyans
 knew beforehand by the Devil's information, for they never go upon any Business of consequence before they have consulted with him, and done him worship. Yet, it seems, they cannot secure this Devil of theirs from the Stripes of a Mortal,
 as appears by this pleasant Story: A 
Tapuyan
 Priest was promis'd a Shirt from 
Arcisseusky,
 upon condition the Devil should pull the same out of his Hand and carry it up in the Air: The 
Tapuyan
 liking the Proposal, promis'd immediately to call the Devil; but when 
Arcisseusky
 desir'd leave to Drub him with a Stick which he had in his Hand, he could by no means perswade the Priest to call for his 
Daemon;
 at which every one began to laugh: and to carry on the Mirth farther, 
Arcisseusky
 Joking with the Priest, said, 
I will shew you that I am a greater Artist than you, for to Morrow I will bring it about by my Art, that great Horns shall grow on your Head, so big, that you shall not be able to pass these Doors;
 which so af∣frighted the 
Tapuyans,
 that all of them fled, onely the Priest return'd the next day with an Interpreter to 
Arcisseusky,
 desiring him that he would use him mercifully, and not cause any Horns to grow on his Head.


At the time when 
Jacob Rabbi
 convers'd amongst the 
Tapuyans,
 they were Go∣vern'd by 
Janduy,
 a Man of above a hundred years old, whose chief Seat was on each side of the River 
Otschunogh,
 and round about the Lake 
Igtug,
 in which none durst Swim, because of the many biting Fishes in the same.


The King 
Pritigaba
 having entred into a strict League with 
Janduy,
 Warr'd con∣tinually against the Kings 
Arygpoygh, Wanasewasug, Tshering,
 and 
Dremenige;
 and had not the 
Portuguese
 taken the four last into their Service to aid them against the 
Hol∣landers,
 they could never have held out long against the Forces sent by 
Janduy,
 who destroy'd Man, Beast, and Houses, sparing nothing they met with; for they murther and destroy all things where e're they come.


The several Nations that now possess 
Brasile,
 besides its native Inhabitants, are 
Portuguese, English, Hollanders, Germans,
 and 
French,
 which the 
Brasilians
 by a general Name call 
Ajuru-juba;
 otherwise they call all Strangers 
Caraiba
 or 
Pero.
 But from the commixing of several Nations proceeds a fifth sort, for one that is born of 
Eu∣ropean
 Parents in 
Brasile
 is call'd 
Mozombo;
 of an 
European
 Father and 
Brasilian
 Mo∣ther, 
Mameluc;
 of an 
European
 Father and a 
Moor, Mulatto;
 of a 
Brasilian
 and 
Moor, Curiboca,
 or 
Cabocles;
 of two 
Negro's, Criolo.
 But above all others the 
Portuguese
 are

the strongest along the Sea-Coast, who when first they began to settle on 
Brasile,
 found great resistance; and had not the Natives been at Wars amongst themselves, they could never have got so much footing, but now they are sufficiently Masters; for they have either slain all the old Inhabitants, or driven them up into the Inland: however, the 
Brasilians
 are so valiant, that they will Encounter a great Army, be∣ing brought up in the Wars from their Cradle. When they Engage one with an∣other they shoot their Arrows exceeding thick, Hooting, Hollowing, and Leaping from one side to the other to shun the Arrows with a wonderful dexterity: The Conquerors spare none, but kill all, and Feast on the slain Bodies; but some they hale away Prisoners with a Rope about their Necks, to each of whom they allot a young Maid, who cherishes and fattens them up for five Moneths, at the end of which they make a great Feast, and drink to a pitch beyond Sense or Reason, having first fill'd their Bellies with the Flesh of the slain Prisoners roasted. If the Woman be got with Child by the Slain, they imagine that they can take no greater revenge of their Enemy, than to devour the Child as soon as it comes into the World; but it often happens, that the Woman really loving her Husband the Prisoner, runs away with him, and so bereaves her Friends of a Banquet.




SECT. II. St. Vincent.


THe continual Wars which the 
Portuguese
 have maintain'd against the 
Brasi∣lians,
 have hindred them from Setling any where but along the Sea-side, where their Residences are divided into thirteen 
Praefectures
 or Lordships, by them call'd 
Capitanias;
 the Southermost whereof being 1. 
St. Vincent,
 hath a City of the same Denomination, which lies near a River that coming out of the Ocean runs round in the Countrey, and so returns into the Sea.


2. 
Sanctos los Leyes,
 which reckons four hundred Houses and three Sugar-Mills. Here great Ships take in their Lading in the middle of the City.


3. 
Hitauhacin,
 the most Southern, is inhabited by the 
Portuguese.
 Twelve Leagues from thence up into the Countrey the 
Jesuits
 have built the Village 
St. Paulo,
 near the Gold-Mines that lie in the Mountains, extending from East to West thirty Leagues. This Village, long since containing eighty Houses, is inha∣bited by 
Brasilians
 and a mix'd People; the Way thither is troublesom, over rough Mountains, and Ways overgrown with Brambles.


On the Island 
Britioga,
 at a sandy Inlet which makes a good Harbor, lies a Fort for defence of the Haven 
St. Vincent:
 and since the 
English, Anno
 1582. sunk a Ship there, a second Fort hath been built to prevent the coming in up the River; yet notwithstanding Captain 
Thomas Candish
 ran by both the Forts, and burnt 
St. Vincent,
 but spar'd 
Sanctos.


Before the River which washes 
St. Vincent,
 appears the Island 
Sebastian,
 pretty large, wooddy, and well stor'd with Venison; It hath wholsom Water, good Her∣bage, and a secure Road for Ships against all Winds.


Farther into the Sea appears the high and rocky Isles 
Alcatraces,
 as also 
Victorio des Busires, Porto des Castellanos, Monte de Frigo, Muella,
 and 
Queimadas.


The Natives of 
St. Vincent,
 which are in League with the 
Portuguese,
 are call'd 
Tupinikinsi,
 inhabiting the Mountains which extend above twenty eight Leagues up into the Countrey: They maintain continual Wars against the 
Carioes,
 a civiliz'd People, and white of Complexion, as also against the 
Cupin-Imbas
 on the North,

and a nameless People bordering on 
Peru.
 Moreover, the 
Miramumins,
 a very wild People, range all the Countrey over, but are much lessen'd since the 
Portugueses
 Arrival.






SECT. III. Rio de Janeiro.


THe second Lordship 
Rio de Janeiro,
 formerly by the 
French
 call'd 
Ganabara,
 was discover'd 
Anno
 1515. by 
Juan Dias de Solis;
 but the 
French
 first Setled themselves here forty years after 
Dias de Solis:
 for setting Sail from 
Havre de Grace
 with three well Mann'd Ships, Commanded by 
Nicholas Durandus Ville∣gagnon,
 they arriv'd at 
Rio Janeiro
 in 
November,
 and at the Entrance into the River, which is about half a League broad, built a woodden Fort of a hundred Foot long, and sixty broad, and giving it the Name of the 
French
 Admiral 
Coligni,
 put several Guns into the same to secure the Entrance, inclos'd on each side by two steep Moun∣tains. In the River, which is very broad, lie several wooddy Isles, on one of which, near the Fort 
Coligni, Villegagnon
 Setling himself, suffer'd great Inconveniences for want of Water, because he durst not Land on the Main, for fear of being surpris'd by the Natives. Here he stay'd a year and a half in a deplorable Condition, when 
Philip Corguileray
 and 
Du Pont
 set Sail with three Ships from the Haven 
Honfleurs;
 but they also though they had many Men, yet were ill stor'd with Provisions, in∣somuch that Hunger increas'd amongst them daily: wherefore 
Villegagnon
 return'd home without any farther Exploits.


Jean Leri,
 who went with 
Corguileray,
 describes 
Rio Janeiro
 after this manner:


The River (saith he) lies twenty three Degrees Southward of the 
Equinoctial Line;
 the Inlet of the Sea, twenty fourthousand Paces broad, and in some places broader, is hemm'd in by hills; the Mouth of the Inlet is somewhat dangerous, by reason of three rocky Isles; beyond the large Bay is a narrow Channel, on the left-hand whereof there rises a high Mountain, which the 
French
 call'd 
Le Pot de Beure,
 because it resembles a Butter-pot. Somewhat farther lies the Rock 
Ratier,
 where 
Villegagnon
 thought to build a Fort, but the Water in stormy Wea∣ther washing over the Rock, he was forc'd to give over his Design. Half a League farther is an Island a thousand Paces in length, and a hundred and fifty in breadth, surrounded with Rocks, on which the 
French
 resided: at each end of the Isle rises a Hill, and from the middle a Rock sixty Foot high; on the Hill 
Villegagnon
 pitcht his Tent till he had built him a handsom House on a Rock; the other Houses were built in the Valley. Three Leagues and a half farther lies a fruitful Isle nine Miles in circumference, inhabited by a salvage People call'd 
Touoebinambauti:
 there are several other Isles, on which breed good Oysters with little Pearls, which stick so fast to great Stones, that they can scarce be pluckt off. The River 
Janeiro
 abounds with Fish.


The 
French
 once possess'd this Island, but were dispossess'd by 
Emanuel de Sa,
 Governor of 
Brasile,
 for the 
Portuguese.


The City 
Sebastian,
 which contains three hundred Houses, is built on the Sou∣thern Point of 
Janeiro;
 opposite to which, on the Northern Point, lies the Fort; a large Church, the 
Jesuits
 Cloyster, and two Sugar-Mills, give no small lustre to the City, where the chief Trade consists in 
Brasile
 Wood and Cotton. The 
French
 Storm'd this Town 
Anno
 1581. but march'd off without any success. 
Dirk Ruiters,
 an Eye-witness, gives us this Description of 
Sebastian:




The Town (says he) lies two Leagues up the River 
Janeiro,
 in a Bay, about which it is built like a Semi-Circle in a sandy Soil along the Water, and is about a Mile long; at each end rise steep Mountains, besides which it hath neither Walls nor Gates; but its strength consists of four Forts, the chiefest whereof stands towards the East on a Rock in the Mouth of the River; the second to∣wards the West, an Isle which on the South-East rises with a Mountain resem∣bling a Sugar-Loaf: the third crowns a Rock South-East from the Town; and the fourth, in the North-West, a high Mountain. The Natives, call'd 
Tououpi∣nambauti,
 are very serviceable to the 
Portuguese.


Besides the fore-mention'd Towns 
Coligni
 and 
St. Sebastian,
 some make mention of another in this 
Praefecture,
 call'd 
Angra de los Reyes,
 twelve Leagues distant from 
St. Sebastian
 Westward.


The Burroughs of the Natives are populous, but neither strong by Nature, nor fortifi'd, and so not by any one thought worthy the naming.






SECT. IV. De Spirito Sancto.


NExt to 
Rio Janeiro
 lies the Lordship or County 
De Spirito Sancto,
 exceeding fruitful, having divers Woods abounding with Venison. The Rivers 
Parayva, Manangea, Itapemeri, Iritibi,
 and 
Guarapari,
 are stor'd with all sorts of Fish, and amongst others the Fish 
Piratiapua,
 which in the Winter Moneths lives in the Rivers, and against the Summer returns to the Rocks wash'd by the Ocean. This Fish hath a wide Mouth full of Teeth, a reddish Tongue, little Fins, except those on their Backs, divers colour'd Scales, yet most of a dark Red, and generally weighs fifty Pound.


Here is also the Fish 
Paru,
 full of yellow Scales like Half-Moons over a black Skin; it hath long Fins near the Tail, and a little Head.


No less remarkable is the 
Guebucu,
 which hath a long Body, a sharp bonie Snout, the upper Jaw reaching over the other, no Teeth, a Tail divided in the middle, sharp Fins on the Back, and a Skin full of Silver-colour'd Prickles. This Monster not onely devours great Fishes, but also Men; when it is hungry it often runs its Snout through the side of a Ship.


But there is no Fish more deform'd than the 
Abacatuaja,
 which being oval and flat, hath two long Fins underneath, and one on the top, a divided Tail, green Fins, a smooth Skin, and fiery Eyes; as soon as it is taken it cries like a Hog.


In this County stands a Town of the same Denomination, which contains two hundred Houses, a Sugar-Mill, and a Cloyster of 
Jesuits,
 and drives a great Trade in Cotton and 
Brasile
 Wood. Before the City lies an Inlet full of Isles, the Mouth of which is guarded by a Castle. The Natives, call'd 
Maigaias,
 are in League with the 
Portuguese,
 but the 
Tapuyans
 and 
Apiapetangas
 do them all the mischief they can possibly; so that the 
Portuguese
 travel in great danger of their lives, when any Busi∣ness calls them, through the Countrey of these salvage People. But besides these People, the Way is pester'd with strange wild Beasts, especially on the Mountain 
Mestre Alvaro,
 which is seen at a great distance off at Sea; on which, amongst other Creatures, breeds the terrible Serpent 
Boiguacu,
 whose length is generally twenty four Foot; it is of an Ash colour, with great and small black Spots, with a little white Speck in the middle; when hungry, it leaps out of the Hedges, or from the tops of Trees, raises it self upright on its Tail, and winding about either Man,

Beast, or whate're it be, squeezes it to death, or puts its Tail, which ends in a sharp Point or Sting, in at the Fundament in such a manner, that it kills the Creature on which it seizeth in a moment, and then swallows it up. This Serpent hath strong Ribs inwardly, and more than seventy bonie Joynts; wherefore it turns it self with great ease; the Joynt-bones near the Head are the biggest, and grow smaller and smaller towards the Tail: It also feeds on Pismires.


This County also breeds the Bird 
Jabicu-guacu,
 which exceeds the Crane in big∣ness, and hath a long thick Bill, but no Tongue; on his Head appears a white grifly Crest or Mitre; the Wings and Tail are short, and the Feathers most of them white, except the Pinions, which shine like Rubies; their Flesh is of a good rellish, but somewhat dry.


Near the River which washes the City 
Spirito Sancto,
 the 
Paraibes
 dwell in Huts, not unlike Ovens.






SECT. V. Porto Seguro.


NExt to the fore-mention'd County borders 
Porto Seguro,
 discover'd by 
Pedro Alvares Capralis,
 who gave this Countrey the Name of 
Terra de Santa Cruiz,
 but afterwards chang'd it to 
Porto Seguro,
 because he found a secure Harbor there. The Town, built on the top of a white Rock, gives its Denomination to the whole Countrey, and harbor'd long since two hundred and twenty Families, and hath five Sugar-Mills. The Land on the North side of the Rock rises high, but South wardly a smooth Coast runs along the Ocean, from which two Leagues off at Sea lie several Cliffs, against which the Waves break with a great force.


The Towns 
Santa Cruiz
 and 
Amaro
 are left desolate, because the 
Portuguese
 were continually Invaded by the salvage 
Aymures,
 whom they were not able by any means to repress.


Southward from 
Porto Seguro
 appear the Shoals 
Abrolhos,
 twenty six Leagues from the Coast; they are of one breadth, but one is longer than the other.


On this Coast the Ship 
Batavia
 was cast away 
Anno
 1629. which Accident is the more remakable for the Murders committed by the Factor, 
Hieronymus Cornelis∣zoon,
 who with some Confederates resolv'd to run away with the Ship, and to Sail to some 
Spanish
 Haven, or 
Dunkirk,
 and so to pillage the 
Netherland
 Vessels; but their Design was frustrated by the Ships running against the 
Abrolhos: Francis Pelsaert,
 chief Commander, first caus'd the Sick, with the Women and Children, to be put on an Island, or else on two Rocks about three Leagues distant from the place where the Ship lay, in which remain'd seventy Men, whom 
Pelsaert
 in vain endea∣vor'd to carry away; for the Sea was so rough that a Boat was not able to abide in the same, and also the Storm beginning to increase, beat the Ship more and more against the Sands, and the Seamen venturing towards the Isle on pieces of Timber, were some drown'd, others by the Waves, were driven ashore, amongst whom was 
Hieronymus Cornelszoon,
 who preserv'd his Life twenty four hours on the Bolt sprit after the Ship was stav'd; but not terrifi'd with such an Accident, he continu'd in his fore-mention'd Resolution. On one of the Cliffs were forty Persons with eighty Cans of Water, but on the Island a hundred and eighty with much less; upon which 
Pelsaert,
 who when the Storm ceas'd, thought to save somewhat more out of his Wrack, was necessitated to seek for fresh Water on one of the said Cliffs, but not finding enough, trimm'd up his Boat and set Sail homeward, from thence to





 fetch a new supply of People:
 During which time 
Cornelisszoon
 perform'd his Vi∣lany; for he chose 
David
 of 
Zeevang, Gysbrecht Welderen, Coenraed Huissen, Cornelis Pie∣terszoon, Rutger Frederickszoon,
 and 
Hans Heilwerk,
 for his Assistants, besides several others, and destroy'd all the People on the Island, except five, who escap'd on pie∣ces of Timber to the Rock where 
Weyber Hays
 resided with forty Men, who being inform'd what the aforesaid Villains had done, prepar'd for resistance with sharp∣pointed Sticks, those People on the second Rock being also slain by 
Zeevang,
 who spared onely some Women and seven Boys; after which 
Hieronymus Corneliszoon
 took 
Lucretia Jans
 for his Wife; in like manner 
Huissen
 took 
Judith Sebastiaens;
 the remain∣ing Women serv'd the rest for Concubines. Not long after twenty of them going in Sloops, fell upon 
Weiber Hays,
 who valiantly resisted them: but because 
Hays
's Life was of great consequence, by reason he might give notice of their Actions to to the Ship which was expected from 
Holland,
 and which they design'd to run away with, therefore they renew'd their Assault with fifteen Men more, and were again beat off; wherefore they resolv'd to make a Peace, which 
Heronymus Corneliszoon
 promis'd to ratifie the next day; nevertheless this Peace was but feigned, for under pretence thereof they deliver'd Letters to several 
French
 Soldiers that were under 
Hays
's Command, promising each six thousand 
Guilders
 if they would joyn with them; but they shew'd the Letters to 
Hays,
 who keeping it secret, that he might draw on 
Hieronymus Corneliszoon,
 not mistrusting the Discovery, to come thi∣ther at the appointed time, took him Prisoner, and caus'd 
Zeevang, Huissen, Wel∣deren,
 and 
Cornelis Pieterszoon
 to be put to death; but 
Wouter Loos
 making his escape, was chosen chief of the Rebels, who ventur'd a fourth Assault, but returning with∣out any effect left off making any farther Attempt. Mean while 
Pelsaert
 arriving with the 
Sardam
 Frigat from 
Holland,
 sent a Boat ashore, which by a little Skiff dispatcht by 
Hays,
 was inform'd of all the Passages; whereupon the Boat return∣ing, 
Pelsaert
 as he was putting himself into a posture of Defence, espy'd a Sloop co∣ming about the Southern Point of the Island, in which were eleven of the Rebels clad in Scarlet with Silver Lace, which making directly towards the Ship, as soon

as they came up, were commanded to throw away their Arms over-board; which having done, and coming aboard the Frigat, they were all put in Irons, as also their remaining Party, and condemn'd to die.


Opposite to the 
Abrolhos
 on the Main Coast, a plain Countrey extends it self thirty Leagues in length, inhabited by the 
Ouetacates,
 a cruel People, who continu∣ally either destroy one another, or else make sad slaughters amongst their Neigh∣bors.


The County 
Porto Seguro
 belongs to the 
Spanish
 Duke of 
Avero,
 but is very much decay'd.


The Rivers 
Moucuripe, Caruvelas,
 and 
Lucura,
 breed abundance of Water-Hogs call'd 
Capybara,
 which have short Feet, Bristles and Ears, a thick Body and Head, with a bearded Snout, besides two Tusks, and twenty four lesser Teeth in each Jaw, but no Tail; they feed on Grass and Bushes in whole Herds on the Shore, and make a terrible noise; and though they cannot run fast, yet they dive and swim extraordinary quick.


The 
Tapiirete
 also resembles a Hog, especially in its Head and Feet, but is as big as a Heifer of six Moneths old, hath a Snout hanging over its under Lip, a Mouth full of Teeth, and on its Skin short and dark colour'd Hair. This Beast is very libidi∣nous, and in the Nights spoils the Fruit-Trees, especially the Sugar-Canes, but in the Day-time it sleeps in Thickets. The Flesh of a young 
Tapiierete
 tastes like Beef.


Lastly, the Inhabitants of 
Porto Seguro
 are plentifully supply'd with Rabbets, and the more, because there being divers sorts of them, (some say five) they are ta∣ken in great abundance, either in Traps, Snairs, or Gins, or by discovering their Holes; for the Hunters stopping the entrance of them, dig a Hole directly over the place where the Coneys lodge, and so kill them with long Pike-staves in the Ground.


Of these five sorts of Rabbets in 
Brasile,
 the chiefest, call'd 
Paca,
 hath a thick Head, little Ears, their fore-Feet bigger than their hind-Feet, short, hard, and brown Hair, speckled grey on the Sides, but no Tail: The Flesh of this sort of Rabbets is very delicate.


The second sort is the 
Tupesi,
 which being like a Hare amongst us, may as well be accounted of that kind.


The 
Aguti
 resembles our Rabbets, onely it hath harsh brown Hair, round Ears, bald Feet, gruntles like a Hog, hath two Toes more on their hind-Legs than on the foremost.


The 
Cavia Cobaya,
 though less than the 
European
 Rabbets, excell them in soft and divers-colour'd Hair, distinguish'd by white, red, and black Spots; their Head and Teeth resemble those of a Rat, but it hath no Tail: No Rabbets can be made tamer than these, and if carry'd to any remote Countrey, breed as well there as in 
Brasile.


The last of all is the 
Aparea,
 which differs little in running from a Hare, as also in respect of the Head and Beard, harbors more in rent Cliffs than in sandy Ground.


The Soil of 
Porto Seguro
 bears two sorts of Palm-Trees, 
viz.
 the 
Tucum
 and 
Airi;
 the 
Tucum
 hath small Boughs full of prickly Leaves, and a fruit not unlike the Da∣mask Prune, hanging in Clusters of three or four hundred together; and being excel∣lent Food to fatten Hogs and Apes; also when press'd yielding a clear Oyl, which is highly esteem'd: the Fruit when ripe grows black without, and within hath a white Kernel: of the Leaves the 
Brasilians
 spin fine and strong Thred.








The 
Airi
 grows much higher than the 
Tucum,
 and hath also longer Leaves, a Body full of sharp Thorns, and a round Fruit full of white and oylie Pulp, but not eatable; the Wood hard, heavy and black, sinks in the Water, and the 
Brafilians
 make their Clubs of the same.


Along the Rivers flie the Birds 
Cocoi,
 resembling Herons, though in beauty they far exceed them; they have but little Flesh, long sharp Bills, of a yellowish green colour, and curious Crests of Feathers on their Heads, which fall back over their Necks; their Flesh when young is delicate.






SECT. VI. Los Isleos.


NExt 
Porto Seguro
 borders the Countrey 
Los Isleos,
 so call'd from its chief Town, which consists of a hundred and fifty Houses, (or perhaps by this time many more) eight Sugar-Mills, a Cloyster for the 
Jesuits,
 and a Church. The Inhabitants live by Tillage, and Transporting of Provisions in lit∣tle Barks to 
Pernambuco.


Seven Leagues farther in the Countrey, beyond the Town of 
Isleos,
 lies a nameless Lake three Leagues long, as many broad, and above ten Fathom deep, and full of the Fish 
Manati,
 which are very large and well tasted, besides abundance of Crocodiles; and in windy Weather the Water is as rough as if it were in the Ocean. Out of this Lake flows a River by a Passage so narrow, that a Boat can scarce pass through the same.


Round about this River live the 
Guaymures,
 the most salvage People of all 
Ame∣rica;
 they are of a Gigantick size, have white Skins, carry exceeding great Bowes and Arrows, live without Houses like Beasts, devour Mans-flesh like Tygers, never Fight in Companies or Armies, but watch to surprize a single Man or Beast; they also eat their own Children, and possess'd formerly all the Land from the River

St. Francisco
 to the Promontory 
Frio;
 but beaten from thence by the 
Tupinambas
 and 
Tupinachias,
 they went to the County 
Los Isleos,
 which they Invaded in such a man∣ner, that the 
Portuguese
 were not onely forc'd to leave several Sugar-Mills, but also the whole Countrey.






SECT. VII. Bahia de Todos los Sanctos.


NExt to 
Isleos
 borders 
Bahia de Todos los Sanctos,
 belonging to the 
Portuguese.
 The Inlet which borrows its Denomination from all the Saints, gives Name to this eminent County. The Bay great and wide, and in the middle from twelve to eighteen Fathom deep, lies in thirteen Degrees Southward of the 
Equinoctial Line.
 The Coast rises white along the Sea side. The Current ac∣cording to the course of the Sun runs six Moneths towards the South, and as many towards the North. The opening of the Inlet is on the South, but it flows up Nor∣therly, and contains two Leagues and a half in breadth; several fresh Rivers dis∣charge their Waters into the same: The utmost and biggest Island 
Taperica
 breaks off the Waves which come rowling in from the Ocean. Those that Sail into the same must have the Island on their left Hand, and the Main Coast on their right, which is known by a Promontory, on which the Fort 
Antonio,
 and the old City 
Villa Veja
 are built, near a little Bay with a Foreland on the North, from which the Main Coast circling like a Half-Moon ends near the Point 
Tapagipe,
 which juts out from 
Bahia Todos los Sanctos.
 The Castle 
Tapesiepe
 stands on the utmost Point, where the Countrey winding towards the East makes the Inlet larger, from whence a narrow Channel runs up into the Countrey, and there makes a Lake which extends North and South: from the Mouth of the Lake the Coast reaches Northward to the River 
Pitanga,
 which comes gliding out of the East, and in its Passage receives several Streams, on whose Banks stand divers Sugar-Mills. From 
Pitanga
 the Coast extends a League Northward, then Westerly with a crooked. Elbow, in whose circumference lie two nameless Isles close under the Shore; this Elbow ends in a blunt Point, about half a League from which lies the Island 
Mare,
 a League long, in the Mouth of the River 
Pitanga.
 To the Northward from hence a River disembogues in the said Inlet. More Southerly appears 
Monks-Isle,
 from whence the Coast extends it self Northerly, where several Islands appear at an exact distance from the Coast; the first beyond the fore-mention'd blunt Point, is 
Birapebiara;
 the next, which lies closer to the Shore, 
Porto Madero;
 next comes in view a long Island in the Mouth of a River, from whence the Countrey extends Westward, and fronts the Island 
De Fuentes,
 as doth also the River 
Tambaria,
 which comes out of the North, but empties it self with a crooked Arm near the rest; from hence the Coast with two little Bays runs North-West to the Stream 
Geresipe,
 in whose Mouth, which is pretty large, appear three Isles on a row, the utmost whereof is call'd 
Caraibe,
 the middlemost 
Pycca,
 the innermost hath no Name, but divides the River into two Channels; from hence the Coast bends with several Inlets, in∣to which fall divers Rivulets towards the South, from the River 
Cachoera,
 full of lit∣tle Isles, opposite to which stand several Sugar-Mills. Against 
Cachoera
 appears the Island 
Meve,
 and more Southerly 
Taperica,
 between the sharp Point 
Tapagipe
 and the Castle 
Antonio.
 Near the fore-mention'd the City 
St. Salvador
 was built by 
Tho∣mas de Sosa,
 who weighing Anchor from 
Lisbon, Anno
 1549. Landed safely near 
Villa Veja,
 and about half a League from thence pitch'd upon a Hill, and took order











forthwith for the erecting of his new City there, giving to each of his Followers a place to build on: the 
Jesuits
 chose the large Plain where at present stands the Church Consecrated to the Virgin 
Mary;
 the Names of the said 
Jesuits
 were 
Juan Azpilcueta, Antonio Pireo, Leonardo Nonnio, Didaco Jacobeo, Vincentio Roderigo,
 and 
Emanuel Nobrega;
 whilest the common People set themselves to the building of Dwelling-houses: But when 
John
 the Third, King of 
Portugal,
 sent a Priest thither to Teach in the new Church of 
Maria,
 the fore-mention'd 
Jesuits
 remov'd from thence to a high Hill, which they call'd 
The Mountain Calvarien,
 whither divers 
Brasilians
 came flocking, and pitch'd their Tents about the Cloyster, admiring their strange Neigh∣bors.


When 
Sosa
 Landed on the fore-mention'd Shore, the 
Portuguese
 had but little footing on 
America;
 for their Plantations at 
Isleos, St. Vincent, Pernambuco, Villa Veja, Itamaraca,
 and 
Porto Seguro,
 discover'd by 
Pedro Alvares Capralis, Anno
 1500. were run all to ruine.


Beside the City 
St. Salvador
 and the decay'd Town 
Villa Veja,
 the City 
Paripe
 lies three Leagues farther into the Countrey, consisting of three thousand Families, and eighteen Sugar-Mills: The Countrey about the same produces plenty of Cotton.


The Island 
Taperica,
 which is pretty large, hath a fertile Soil for the production of Tobacco, and Grass to fatten Cattel: The Inhabitants boyl much Train-Oyl of the Whales, which come ashore there in considerable numbers.


Twelve Leagues Southward from 
St. Salvador
 appears the Village 
Cacocheira,
 for∣merly belonging to a rich 
Portuguese,
 who took great pains in reforming the sal∣vage People 
Guaymures
 to a civil Life; but seeing he profited but little, he caus'd great Companies of them to be remov'd to 
Taperica,
 that they might do less mis∣chief, where the unusual and unwholsom Air kill'd them all in a short time.


The Lordship 
Bahia
 hath abundance of Sugar-Mills, which are either turn'd by the Water, or drawn by Oxen.


The Sugar-Canes, by the 
Brasilians
 call'd 
Viba
 or 
Tacomaree,
 grow better in a clayie and fat Soil, over which the Rivers flowing leave their Mud, than on High-lands, Hills, or Mountains; they are Planted after this manner: They first plough their Fields, weed them, and make Holes at an exact distance one from the other, into which they plant their Canes in such a manner, that the tops touch one another. The Holes before mention'd require more Earth to fill them in Summer than in Winter, that the violent Heat of the Sun may not dry up the Root, and that the Rain may the freelier come at them to moisten them, for the more moisture they have, the better they grow; they attain to their full ripeness in ten, or at most in twelve Moneths; 
February
 and 
March
 being the two last Winter Moneths, are ac∣counted the best to Plant in, because the Earth softned by Rains, suffers the Root to shoot forth the better. The ripe Canes being cut off, are left in the Field till the following Year; during which time new Canes growing, are often ground in the Mill with the old ones; but if they stand two years, then the sweet Liquor dries up, and the Cane withers. The young Plants carefully planted in good Ground may last forty, nay fifty years; but in a barren Soil they set new every five years. Sometimes in great Droughts and extraordinary hot Seasons, the Canes are scorcht to nothing, which being burnt in the Winter, the Ashes serve to Dung the Ground; and so in like manner when the Water, overflowing the Fields, drowns the young Plants. In moist Grounds the black-wing'd Worm, call'd 
Guirapeacopa,
 (by the 
Por∣tuguese
 nam'd 
Pao de Galeuba
) gnaws the Roots in such a manner, that the Canes die; and sometimes it happens also that the Weeds choak the young Plants;





 wherefore the Ground is to be weeded four times a year,
 till such time as the Canes are strong enough to bear against the Weeds: they cut off the ripe Canes at the lowermost Joynt, and, all the Leaves being first pull'd off, tie them up in Bundles, and bring them to the Mills, which consist of three great Iron Bars, between which the Canes are squeez'd. The Water-Mills are turn'd by the force of the Wa∣ter, which in great Gutters led from high Mountains falls with exceeding force in∣to Pools made for that purpose; after which manner, though they wind the Canes much faster, yet they get not so much Sugar as when they grind them in the Mills turn'd by Cattel: The places through which the Juice runs must be cleans'd twice in twenty four hours; the Canes put in behind between the first Bar, are turn'd into the second, and thence into the third, which successively squeezes out all the remaining Juice: The Canes thus press'd, serve for Fewel to burn; but they con∣stantly keep such a great Fire both Night and Day, that besides those press'd Canes, they burn forty Fathom of Wood in twenty four hours, insomuch that whole Woods are consum'd in a short time: The Liquor, nam'd 
Caldo,
 runs along wood∣den Gutters into great Kettles, in which it is boyl'd, but if it happen to be over∣boyl'd they put Water amongst it, whereby it becomes excellent Food for Horses; then they put the Liquor into a second Kettle, where it is boyl'd afresh, and also scumm'd; and for the better cleansing of it, Lime-Juyce and other things are put amongst it; then they strein it through Clothes, and give the Dross which remains in the same to the Slaves, which work for half a year together Night and Day like Horses. The Dross mix'd with Water makes also good Wine. Out of the great Kettles, by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Caldero de Mellar,
 the 
Caldo
 runs into the lesser nam'd 
Tachas,
 where it is boyl'd a third time, and continually stirr'd till it comes to be thick like a Syrrup, and at last to the consistence of Sugar: It may be accounted amongst the Mysteries of Nature, that while the Sugar boyls in the 
Tachas,
 which are the little Kettles, they must drop Oyl amongst the Liquor, which if they should do whilest it is in the great Kettel, the Liquor would not turn to the consistence of Sugar; as on the contrary, if they should put their Lye into the little Kettles as they







OLINDA DE PHERNAMBUCO




A. 
Narale.


B. 
Nonasterium in Insula Antonic vace.


C. 
Hospitium domini Presiotu
 H. C. Lonck.


D.
Ecclesia Pagi Povo.


E. 
Promptuaria Sac
aro, A
 Hispanen ique delec
.


F. 
Vallum ferrestre cum nonnu
is fortulitus.


G. 
Monasterium Sancti Benedicti dictum Bento.


H. 
Sancti Antoni.


I. 
S
•i
. Francisci.


K. 
Ecclesia Maga
.


L. 
Ecclesia Jesuitarum.


N. 
Promontorium ex virgultis. 
stium.








do into the great, the Liquor would be quite spoil'd. In their Boyling-houses stand several hundreds of Earthen Pots one by another on Planks full of Holes; which Pots they cover with moist clay, and after fourteen days knocking it out of the Pots, they separate the brown Sugar from the white, both which are laid to dry in the Sun, and put into Chests.






SECT. VIII. Pernambuco.


NOrthward from 
Bahia de Todos los Sanctos
 lies 
Pernambuco,
 which extends along the Coast above seventy Leagues, between the River 
St. Francisco
 and the Countrey of 
Hamaraca.


Pernambuco,
 which signifies 
Hells-Mouth,
 is on the East wash'd by the Northern Ocean; in which grows a Weed much like an Oaken Leaf, and so thick, that un∣less it be cut to make their Way, impedes the Sailing of Ships.


The Sea is also very full of Fish, which in calm Weather are visible sixty Fathom deep, and are taken in greater abundance than they are able to spend; for they no sooner let down a Bait, cover'd with Feathers and Tallow, but the Fish immedi∣ately swallowing the same, are taken.


Here are in the first place abundance of 
Hays,
 a Fish so rank and oylie, that they are not eatable, but their Brains are accounted good against the Stone.


There are also hereabouts a sort of flying Fish like Herrings, but not so big; they have Wings like Bats, which carry them above Water whilest they are wet; they swim in shoals, and are chased by all other Fishes, which endeavoring to escape by flight out of the Water, they become a prey to the Sea-pies.


The Sea-Breams are as well tasted as the flying Fish; the Mariners cover them in Salt, or stuff them within full of Salt and Pepper, and so hang them to dry in the Sun.


Pernambuco
 it self lying in five Degrees Southward from the 
Equinox,
 produces abundance of 
Brasile
 Wood and Sugar-Canes, which last is no proper 
Brasilian
 Plant, for the first Plants thereof were by the 
Portuguese
 first transplanted thither from the 
Canary
 Islands.


This Countrey was first discover'd by 
Americus Vesputius,
 who being sent thither by 
Emanuel,
 King of 
Portugal,
 to discover the Coast between the Promontory before 
Olinda
 and the Island 
Itamaraca,
 and finding a split Rock and some 
Brasilian
 Huts, Landed, and ask'd the Denomination of the Coast, which he was inform'd was call'd 
Pernambuco,
 which he found full of steep Mountains, inaccessible Woods, and in some places Plains and pleasant Valleys; but the chiefest thing he could find to lade his Ship with, was 
Brasile
 Wood; but being inform'd that the Soil would bear Sugar-Canes, he caus'd 
Canary
 Sugar-Plants to be Set there.


Olinda,
 formerly the chief City of 
Pernambuco,
 had (according to 
Lopez
) above three thousand Houses and seventy Sugar-Mills: It is built on several Hills, which on the North-side are steep and overgrown with Brambles, betwixt which in ma∣ny places grow Orange-Trees. 
John Newhof,
 who arriv'd at 
Olinda
 Anno 1642. found a few 
Netherlanders
 and 
Spaniards
 there, who dwelt in the ruin'd Houses. The Land-side of the City is strengthned by Hills overgrown with Brambles and Thorns, and towards the Sea-side with Earthen Walls, fortifi'd by fourteen Bul∣warks and a Stone Castle, able to withstand a considerable force: The Out-works towards the South were maintain'd by 
Jews,
 who from the fore-mention'd Hills

could see not onely a great way into the Ocean, but also the River 
Biberibi,
 which hath a Stone Bridge leading to the City, and Northerly and Westward the Way lies through great Woods and Forrests. 
Olinda
 it self is divided into twenty seven large Streets, besides lesser Lanes and several Avenues, and five chief Churches, 
viz. Misericordia, Nostra Sennora del Emparo,
 and 
Nostra Sennora de Guadalupe, San Salvador,
 and 
San Pedro,
 besides two others of lesser note. On the highest Hill stands the 
Je∣suits
 Cloyster, built square and high, and surrounded with Walls, on which 
Seba∣stian
 King of 
Portugal,
 by the perswasion of his Uncle Cardinal 
Henry,
 spent a great sum of Money, and endow'd it with annual Revenues, 
Anno
 1571. The 
Capuchins
 also built a stately Cloyster towards the East. The 
Franciscans
 moreover inhabited a magnificent Building, near which stood the Governors Palace. The 
Carmelites
 had also a stately Edifice, whose former lustre still appears by the Ruines, where now Cattel graze; from the Hills about which may be exactly discern'd 
Reciffa,
 the Promontory of 
St. Augustine,
 and the Castle before the Road of 
Reciffa:
 Along the Shore stood the 
Dominican
 Cloyster, and in the upper part of the City the Minster, Consecrated to 
St. Bento,
 exceeding strong both by Nature and Art; near which stood 
Conceptio de nostra Sennora.
 The Fort 
Juan de Albuquerque
 stood on the South∣side, from whence a Way leads you along the Shore to 
Reciffa,
 where hard by the Potter's House stood a Beacon. But since 
Olinda
 fell into the hands of the 
Nether∣land East-India
 Company, they built a strong Fortress on the North near the Sea∣side, where formerly a great Trade was driven with Sugar, insomuch that forty Ships have been fraighted in a day therewith from 
Olinda,
 and still as much more remain'd in the Store-houses. The Sugar cannot be made without the help of 
African
 Slaves, and that in great numbers; for 
Angola
 alone provided fifteen thou∣sand four hundred and thirty 
Moors
 for the Sugar-Mills about 
Olinda.


In the Years 1601, 1602, and 1623. there was sent to surprize this City 
Henrick Loncque,
 who a little before with 
Peter Peterszoon Hein
 took the 
Spanish
 Plate-Fleet, and brought it away from 
Matanca.
 In the middle of 
June,
 Anno 1629. 
Loncque
 weighed Anchor from the 
Goerean
 Road, and between great 
Canary
 and 
Teneriff
 he was Engag'd (having but eight Sail) with forty 
Spanish
 Ships, Commanded by 
Fre∣derick de Toledo,
 fought his way through the midst of them, and near 
St. Vincent
 (the rest of his Fleet being come up to him, which in all made up twenty seven) he stay'd for a farther promis'd Supply of Ships to assist him, and the longer, because the Men rais'd by the 
Netherland West-India
 Company were taken into the 
States
 Ser∣vice, to oppose the 
Spanish
 and Imperial Forces, who at that time had gain'd some advantage upon them: But not long after 
Hartogen-bosch
 being taken by the 
Hol∣landers,
 the rest of the expected Fleet, with the promis'd Aid, arriv'd at 
St. Vincent;
 from whence 
Loncque,
 after four Moneths stay, set Sail with these additional Forces, his Fleet then consisting of fifty Sail of Ships, which carry'd above seven thousand Soldiers, befides Seamen; but he was forc'd to lie a considerable time under the 
Line,
 being either becalm'd or beaten back by contrary Winds, insomuch that ma∣ny of his Men perish'd, or were disabled with the Scurvey: At last his Fleet being come to an Anchor upon the Coast of 
Pernambuco,
 the first that Landed about two Leagues Northward of 
Olinda,
 was Colonel 
Diederik van Waerdenberg,
 who by Day∣break divided his Men into three Divisions, the Forlorn-Hope consisting of nine hundred and thirty four Men, march'd towards 
Olinda
 along the Shore, led by 
Adolf van der Eltz;
 the second being a thousand and forty nine, by 
Stein Callenfels;
 the third, consisting of nine hundred and sixty five, was led by 
Fouke Honx:
 thus drawn out, and marching on, they met with no resistance till they came to the River 
Dolce,
 where eight hundred 
Portuguese
 Charg'd on them from behind a new Sconce;

but 
Waerdenberg
 wading up to the Middle through the River with two Field-Pieces, the Enemy left his Works and ran into the Wood; the Forlorn-Hope approach∣ing the City, march'd up towards the right side, up a Way through the Woods, Scal'd the Walls, near which the 
Jesuits
 Cloyster stood, over which he got after some resistance. The second Party march'd in a narrow Path along the Shore,
 and broke into the City between the 
Franciscans
 and 
Jesuits
 Cloyster, towards the Cathe∣dral 
Salvador,
 from whence they discharg'd several Guns, as also from the Castle, which they had taken, whilest 
Fouke Honx
 Storm'd the Battlements towards the South; but 
Stein Callenfels
 and 
Eltz
 being already Masters of 
Olinda,
 the Defendants surrendred all. Mean while the Colonel's Skiff brought five hundred Men more ashore, with which he march'd without any hinderance into the City, where the Conquerors, faint with excessive Heat and want of Water, found but little Booty, because the Inhabitants having notice of the 
Hollanders
 coming, had convey'd all their Goods and Wealth to 
Reciffa,
 which the Governor 
Matthias Albuquerque
 (Bro∣ther to the Lord 
Duarte Albuquerque,
 to whom 
Pernambuco
 properly belong'd) burnt with all the Store-houses, partly out of revenge to the Inhabitants, who fled contrary to his Commands, and partly because he would not enrich the 
Hollanders.
 The 
Por∣tuguese
 Captain, 
Correa de Castel Blanco,
 in his Letter to the King of 
Spain,
 values the loss at twenty hundred thousand 
Ducats.
 But still the 
Portuguese
 had possession of several Forts about the Countrey, whereof the most considerable was 
St. George,
 whither 
Stein Callenfels
 march'd in the Night with six hundred Men, but his Lad∣ders being too short, and the Hand-Granado's not easily taking fire, he was for'd to Retreat; whereupon judging it most convenient to besiege the Castle, he digg'd Trenches about the same; nor was it long ere the Besieged desir'd Quarter,
 which being granted, they march'd from thence with ninety Men. The Water Castle sur∣rendring in like manner, they found fifteen Brass Guns therein; and in that of 
St. George
 four thousand pound of Gun-powder, and twenty four Iron Guns.


When the 
Netherland
 Forces Landed on 
Pernambuco,
 the 
Portuguese
 inhabited eleven Towns, the chiefest whereof being 
Olinda,
 was generally Garrison'd by four Companies of Armed Citizens, each containing a hundred Men and three Com∣panies of Soldiers: Amongst the Citizens were two hundred Merchants, some of whom were judg'd to be worth fifty thousand 
Crusados.


Southward from 
Olinda,
 between the River 
Biberibe
 and the Ocean, was a nar∣row Cawsey, at the end of which lay the populous Village 
Reciffa,
 where the Ships lade and unlade. About the middle of the Cliff, being a League long, is the An∣choring place for great Ships, call'd 
Pozo.
 At the end of the fore-mention'd Caw∣sey against 
Pozo,
 appear'd a round Tower of Fre-stone.


The Journal kept by the 
English
 Fleet that came hither under the Command of Captain 
James Lancaster,
 Anno 1595. makes mention of a Fort which lay at the Mouth of the Haven before 
Reciffa,
 which the 
English
 valiantly Storm'd, notwith∣standing six hundred Men and seven Brass Guns might easily have made it invinci∣ble: But they conquering the same, march'd up to 
Olinda,
 took the Suburb, con∣sisting of a hundred Houses, without any resistance, as also a great Booty, and the greater, because the Goods of a rich 
Carak
 which had some few days before suffer'd Shipwrack, were kept there; they also took fifteen laden Ships, and for thirty days kept the whole Countrey about 
Olinda
 restless with continual Alarms. Since this Invasion the 
Portuguese
 built a third Fort on 
Reciffa,
 so that the Ships must pass in in between two Forts, where the Channel is also full of Rocks, and consequently the more dangerous.


From 
Reciffa
 the Goods are sent in Barques or Lighters to 
Olinda,
 between which

and 
St. Salvador
 run the two great Rivers 
Francisco
 and 
Real,
 the first whereof re∣tains its freshness twenty Leagues into the Ocean.


Along the River 
Popitinga
 stand many Sugar-Mills; and five Leagues farther Northward beyond 
Olinda
 the 
Portuguese
 inhabit these Villages, 
viz. Garasu, Reciffa, Moribeca, Antonio de Cabo, Miguel de Poyuca, Gonsalvo de Una, Povacon de Porto Calvo, Ala∣goa del Nort,
 and 
Alagoa del Zur,
 besides other 
Brasilian
 Hamlets, and above seventy Sugar-Mills.


The County of 
Pernambuco
 hath for the most part a good Soil, several Plains, low Hills, and fruitful Valleys, abounding with fair Canes, which also grow on the Mountains 
Masurepe, Zebaatan, Poyuca,
 and 
Moribeque.


The Wilds of 
El Gran Matto,
 afford the best Wood, with which they drive the greatest Trade in the Village 
Laurenzo.
 Whilest 
Matthias Albuquerque
 Intrench'd himself a League and a half Westward from 
Olinda,
 by the Sugar-Mills belonging to 
Francisco Montero,
 with a hundred 
Portuguese,
 and three times as many Armed 
Brasilians, Loncque
 finding that he could not long keep the City 
Olinda
 against the Enemy, caus'd the same to be pull'd down and burnt.


Between the Rivers 
Francisco
 and 
Real,
 lies the Town 
Sergippo del Rey,
 up in the Countrey near a small Rivulet, which at Spring-Tydes hath fourteen Foot Water. The Woods round about feed wild Cattel, and the Mountains contain Mines of Gold and Silver.


The first Plantation in 
Brasile
 was in the Island 
Itamaraca,
 three Leagues long and two broad, but extends its Jurisdiction along the Main Coast, from which it is separated by a narrow River, which runs betwixt both thirty five Leagues. The Countrey is eminent for twenty Sugar-Mills, and abundance of 
Brasile
 Wood.


The chief Town of this Island is call'd 
Villa de Conception
 near the Sea, which round about the Island is full of Rocks. The 
French
 settling themselves here at first, were driven from thence by the 
Portuguese.
 The Town it self, built on a Rock, hath a strong Castle on the one side, erected near a shrubby Moor; to the Northward of which 
Stein Callenfels
 found a little Isle, scarce a Musquet-shot long, which at High-water is overflown, and being full of small Trees makes a Receptacle for Sea-Fowl, which flock thither about six a Clock in the Evening to Roost on the Boughs, from which, when once setled to take their repose, they will not stir till six of the Clock the next Morning, though you discharge Guns at them all Night; but since 
Stein Callenfels
 cut down the Wood to make Pallisado's for the new Fort against the Town 
Conception,
 they were never seen afterwards.






SECT. IX. Parayba.


NOrthward from 
Itamaraca
 borders the County of 
Parayba,
 whence the 
French
 Ships carry'd yearly several Ladings of 
Brasile
 Wood, till 
Anno
 1585. the 
Portuguese
 General 
Martin Leytam
 drove them from all places, since when they never recover'd any part thereof.


This Territory of 
Parayba
 borrows its Denomination from the chief Town, ly∣ing five Leagues from the North Sea near the River 
Parayba,
 which in the Summer Season hath but little Water, but in the Winter Season increases to that heighth, that it oftentimes on a sudden overflowing the Countrey sweeps away both Peo∣ple, Cattel, and Houses. The City it self, though small, yet hath several fair Buildings, amongst which three Churches and as many Cloysters, inhabited by







OSTIS
NES






Franciscans, Carmelites,
 and 
Benedictins,
 are none of the meanest. The Countrey there∣abouts indifferently fruitful, hath twenty Sugar-Mills. The Mountain 
Cupaguao,
 formerly very populous with Natives, being exceeding fertile, produces all man∣ner of Fruit; at present it lies desolate, the 
Brasilians
 being all destroy'd by the 
Por∣tuguese.
 These Mountains produce also curious green Stones, which the Inhabi∣tants wore in their Lips for an Ornament, and which also cures the Griping of the Guts, by being laid upon the Belly.


The 
French
 under the Command of Captain 
Dourmigas,
 discover'd ninety years ago the Silver-Mine 
Copaoba,
 and for a considerable time carry'd Silver and 
Brasile
 Wood from hence, till the 
Portuguese
 made themselves absolute Masters.


Moreover, on the North-side of 
Parayba,
 the Salvages call'd 
Petiguars
 inhabit sixteen Villages.


Amongst the Birds of prey which breed here, are the 
Ouyaourassou,
 twice as big as a Crane, with curious Feathers, and so bold and strong, that it devours not onely Sheep, but Deer and Men.


The Bird 
Mayton
 is no way inferior in beauty to the Peacock, his whole Body being cover'd with white and black Feathers; on his Head grows a Tuft; the Flesh is also very pleasant to the taste.


The 
Toucan,
 another Bird, resembles a Turtle-Dove in all parts, except the Bill and Breast; for the Belly is ten Inches long and three broad, the Breast of an Orange colour, mix'd with Crimson Spots; the remaining part is white, the Back red, and the Tail and Wings Coal-black.


The Plant call'd 
Yarammacarou
 deserves also a peculiar observation, 
viz.
 It is thicker than a Man's Thigh, grows twelve Foot high, with three Branches of equal length and thickness, which you may easily break; it is green without, white within, and without Leaves, leaving red Blossoms streak'd with blue, from whence grows a Fruit about the bigness of an Apple, crimson without and white within, and tasting like a Mulberry.


The River 
Parayba
 produces amongst many other Fishes the 
Guara-tereba,
 which hath a thick Body, flat Head, crooked Back, split Tail, and triangular Scales, which laid in the Sun, shine like polish'd Gold.


The Sea also hereabouts affords a strange Fish with a very long and thin Tail, the Females whereof Lay every day Eggs like Hens: they are full of poysonous Prickles, and divided into several sorts, amongst which the chiefest are accounted the 
Naainari
 and 
Jabebara.


THe Sea-Coast of 
Brasile
 from 
St. Vincent
 to 
Spirito Santo
 appears as followeth: Before the Coast of 
St. Vincent
 lie the four little Isles 
Queimadas,
 and on one side the 
Alcatraces
 and 
Busios;
 East North-East from which bears the Island 
Sebastian:
 Before the Inlet 
Ubatuba
 lies the Isle 
Dos Porcos,
 close under a high Shore, where the Haven runs far up in the Countrey. Fourteen Leagues farther the Island 
Grande,
 stor'd with fresh Water, with Fish-ponds, Woods, and two good Havens. Before the Road of 
Garatuba
 appear several broken Isles, the chiefest whereof is 
Morambaya.
 The Ships Sailing along the 
Brasilian
 Coast view next the Mouth of the wide River 
Jenero,
 without fear of Rocks or Shoals. Moreover, a sandy Ground ex
ends from the Western Point to 
Cape Frio,
 which rises out of the Sea like a Rock, with white Streaks, and crack'd on the top, between both which the high Island before 
Frio
 makes a safe Harbor. Nine Leagues beyond 
Frio
 to the Northward, 
St. Salvador
 opens a large Bay, hemm'd in on the South by divers nameless Isles. Lastly, the several Salt-pans along this Coast are very remarkable, as also the Promontory

St. Thoma
 and 
Parayva,
 the Inlets 
Manangea
 and 
Itapemeri,

and the River 
Guarapari,
 famous for the Mountain 
Pero Cam
 towards the North, and 
Guapel
 to the South. The Island 
Salvago,
 round and mountainous, lies before the Mouth of the River 
Guarapari,
 where the Main Coast grows uneven and Hilly. On the North-East Point of 
Spirito Santo
 a long ridge of Rocks appears above the Sea; and near the Inlet rises three black Hills on the South, and two Leagues up in the Countrey the bro∣ken Mountain 
Mestre Alvaro,
 which extends along the Sea-Coast. The River 
Des Reyos Magos
 encompasses three Mountains severally, and makes three Isles. The Coast on each side of the River 
Dolce
 is very plain and even, but 
Cricare
 hath a mix∣ture of high and low Lands. In the Mouth of the River 
Maranipe
 lies a great com∣pany of white Shelves near together, appearing afar off as if all one. 
Parairepe
 is re∣markable by the high Trees growing on it. The Mouth of the River 
Caruvelas
 lies full of Sand-plats. Near the Beacon 
Tauhaen
 rises a red Cliff from which a sandy Point reaches to the River 
Curubabo.
 Before 
Porto Seguro
 lie several dangerous Rocks in the Sea, to the Southward of which rises the High-land 
Cape Pasqual.
 Not far from hence 
Santa Cruiz
 a good Haven for small Vessels, from whence the Coast extends North North-East, and South South-West, to 
Rio Grande,
 where the Shoals call'd 
Baxos de St. Antonio,
 making a dangerous Entry, force the Ships for the most part to keep three Leagues from the Shore. Beyond the Arm of 
Rio Grande
 appear three high Mountains cover'd with Trees; from whence to 
Ilheos
 is a safe Passage free from Shelves. Eight Leagues farther, the River 
Dos Contas
 runs between two broken Cliffs into the Sea: in the Mouth of it rises a Rock resembling a high Island. Between 
Ilheos
 and 
Contas
 the Coast rises also, but falls low again in a Bay, where white Sugar-Mills, formerly belonging to 
Lucas Giraldes,
 are seen at a great distance. The Countrey on each side of the River 
Camanu
 is plain; the Stream it self hath a wide Mouth, and respects with its Northern Shore the Isle 
Cayepa,
 dan∣gerous for the many Shelves which are about the same. The River 
Tinhare
 is known by the Mountain 
Morro de Santo Paulo,
 which rises like a Galley on the Southern Shore. Twelve Leagues farther opens the Bay of 
Todos los Sanctos,
 on whose East∣stern Point stands the Castle 
Antonio,
 and before the Northern Shore the Island 
To∣poam,
 to the East and South-East low and strong. The River 
Das Pedras
 falls with a wide Mouth into the Ocean. Next you pass by the Streams 
Tapicuru, Real Vasa∣baris
 and 
Francisco,
 known by a low Promontory. The Rivers 
Miguel, Antonio, Ca∣maragili, Porto Calvo, Formoso,
 and 
Serinhaem,
 disembogue also into the Sea. Next the Stream 
Das Pedras
 rises the Promontory 
St. Augustine,
 all overgrown with Bushes and Brambles. Five Leagues Southward lies the small Isle 
Alexo.
 The Coast from 
St. Augustine
 to 
Pernambuco
 extends North and by East, and South and by West. The Island 
Tamaraca
 lies in the Mouth of the Stream 
Gajana;
 and fifteen Leagues farther appears 
Parayba;
 between which two the Shelf 
Pedra Furada
 extends three Leagues along the Coast, and another from the Shore of the Promontory 
Blanco,
 where the Road 
Porto de Franeses
 affords Seamen secure Anchorage for Shipping. Next to 
Parayba
 follow the Havens 
Treicaon, Pipa,
 and 
Busios,
 the Stream 
Siara
 and 
Maragnan,
 which washes the Western part of 
Brasile,
 and is taken for the Boundary between the 
Spanish Indies
 and the 
Portuguese,
 according to the Division by Pope 
Alexander
 the Sixth, 
Anno
 1502. Lastly, there belongs to 
Brasile
 the Island 
Fernando de Noronho,
 in three Degrees of Southern Latitude. The Capuchin, 
Claude de Abbe∣ville,
 going thither, found the same to be six Leagues in circumference, and extra∣ordinary fruitful; besides good fresh Water, Pease, Beans, Maiz, Potato's, Melons, Cotton, Cattel, wild Goats, and all sorts of Poultrey, which this Island affords; but it chiefly abounds with great variety of a sort of Birds which suffer themselves

to be caught with the Hand. There grows likewise a nameless Tree,
 not unlike the Laurel, being of a strange Nature, for who e're touches the Leaves, and after∣wards rubs his Eyes, loses his Sight for four hours, with exceeding pain; which pain nevertheless another Tree growing in the same Island cures immediately. The 
French,
 who Landed on 
Noronho
 Anno 1613. found a 
Portuguese
 there, with eighteen 
Brasilians,
 Men, Women, and Children, banish'd thither from 
Pernambuco,
 whom Baptizing, they carry'd to 
Maragnan.
 Near 
Noronho
 lies the Isle 
De Feu.






SECT. X. Maragnan.


MAragnan,
 forty five Leagues in circumference,
 lies in two Degrees of Sou∣thern Latitude, and a considerable distance from the Bay, which ap∣pears between the Rivers 
Aperegha
 and 
Comajamu.


The Eastern Entrance into this Bay hath before the Promontory 
Arbres Secs,
 the Isle 
St. Anna,
 by the 
Brasilians
 call'd 
Upaonmiri.


Opposite to 
Maragnan,
 about half way from the said Inlet, fall three Rivers into the Sea, the most Easterly call'd 
Mounin,
 hath a Mouth a Mile wide, and discharges its Water into the Sea; the middlemost 
Taboucourou,
 is five hundred Leagues long, and ends with two Mouths, half a League distant one from the other; the most Westerly, call'd 
Miary,
 is about six Leagues broad, so falling into the Sea.


The Stream 
Maracou
 falls into the 
Pinare,
 and thus united they joyn both with the 
Miary,
 which runs exceeding swift into the Sea.


Between the Capes 
Arbres Secs
 and 
De la Tortue,
 the Coast lies full of sandy Banks, some of which extend a League into the Ocean.


On the other side of the Promontory 
Tapoytapere
 near 
Maragnan,
 towards the River of 
Amazones,
 lie so many Isles along the Sea-shore, that no Ship is able to approach the same, because the Spaces between the Isles are overgrown with Trees call'd 
Apparituriers,
 whose Boughs shooting down and rooting in the Sea, produce other Trees, which grow so close together, that they seem one entire Tree with many Branches. Besides this Inconvenience there is abundance of drift Sand when the Wind sits from the Shore, which oftentimes swallows the Ships which lie upon the same.


Beyond 
Maragnan
 lie two Roads, the first between the Promontory 
Arbres
 and the Isle 
St. Anna,
 but dangerous; the other, discover'd some years since, reaches to the Fort of 
Maragnan,
 and is as dangerous as the first.


This Island hath twenty seven Villages, by the Natives call'd 
Oc
 or 
Tave,
 each Village consisting of four Houses made of great Stakes, and cover'd with Palm-tree Leaves against the Rain, each House being thirty Foot broad, and from two hun∣dred to five hundred Paces long, according to the greater or lesser number of In∣habitants. The first Village, opposite to 
St. Anna,
 is call'd 
Timbohu;
 the second, well known for two eminent Fishing-places, is 
Itapara;
 but the two biggest are 
Juniparan
 and 
Eussaouap,
 each having about five or six hundred Inhabitants.


This Island of 
Maragnan
 lies under a temperate Climate, being seldom troubled with excessive Colds, Droughts, pestilential Vapors, Wind, Hail, or Thunder, only it Lightens Morning and Evening in serene Weather. When the Sun returns from the 
Tropick
 of 
Capricorn
 to the North, then it Rains for six Weeks together; but when he declines from 
Cancer
 towards the Southern 
Solstice,
 the 
Trade
-Wind, or

Eastern Breezes rise at seven of the Clock in the Morning, but grow fainter to∣wards Sun-setting.


The Soil of 
Maragnan
 is exceeding fruitful, producing abundance of 
Brasile
 
ood, Sugar, Cotton, the red Colour 
Roucou,
 Tobacco, Balsam not inferior to 
 
Ara∣bian,
 Pepper, and all manner of Fruits. On the Coast is often found excellent Amber-greece and Jasper Stones, which the Inhabitants wore in their Lips. In some places along the Sea-shore appear Rocks of red and white Stone 
Diaphanous,
 like Crystal, which (some say) are as hard as Diamonds, and call'd 
Allencon.
 The Woods produce Timber, and the Shore Stones and Shells, of which they make Mortar. There are also several pleasant Fields and Hills, whose Feet are wash'd by delightful Brooks, along which they pass in 
Canoos
 from one Village to another. The Woods consist most of Palm-Trees, amongst which breed all sorts of Fowls and Beasts.


The chiefest of the Fruit-Trees which grow here is the 
Accayou,
 which being much bigger than our Pomewaters, hath Leaves not unlike those of an Oak: and also a Nut resembling a Sheeps Kidney, cover'd with a hard Shell, which incloses an oylie Pith. Out of these the Islanders press a very wholsom and pleasant Li∣quor; as also out of the 
Pacoeira
 and 
Bannanas,
 both excellent Plants, which will grow in any Ground. This Plant they pluck up by the Roots wild as soon as it hath put forth three Leaves; which Leaves being rowl'd up hard together like a Twig, are again Set, and then sprout up each with ten green Leaves, which when mov'd by the Wind, rattle like Parchment, and tear very easily: the Stalk is an Inch thick, from which spread several lesser Branches; under the Leaves hang yel∣lowish Flowers of a pleasant smell, at whose Stalks are lesser Leaves resembling little Scoups, full of Juice, in taste like Honey, and in colour like the White of an Egg: after the Flower follows the Fruit, very like a Cucumber, onely they are three square, and have a hardish Shell, which incloses a well tasted and wholsom Pulp, which commonly grows in Clusters. This Plant, when the Fruit is ripe, is pluck'd up, from whence another springs up immediately, which bears the like Fruit the next year; so that this Plant lives as it were by propagation conti∣nually.


The 
Bannanas
 bear Leaves of a Fathom long and two Foot broad; the Fruit is very like that of the 
Pacoeira.


The 
Mangaa
 is very like the Apricock both in taste and form.


The Tree 
Jaracaha
 hath a spread Crown, leaves like those of a Fig-Tree, yellow Flowers, and Pears with Shells, and full of Kernels.


The 
Ouaieroua
 is an exceeding sweet-smelling Tree, bears a Fruit much bigger than the greatest Melons.


The 
Junipap,
 which is much taller, hath Apples, which whilest they are green are best, yielding a Juice which Dyes Coal-black, and therefore is us'd by the Natives to paint their Bodies with: The Apples when ripe are yellow within and without, very well tasted, and melting in the Mouth.


Besides these fore-mention'd Fruit-Trees there are several others that grow on this Island, amongst which is the 
Vua-pirup,
 eminent for its Blossom, which is yel∣low, blue, and red, and bears delicate Apples, which ripen best in the rainy Season.


Lastly, the 
Pekey,
 which three Men cannot Fathom, bears a Fruit of two hand∣fuls bigness, having a hard thick Shell, and within four Kidney-like Kernels, each concealing a prickly Stone, which hurts the Mouths of unwary Eaters.


The Plant 
Carouata
 hath Leaves an Ell long, and two Inches broad; they are

very thick and thistly from the middle, and about two Foot from the Ground grows an exceeding pleasant Fruit, yellow without and within, three square, a Finger long, and hanging oftentimes sixty in a Cluster.


Vua,
 a sort of Melons, green without, and within full of white Pulp and black Kernels, and hath a pleasant Juice, dissolves to Water, if cut in the middle, sweeter than Sugar, and very refreshing.


Manioch,
 a thick Root of the Plant 
Manicup,
 Leav'd like a Fig-Tree; being ground to Meal, it serves in stead of Bread.


Besides these already mention'd, there are several other Plants, the most usual are the great flat Beans call'd 
Commanda-ouassou,
 and the long Pease 
Commanda-miry.


Here are variety of Birds of several sorts, especially of Parrots, which flye in great Companies, most beautiful to the Eye, and very docible to speak, and also good for Food.


The Partridges 
Nanbououassou,
 in bigness no way inferior to a Capon, have blue Feathers, and also Lay blue Eggs.


The 
Ourou,
 resembling a Partridge, hath a Combe like a Cock, but mix'd with three Colours, 
viz.
 red, black, and white.


The Bats, nam'd 
Andheura,
 have a mournful Note in the Night, often biting those they find asleep, and suck their Blood so hard that it can hardly be stopt.


The Ostriches here call'd 
Yandou,
 being as tall as a middle-siz'd Man, cannot flye, but run as swift as a Greyhound.


Their Fowl call'd 
Falian,
 with long Bills and Cranes Legs, flies very low, but runs so swift that a Horse can scarce overtake them.


The Ocean about 
Maragnan
 produces abundance of all sorts of Fish, and amongst others the 
Pyraon,
 six Foot long, thicker than a Barrel, and cover'd with black Scales of a hand-breadth.


The Fish 
Camouroupouy
 differs not much from the 
Pyraon,
 onely in having fewer Scales.


The 
Ougry,
 four Foot long, hath a broad Head, and two sharp Fins on the Back, which wound terribly. This Fish also swimming in the River, smells of Musk whilest it stays therein.


The like length hath also the 
Camboury Ouassou,
 whose Hog-like Head, and yel∣low scal'd Tail, makes it seem like a Monster.


The 
Yauebouyre
 is a Foot in thickness, in length two Fathom, and a Fathom in breadth, and hath a Tail of half a Fathom long, out of the middle of which sticks a sharp and great Bone, which makes such dangerous Wounds, that if any part of a Man's Body be touch'd therewith, it must be cut off.


The 
Narinnary,
 which is much lesser, wounds with its Sting very dangerously.


The flat Fish 
Acaraiou
 hath the length of a Foot, a green Head, thick Scales, a yellow Back, and white Belly.


The 
Araououa
 hath a hard Skin, is eight times bigger than the 
Acaraiou,
 and hath a three-pointed Sword, with which it kills other Fish.


Another sort of Sword-fish is the 
Panapans,
 whose Sword is a Foot less than that of the 
Araououa.


The 
Picamo
 and 
Caramourou
 resemble the Pilchard, and are taken in great abun∣dance near the Rocks.


The Rivers and Brooks on 
Maragnan
 are also very full of Fish, amongst which the 
Pourake,
 four Foot long, full of green, blue, red and white Specks and Streaks, the Skin so hard that no Sword can penetrate it; wherefore it regards not a blow, but if it moves, it causes such a pain on the Arm of him that strikes, that he falls down on the Ground.




The 
Caurimata,
 which is very like a Carp, is the most delicious Fish that ever was tasted.


The 
Pyrain,
 without Scales, colour'd red and yellow, hath sharp Teeth, which cut sloapingly; as also the 
Opean, Tarehure, Paraty,
 and 
Jerou.


The red Crabs 
Oussa,
 with hairy Legs, breed about the Roots of the fore-men∣tion'd Trees that grow in the Water.


The white Crabs 
Aouara-oussa
 carry the Amber-greece, cast on the Shores to their Holes.


They have also good Mussles, and well rellish'd Oysters sticking on the Boughs of the said Trees.


During the rainy Season there are generally standing Pools, in which yearly breed many Fishes, which are taken up by the Inhabitants when the Pools begin to dry.


Moreover, this Island feeds abundance of four-footed Beasts, amongst which their wild Deer, Rabbets and Hares, differ little from the 
European.
 They have al∣so wild Swine call'd 
Taiassou,
 who seem to have Navels on their Backs, which cast a sweet Musky smell; besides another sort of Swine, not inferior to the former, but of a stranger shape, being Mouth'd like a Hare, with two long Tusks in their up∣per Jaws, and two beneath; their Ears like a Mans; the foremost Feet white, and hoof'd like an Ass; the hindermost part of their Body like a Bear, and full of Bri∣stles, half white and half black, three handfuls long: when they creep in their Holes their staring Bristles fall; they keep much amongst Brambles, feed on Apples and Roots; In the Winter Season they Stye themselves up in their Holes.


Here are also Pismire-eaters, call'd 
Tamandua,
 with a Boars Head, Dogs Ears, sharp Snout, Horses Hair, and Ox Feet.


The 
Tapiyre-ete
 differ little from wild Cows, onely they have shorter Legs and Tails, and wanting Horns, are Arm'd in stead thereof with Teeth; in their Heads are often found a Stone like the 
Bezoar
 Stone.


Several sorts of 
Armadillo's
 here differ much in form each from the other.


The wild Cats 
Margaia
 are caught for their curious Skin.


The Foxes 
Janovare,
 and Leopards 
Sovassovaran,
 both curiously mark'd, are very ravenous.


Here is also a deform'd slow creeping Beast call'd 
Ai,
 whose Head is like a Mans, and cover'd with rough and grey Hair, on each Foot three Claws close together, and at least a Finger long, sharp Teeth, a smooth high black Nose, little drowsie Eyes, no Ears, a Tail small above and broad at the bottom, long Ash-colour'd Hair over all the Body; and being about the bigness of a Fox, it climbs slowly up the Trees, and comes not down before it hath eaten off all the Leaves; it feeds also on Earth, and sometimes sits on a high Bough without Meat twenty days to∣gether; it goes so softly, that it will hardly clear fifty Paces in twenty four hours.


On this Island are likewise all sorts of Apes and Monkies, amongst which is one most remarkable, call'd 
The Zimme Cayon,
 hairy all over, with a long white Beard, an old Mans Face, bald Ears, black Eyes and long Tail, which they wind about a Bough, and so hanging, swing themselves from one Tree to another; they are very fierce as well as subtile, for being wounded with an Arrow, they set upon their Enemy without the least fear; when they climb up the Trees, they carry their Mouths and Hands full of Stones to throw at Travellers; and if any one of them chance to be wounded, all the rest that are near come to help him, and stop the Wound with Leaves, and the like; the young ones hang upon the Backs of their Dams, who run very swift with them, and leap from one Tree to another.








Juan Ardenois
 relates, That the 
Coyons
 play at certain Games with the Natives for Money, and spend what they win in publick Houses.


Joseph de Acosta
 tells us, That one of these kind of Creatures being sent to a Tavern for Wine, would not part with his Money before his Pot was fill'd, which he defen∣ded from the Boys that offer'd to take it from him, by throwing Stones at them; and though it lov'd Wine very well, yet brought it always home without tasting.


It is no less wonderful what 
Peter Martyr
 relates of one of these Creatures, 
viz.
 That observing one ready to fire a Gun at him, before he could discharge, it leap'd from the Tree and snatch'd up a Child, which he held as a Buckler before him.


The 
Sagovin
 resembles a Lyon in the fore-part of the Body, with shaggy Hair; they are exceeding dainty and tender, yet so stubborn and sullen, that they take pet at the least affront, and often pine themselves away and die with hunger.


The Serpent 
Boy-ete,
 two Fathoms long, without Legs, having a bright speckled Skin and four sharp Teeth, wounds also mortally with its Tail; but is the less dan∣gerous, because at the end of the Tail grows a Bladder, which moving rattles as if there were Pease in it, which gives notice to the Traveller, though unwary, by which means he makes his escape.


The other Serpents call'd 
Jouboy, Tara-gouyboy,
 and 
Tarehuboy,
 serve the Natives for a great Delicacy; as also the great Toads or Frogs, call'd 
Tourourou.


They have also a sort of Flies call'd 
Ton,
 which exceedingly molest them, against which their chiefest Medicine is Palm-tree Oyl, and the 
Roucou,
 with which they colour their Skins.


The Natives of this Island of 
Maragnan,
 driven out of the pleasant Countrey 
Cayete
 by the 
Portuguese,
 are a sort of the 
Toupinambas,
 who Setled here about a hun∣dred and fifty years ago. The time of their first coming hither us'd formerly to be solemniz'd with the great Feast call'd 
Caoven;
 but because a Woman boldly set up∣on a Commander in his Cups, there arose a great Tumult amongst them, and ever since the Island hath been divided, one Party calling the other 
Tobaiares,
 that is,

We are Enemies:
 They are so inveterate against one another, that who e're they take Prisoners they unmercifully devour: Both are of a middle Stature, have flat No∣ses, which the Midwive make at the Birth of the Child; they are generally a strong People, and many of them living a hundred years, without being grey, bald, or sick; they live temperate, and under a wholsom Climate: Some of their Women bear Children (as they say) till they are eighty years of age, which being born white, turn to be of a Tawny colour, by being anointed with Suet call'd 
Roucou,
 and Oyl; otherwise they are well proportion'd. The Men pluck out all the Hair of their Foreheads, but suffer it to hang pretty long over their Ears, and behind. The Women let their Hair hang down to their Middle, and wear woodden Ear-rings; but the Men hang green Beads in their Lips, and thrust, little Bones through their Noses. They go all stark naked; their Legs are colour'd black with the Juice of the Herb 
Junipap,
 and upon the other parts of their Body appear Fi∣gures of several Representations. Those that will manifest their Valor, and be ac∣counted hardy, gash their Bodies all over with Wounds, which they heal in such a manner, that the Scars may more plainly appear. They never come to their usual Feasts, but dress'd up in various colour'd Feathers; upon the Crown of their Heads they wear Caps stuck with Plumes, which they call 
Acangoap,
 or Coronets, call'd 
Acangerar;
 about their Necks, the Necklaces 
Aiouacava;
 over their Shoulders, the Man∣tles 
Assoyave;
 their Garters they call 
Tabacoura,
 at which they hang hollow Nut∣shells full of little Stones, which gingle and rattle as they go, and about their Arms Armlets call'd 
Mapouyh-couaychovare;
 all which are curiously checker'd with various colour'd Feathers.


The 
Maragnans
 live not much up in the Countrey, but rather on the Sea-Coast, because of their Fishing, removing every sixth year, calling the Village where they Settle, by the former Name.


They take every Man as many Wives as he pleaseth; but the Women must stick each to one Man, unless she be Divorc'd from him, which often happens upon small occasions.


Their Cotton Hammocks call'd 
Yu,
 on which they sleep, hang between two Stakes, in which they lie.


Singular Friends and Relations Feast one another daily; but they are cruel and revengeful against their neighboring Enemies, whom, when they take any of them, they fatten, kill, and eat. The least affront done them, or injurious word spoken to them, or against their Predecessorss, makes them take up Arms, which consist of Bowes and Arrows, which they call 
Ouyrapar
 and 
Oune.


Here the 
French
 have built the Fort 
St. Lovis
 on an Island, from whence West∣ward may be seen the Cape 
Tapouytapere,
 which at High-water seems like an Island, and lies four Leagues from thence; at Low-water they can walk over the Sands from the same to the Main Land.


This fruitful Countrey hath twenty populous Villages.


Westward lies 
Comma,
 which gives Denomination to the chief Village, the River, and the rest of that Countrey, wherein are sixteen more handsom Villages, better built, and more populous than 
Maragnan
 or 
Tapouytapere.


Concerning the building of the fore-mention'd Fort on 
Maragnan,
 it hapned as followeth:


The 
French
 Captain 
Riffaut,
 upon the Advice of 
Ouyrapive,
 who bore a great sway amongst his 
Maragnan
 Subjects, fitted out three Ships; but because of a Contention between the Sea-men, and the loss of his chiefest Vessel, he was forc'd to Sail to 
France,
 and leave some of his Men on 
Maragnan,
 under the Command of a young







I. TAMA
CA




A. 
Castrum Auriaci.


B. 
Ostium fluminis ad Austrū.


C. 
Castrum in monte.


D. 
Oppidum Scoppi
.


E. 
Sac
llum.


F. 
Via quibus ascenditur.


G. 
Fluvius qui versus Garasu abit.










UVIUS GRANDIS.




A. 
.


B. 
.


C. 
.


D. 
.










SIARA.




A. 
Castrum.


B. 
Fluvius.


C. 
Via lit
us versus.


D. 
Sylva.


E. 
Campestria.








Gentleman call'd 
De Vaux,
 who carry'd himself so discreetly amongst the Islanders; that they promis'd to embrace the 
Christian
 Religion, if new Supplies came from 
France
 to assist them against their Enemies; of which 
De Vaux
 advis'd the 
French
 King 
Henry
 the Fourth, who approv'd of it,
 and sent Monsieur 
De la Ravardiere
 to 
Maragnan,
 to make a farther Enquiry into the whole Matter, where he spent six Moneths; after which returning he found the King murder'd, wherefore the Busi∣ness lay dead for a while; but at length 
Ravardiere
 took with him the Lord 
Rosilly,
 and the Baron of 
Sansi,
 desiring some 
Capuchins
 of the Queen-Mother, for the pro∣mulgating of the 
Christian
 Religion in 
Maragnan;
 which being granted, they set Sail with three Ships 
Anno
 1612. with which arriving safely there, and Landing, he built next the chiefest Haven the Fort 
St. Lewis
 on a Hill, by whose foot two Rivers glide into the Ocean. After which this new Plantation went on for a considerable time, till the 
Portuguese
 overpowering them, drove them out of this their new Field,
 ma∣king themselves absolute Masters of the Fort, and also of the great Mountain 
Ibou∣yapap,
 four Leagues high, plain on the top, twenty four Leagues long, and little less in breadth. No Champain under the Sun is more pleasant and fruitful than this; for in some places it is shaded with Trees, in others hath brave Pastures, lies under a wholsom Climate, and abounds with fresh Springs, from whence are de∣riv'd store of Brooks, and Rivulets full of Fish.






SECT. XI. The Lordships Tamarica, Rio Grande, Siara, and Para.


THe 
Praefecture
 of 
Tamarica,
 not above three Leagues in length and two in breadth, so call'd from a little Island lying before it, and part of its Pre∣cinct, is counted the first, that is, the most ancient Lordship of 
Brasile,
 having otherwise nothing in it that is very considerable, save onely a good Haven or Port, with a Castle for the Security or Command of it, held to be impregna∣ble, and so found by the 
Dutch,
 who under 
Peter Heyn
 and 
Stein Callenfels
 in vain attempted the taking of it, as shall be mention'd hereafter more particularly, but made it useless to the 
Portuguese,
 by making a Bulwark at the Mouth of the Haven, and so blocking it up.


This 
Capatania
 yielded formerly a Rent of thirty thousand 
Ducats
 to the Earls of 
Montesanto,
 whose Right it was.


THe 
Praefecture
 of 
Rio Grande,
 a small Precinct, so denominated, as lying on the South-side of that great River which the 
Portuguese
 call 
Rio Grande,
 and the Natives 
Potingi,
 where it falls into the Sea, was once possess'd by the 
French
 about the Year 1597. who were outed by the 
Portuguese,
 and the Place fortifi'd both against them and the Salvages, (of whom they slew and took Prisoners very great numbers) with a Castle, which the 
Dutch
 in the Year 1631. found an impregnable piece, and too hard for them to take.


THe 
Praefecture
 of 
Siara,
 so denominated from the Haven; it hath long been in the possession of the 
Portuguese,
 but they have therein no Towns of note, onely a Castle, and some few Houses for those that attend the gathering of Cotton-Wool, and Manuring of the Sugar-Canes, which are here in great abundance, also the Countrey is said to afford some Crystal and other Precious Stones.




LAstly, the 
Praefecture
 of 
Para
 is the most Northerly part of 
Brasile,
 bordering upon 
Guiana,
 so call'd from the River 
Para,
 which runneth through the midst of it, upon which, in a convenient place, and upon rais'd Ground, the 
Portuguese
 have built a very strong Castle, well Wall'd on all sides, save onely towards the River, where it is planted with Ordnance: It is built in a quadrangu∣lar form, and hath at least three hundred Persons of the 
Portuguese
 Nation (besides the Garrison Soldiers) belonging to it, who have all Employment enough about the Cotton-Wool, Sugar-Canes, and Tobacco, which the Countrey is said to af∣ford in great plenty.




A Relation of the Proceedings of the 
Netherland West-India
 Company in 
Brasile
 to the Year 
1658.


THe chief Disturbers of the 
Portuguese
 in the possession of the Countrey of 
Brasile,
 were the 
United Netherlanders;
 for they having had good success with their first Fleet, under the Command of 
John Molenaer, John Dignums∣zoon, John Schelinger, Simon Mau,
 and the Merchants 
Cornelis Woddman, Gerard Beveningen,
 and 
Heinier van Heb,
 Anno 1595. in the 
East-Indies,
 where they got such footing, that they took whole Kingdoms, to the great enriching of the Eastern World, where they spread their Trade over the whole Country, were thereupon emboldned to venture also to the West, that thereby they might cut off the Sinews of the King of 
Spain
's Wars, he being continually supply'd with Treasures from 
America.


The grand Promoters of this Design were the Company of Merchants, who hi∣therto had Traded to 
Guinee;
 and the rather, because 
Guinee
 brought them but little Profit. But to set upon the 
Spanish
 Power, was a Business of no small Consequence; nevertheless they undertaking it, obtain'd Letters Patents from the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands,
 Anno 1621. for erecting of a 
West-India
 Company, in which it was declar'd,
 That none without the said Companies leave should drive any Trade to 
Africa
 from the Northern 
Tropick,
 to the Cape 
Bonne Esperance;
 nor to 
America
 from 
Terre-Neuf
 to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 or 
Le Maire;
 nor in the South Sea to 
Anian;
 which if any attempted, they should forfeit Ship and Goods; besides several other Priviledges and Immunities granted towards the promoting and establishing of the said Company. After a long Consultation which way to steer their Course, it was concluded upon in the Council for the Affairs of the Company, to Invade 
St. Sal∣vador
 in the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 whether they sent twenty Men of War and three Ketches, Commanded by 
Jacob Willekens,
 and 
Peter Peterszoon Hein;
 the Land Forces being under the Command of Colonel 
John van Dorth.
 In the beginning of the Year 1624. the Fleet set Sail out of the 
Texel
 and the 
Maes,
 and in five Moneths arriv'd at 
St. Salvador.
 As soon as the 
Portugueses
 discover'd the 
Dutch
 Fleet, they shot with∣out ceasing from the Fort 
Philippo
 with three Brass Guns, as also from the Castle 
Tapagipe,
 with four Demi-Canons, but chiefly from the Battlement rais'd three∣square out of the Water before 
St. Salvador,
 from whence they play'd at them with twelve great Guns,
 whilest the Vice-Admiral ran within Musquet-shot of the said Battlement with three Ships, and found fifteen 
Portuguese
 Vessels lying near the Shore not far from the Castle 
Philippo,
 where there began a sharp Conflict, to the no small advantage of 
Peter Hein;
 who thereupon ventur'd with three Boats to Board the fifteen Ships: which resolute Attempt of the 
Dutch
 Seamen so amaz'd the 
Portuguese,
 that they set their biggest Ships on Fire, and fled ashore: Those Ships that escap'd, being in all ten, the 
Hollanders
 took and brought them to the Fleet.







view of Salvador


Urbs SALVADOR




A. 
Coenobium de Carmo.


B. 
Portude Carmo.


C. 
Collegium Jesuitarum.


D. 
Coenobium S. Francisci.


E. 
Basilica.


F. 
Carcer.


G. 
Aula Marctionis et Vice-regis Brasiliae.


H. 
Porta S. Benti.


I. 
Suburbium.


K. 
Coenobium S. Benti.


L. 
Repositorium.


M. 
Castellum maritim
m.


N. 
Aguae mediterranca.


O. 
Castellum S. Alberti.








This flight of the 
Portuguese
 encouraging 
Peter Hein,
 he went with fourteen Boats, each Mann'd with two hun dred Arm'd Men upon the very Mouths of the Can∣nons to the fore-mention'd Battlement and took the same, notwithstanding the Stone Wall rose eight Foot out of the Water, and above a hundred 
Portuguese
 de∣fended it, whilest the Admiral 
Willekens
 sent twelve hundred Soldiers, and two hun∣dred and forty Seamen ashore with Field-Pieces. The Forlorn-Hope consisted of sixty Musquetteers, led by Captain 
Helmond,
 who was seconded by Lieutenant 
La Main,
 all the Seamen following with Spades and Pick-axes; the Reserve was brought up by Captain 
Kyf, Ysenach,
 and 
William Schouten;
 thus drawn out, they were led towards the City by the Guides 
Dirk Colver
 and 
Dirk de Ruiter,
 along a nar∣row Way, which the 
Portuguese
 might have guarded with a few Men, had they not been all struck with a pannick fear, and making use of the dark Night, fled into the Woods. The 
Dutch
 found in the City an incredible Booty,
 because the Gover∣nor 
Diego Mendoza de Furtado
 had forbid the carrying away of any Goods, that so the Citizens might be the easier perswaded to defend the City; which they might well have done, had they not been surpris'd with the suddenness of the Action; for when 
Willekens
 Anchor'd here, there were above sixteen hundred Soldiers, besides a considerable number of Arm'd Citizens in 
St. Salvador;
 besides, in the Forts about the City on the Walls lay twenty three Brass, and twenty six Iron Guns.


This Victory was scarce obtain'd, when Colonel 
Dorth,
 who had lost the Fleet at 
Point Vincent,
 arriv'd here after all was done, and caus'd Edicts to be publish'd, in which the fled Citizens were promis'd greater Priviledges under the 
Netherlanders
 Protection, than ever they had under the King of 
Spain.
 Whereupon a few 
Portu∣guese
 return'd to the City; but the greatest part of them, and those the most consi∣derable, were partly kept back by Command of the Bishop 
Teixera,
 who laid the fault concerning the loss of the City on the Governor 
Furtado,
 and partly because they judg'd the 
Netherlanders
 unable to defend them against the 
Spanish
 Power.


About the same time several rich laden Vessels arriv'd there from 
Lisbon, Janeiro, Spirito Santo, Angola
 and other Places, all ignorant of the Conquest of 
St. Salvador.


Whilest 
Dorth
 and 
Willekens
 were ordering all things within the City, the out∣staying 
Portuguese
 at last taking courage, Storm'd the City from Midnight till the next day in the Afternoon, but fearing they should be set upon behind unawares, Retreated; after which 
Dorth
 thinking he had been free from all fear of Enemies, and with a small Guard riding out of the City to take a view of the adjacent Coun∣trey, was scarce got a Bowe-shot from the Walls,
 when a great Body of 
Brasilians
 rush'd forth unexpectedly from an Ambuscade, and wounded him so mortally, that he fell dead from his Horse, and had his Head suddenly chopt off, and his Body mangled very terribly.


Allart Schouten
 being chosen Governor in 
Dorth's
 stead, took no care to fortifie the City; and after his Decease his Brother 
William Schouten
 succeeding him, regarded it less, so that all things went to ruine, every one striving onely to enrich themselves. Amongst other Booties, they took the rich laden Vessel which 
Francisco de Sarmiento,
 Governor of 
Chili,
 brought to 
St. Salvador,
 with fifty eight thousand 
Guilders,
 and a much greater sum of Gold and Pearls, all which was imbezled away.


This City 
St. Salvador,
 built by 
Thomas de Sosa
 along the Sea-side, runs up broad at the Suburb 
Carmo,
 hath four Market-places, into the biggest whereof, being of a long square, run nine Streets, the chief of which being very broad, hath many stately Houses. The second Market-place is of like form, onely it winds a little to∣wards the Right, and at the Entrance stands a strong Prison. The Cloyster 
St. Francis,
 inhabited by 
Jesuits,
 stands in a Park near the Wall by which the Moat runs. To∣wards

the Sea-side they have a second Structure, much statelier than the 
Franciscan
 Cloyster. Near the Prison stands the Armory, and somewhat farther the great Church, which 
Anno
 1624. was not quite finish'd. The Church dedicated to the Virgin 
Mary
 appears with a high Spire near the Gate 
Bento,
 without which the great Cloyster 
Bento
 is built; but the chief Church is 
St. Salvador.
 On the utmost Point towards the South-West of the City lies the Fort 
Antonio,
 between which and the City stands a very neat Pleasure-house, belonging to the Bishop. Besides 
Antonio
 there are four other considerable Forts, 
viz. Diego, St. Maria, De Gracia,
 and 
Vittoria,
 About half way between 
Vittoria
 and the Cloyster 
Bento,
 stands the Castle with four Bulwarks; but on the North-side the City is guarded by the Forts 
St. Peter, Philippo,
 and 
Tapecipe.


The 
Spanish
 King seeming exceedingly concern'd at the loss of so eminent a Place, fitted out a great Fleet for the recovery of what had been taken from him; but the 
Netherland West-India
 Company having notice of it, put themselves into a posture of Defence, and in a short time made ready eighteen Men of War and seven Ketches, Mann'd with a thousand six hundred and ninety Seamen, and a thousand three hun∣dred and fifty Land-Soldiers, 
John Dirkszoon Lam
 being Admiral: But news coming day after day of the extraordinary Preparations in 
Spain,
 it was judg'd convenient to strengthen the Fleet with fourteen Ships and two Ketches more, carrying a thou∣sand four hundred and thirty Seamen, and five hundred eighty Soldiers, under the Command of General 
Boudewyn Henrickszoon,
 and Admiral 
Andries Veron.
 Moreover, the 
West-India
 Company fitted out a third Fleet, consisting of four Frigats and three Ketches, Commanded by 
Henry Kat,
 with Orders to Cruise along the 
Spanish
 Coast.


In the beginning of the Year 1625. 
Frederick de Toledo
 weighed Anchor from 
Cales
 with one and thirty Gallions, four Pinnaces, three Tartans, and a Carvel, all carrying seventy five hundred Men. The Soldiers were divided into three Regiments, Commanded by the Colonels 
Pedro Osorio, Juan Orellana,
 and the Mar∣quess 
De Torreclusa.


Near 
St. Jago
 at the 
African
 Cape 
Verde, Toledo
 joyn'd with the 
Portuguese
 Fleet, consisting of twenty one Gallions and fourteen Carvels and Barques, Mann'd with four thousand Seamen, two Regiments of Soldiers, Commanded by 
Antonio Nunnez Barreio,
 and 
Francisco de Almeida;
 but the chief Commander of this Fleet was 
Emanuel Meneses.
 Which great Fleet being arriv'd at 
St. Salvador, Toledo
 himself Landed at the Fort 
Antonio,
 leaving the Command of the Fleet to 
Juan Fajardo:
 The first thing he did, was to set upon the Cloyster 
Bento;
 which having gain'd, he left Serjeant 
Troppani
 with two Regiments in the same, whilest he went and Storm'd the 
Carme∣lites
 Minster, and at last took it; but in the mean time four hundred 
Hollanders
 Sal∣lying out, made a furious Onset upon the two Regiments, who had possession of the Cloyster 
Bento,
 where the 
Spaniards
 sustain'd considerable damage; for besides the wounding of three Captains, and the loss of a great number of Soldiers, there were slain the Commanders 
Emanuel Aquitara, Alonso de Gana, Pedro San Stevan, Diego Espi∣nosa,
 and Colonel 
Pedro Osorio.
 But 
Toledo
 no whit dismay'd hereat, but taking fresh courage, brought twenty nine Demi-Culverins ashore, which fir'd so vehemently out of the 
Carmelites
 and 
Bento's
 Cloysters, on the seventeen 
Dutch
 Ships that lay near the Shore, that several of them were sunk, and others shatter'd beyond hopes of ever being repair'd. After this the 
Spanish
 Army was divided into three several Parties, which continually fir'd on the City from three new rais'd Works; the chiefest Party, which was in the 
Carmelites
 Minster, had twenty three Brass Guns; the secon'd, plac'd on the great Wall of the Cloyster 
Bento,
 fir'd Night and Day with eight Demy-Cannons on the City, in which all things were in a confusion,

whilest the Governor 
William Schouten
 went unconcern'd from one Tavern to ano∣ther railing at the Soldiers, who thereupon mutinying and deposing him, chose Serjeant 
Hans Ernst Kyf
 in his room, who, as he was calling a Council of War, re∣ceiv'd a Summons from 
Toledo
 to deliver up the City; at which 
Kyf
 being much surpris'd, sent a Drummer with a Letter to 
Toledo,
 desiring him to grant the Be∣sieged three Weeks time to repair and make fit their batter'd Vessels to carry them back for 
Holland;
 and also that they might, according to Martial Custom, march out with lighted Matches, flying Colours, Bullets in their Mouths, and with Bag and Baggage. To which 
Toledo
 return'd Answer, That he was now in his own Countrey, and had gotten possession of four Fortifications about 
St. Salvador,
 on which he had planted thirty seven Cannons, and therefore saw no such necessity to grant the Besieged (who could not possibly expect any fresh Supplies) such advan∣tageous and bold Demands; and onely promis'd them their Lives should be at his discretion. Yet at last 
William Stoop, Hugh Antoniszoon,
 and 
Francis du Chesne
 being sent to the 
Carmelites
 Cloyster, agreed with 
Toledo
 on these Conditions: 
That the
 Hollanders 
should surrender
 St. Salvador 
in the Condition it was then in, march out unarm'd, but with Baggage, and have a free Pussage with Provisions and all things necessary allow'd them for their Trasportation for
 Holland. Whereupon on the first of 
May
 the City was de∣liver'd up to the 
Spaniards
 in such disorder, that some of them had taken possession of the Gate 
Bento,
 before those on the other side of the City knew of any Agree∣ment that was made between 
Toledo
 and Colonel 
Kyf.
 And thus the Place which had a whole year been under the Jurisdiction of the 
Netherlanders,
 fell again under the possession of the Spanish Crown, onely through the indiscreet management of the Commanders; for otherwise it was sufficiently strong, and well stor'd with Am∣munition and Men, being able to make out two thousand. Moreover, the Ketch 
De Haes,
 was set out before from the 
Holland
 Fleet, and brought news of the Forces that were sent from the 
Netherland
 Havens to their assistance: But the Ships under Admiral 
Lam,
 as also those under 
Boudewyn Henriczoon,
 were stay'd a considerable time in their Harbors by contrary Winds, and at last reaching the 
Line
 were be∣calm'd, and through the excessive heat of the Climate many Men lost by raging and mortal Distempers, insomuch that they reach'd not the Bay 
Todos los Sanctos
 before the twenty sixth of 
May,
 on which they saw the 
Spanish
 Flag streaming from the Walls of 
St. Salvador,
 and fifty great Ships riding at an Anchor near the Shore.


The 
Netherland
 Fleet, divided into four Squadrons, consisted of thirty four Sail, amongst which 
Lam
 carry'd the Flag on the Main-top, the Vice-Admiral 
Adrian Cheszoon
 on the Fore-top, the Rere-Admiral 
Adries Veron
 on the Main-mast, and the Commander of the fourth Squadron on the Mizne-top: All of them seeing the 
Spa∣niards
 absolute Masters, judg'd it most convenient to put to Sea; but standing a pretty while to the South, they found that the strong Current drove them to the Shelves on the West-side of the Inlet; wherefore Tacking about, they made towards the Enemy, who at first seem'd to meet them with twenty eight great Ships, but re∣turning towards the City, the 
Hollanders
 also stood to Sea again, Steering Southerly, though without making much advantage in their Way, the Sea going very hollow, and the strong Current setting them towards the Shore, by which means they were in no small danger before the River 
Francisco,
 where many of the Men dy'd for want of fresh Provisions, and the number of the Sick increas'd daily, insomuch that some of the Ships were like to perish for want of Men to guide them: It was also judg'd dangerous to lie longer with such a great Fleet near a Lea-Shore, herefore they put into the Inlet 
Trayciaon,
 which lies a League to the Northward of he River 
Monguapigape,
 from whence a ridge of Rocks extends to 
Tayciaon,
 and being

overflow'd at High-water, hath three Openings or Entrances, two for great Ships, and one, the most Northern, for small Vessels to pass through: The Sea also break∣ing against this Cliff never molests the Ships whatever Winds blow. The Coun∣trey is overgrown with Brambles, and hath a Lake two Leagues long, and a quar∣ter broad, on the opposite Shore of which stood a Village, inhabited by 
Portugueses
 and 
Brasilians;
 but the 
Portugueses
 flying from thence left the 
Brasilians
 in absolute possession: The 
Hollanders
 going thither found thirty Chests of Sugar in one Hut; after which the Admiral 
Lam
 caus'd his sick Men to be brought ashore, whilest the Captains 
Boshuisen, Swart, Dyke, Stapels,
 and 
Uzeel,
 march'd up into the Countrey, where they got plenty of Oranges and Cattel. In the mean time the Ketch 
Vosken,
 Mann'd with thirty six Seamen, Cruising along the Sea-Coast of 
Brasile,
 took three Ships, one out of the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 laden with Sugar and Tobacco, ano∣ther with the same Merchandise from 
Pernambuco,
 and the third laden with Wines from 
Madera.
 On the first of 
August
 the Fleet set Sail again, to the great sorrow of the 
Brasilians,
 who out of hopes of being protected by them against the 
Portuguese,
 had joyn'd their Forces with theirs; but now being forsaken, they expected no∣thing but utter Ruine; which to escape, many of them desir'd to be admitted to go along with the Fleet, which had been granted them, had not the 
Hollanders
 wanted Provisions for themselves. The Fleet getting off at Sea, the Admiral 
Veron
 ran with twelve Sail to the Coast of 
Africa;
 and 
Boudewyn Henrickszoon
 kept eighteen Ships under his Command, the rest returning home with Admiral 
Lam:
 and thus the Fleet left the unfortunate Haven 
Trayciaon,
 where above seven hundred 
Dutch
 Seamen were bury'd. 
Boudewyn Henrickszoon
 refreshing at 
Cape St. Vincent,
 steer'd Westerly, when a Storm (which in twenty four hours blew from all Points of the Compass) surprising him, broke his Main-mast, separated the whole Fleet, and sunk the 
Flushing
 Frigat; at last getting beyond the Isle 
Virgin Gorda,
 the Fleet meet∣ing again, got to 
Juan de Porto Rico
 about the latter end of 
September;
 into whose Haven 
Henrickszoon
 Sail'd with great courage,
 notwithstanding the narrow Mouth thereof was guarded by a strong Fort full of Brass Guns, which fir'd very fiercely upon him, who on the other side was not idle in discharging his Guns on the Fort; and had not the shallow Water before the City prevented his Landing that day, he had gotten a far greater Booty than afterwards he met with; for the Inhabitants had, during the Low-water, remov'd all their best Goods: but the next Morning before Sun-rising, the Admiral Landed with eight hundred Men, march'd into the City without any resistance, pitch'd the 
States
 Flag on the Governor's House, guar∣ded all Avenues, unhoop'd all the Wine-Casks which he found there, for fear his Men should make themselves Drunk therewith, and so neglect their Duty, fir'd from the Land-side towards the Castle with three Brass Guns, gain''d the Re∣doubt, built for the security of the Bridge, which unites the small Isle on which 
Porto Rico
 is built with the great, rais'd a Platform, from whence he fir'd Day and Night with six Cannons, guarded by Captain 
Thyene,
 whilest the Commander 
Uzeel
 kept Watch near the Fort; but his Men being most of them sick, he could not do any great Exploits, especially since the 
Spaniards
 Sallying out, as they did daily, kill'd many of the 
Hollanders,
 and amongst them Captain 
Uzeel,
 after he had shot down two Turrets from the Castle; which damage the Enemy repair'd by taking several of the 
Hollanders
 Boats; by which means they could not prevent fresh Sup∣plies from going to the Castle; the Besiegers in the mean time beginning daily to be in greater want for Ammunition and Provisions: whereupon 
Henrickszoon
 judg'd it convenient to sound a Retreat, after he had set the Ships belonging to the City 
Porto Rico
 on fire in four places. In which Retreat he receiv'd so many

farewel Shots from the Fort, that they were forc'd to go to the Leeward to stop their Leaks, and leave one of their Ships to the Enemy, in lieu whereof the 
West-Capel
 Frigat took a Barque with four Brass Guns, in the little Haven 
Sierra Gorda;
 from whence the Fleet ran into the Western Bay of the Island 
Porto Rico,
 where whilest they repair'd and took in fresh Provisions, 
Henrickszoon
 sent the Ships 
Hester
 and 
Jonas
 richly laden for 
Holland;
 the remaining part of the Fleet meeting with strong contrary Tydes at 
Porto Rico,
 were necessitated to put into the Inlet 
Francisco,
 where they made several Marches up into the Countrey, to the loss of many of their Men, which were kill'd by the 
Spaniards,
 lying in Ambuscade amongst the Bram∣bles that grew along by the Ways.


In the middle of 
January,
 Anno 1626. 
Henrickszoon
 Sailing about the North of 
Porto Rico,
 steer'd to 
Dominico,
 and from thence along the Isles 
Martinigo, Luzia,
 and the Promontory 
De tres Puntas,
 towards the Island 
Margarita,
 where Landing, and Storming the Castle on the Land-side with fifteen Men, he gain'd the first Breast∣works; but the 
Spaniards
 stopping up the Way along which they were to return, they had without doubt been all slain, had not the Captains 
Stapel
 and 
Estienne
 come to their assistance; for the 
Spaniards
 seeing them climbing up the Bulwarks, betook them to their Heels, after they had kill'd nine of the fore-mention'd fifteen, amongst whom were the Captains 
Urk
 and 
Molkman:
 of those that leap'd over into the Ditch most part escap'd; those few that were taken inform'd the 
Hollanders,
 That the Way towards the Village, inhabited by 
Spaniards,
 was every where stopt up with Barricado's, through which none were able to pass. 
Hendrickszoon
 thus become Ma∣ster of the Fort, sent the Booty which he had gotten there, together with three Brass, and five Iron Guns, aboard of his Ship, blew up the Fort, burnt all the Houses, and ran into the Haven 
Muchina,
 to which he gave the Denomination of 
Port Mau∣rice;
 where, besides a great number of dry'd Fish, he took forty Tun of Salt out of one Salt-pit. After this he taking in fresh Provisions at 
St. Fe,
 discover'd 
Aves,
 a low Isle full of high Trees, took above two hundred Sheep, and abundance of red Wood on 
Bonaire,
 and before the Coast a 
Spanish
 Frigat richly laden, made Inspe∣ctions into the Havens of 
Hispaniola
 and 
Jamaica;
 from whence he fell back on the Coast of 
Porto Rico,
 about the Island 
Mona,
 where discovering four 
Spanish
 Ships, he took three of them, and burnt the fourth; he also got abundance of Tortoises and Crocodiles on the great 
Caiman,
 and took a new Ship between the little sandy Isles 
Caios,
 as also before 
Cuba
 a Barque, which inform'd him, That the Fleet from the 
Honduras,
 as also that from 
New Spain,
 was daily expected at 
Havana:
 Thence Sail∣ing into the Haven 
Cabannas,
 he took a new Vessel of a hundred Tun, and abundance of Timber and Carpenters Tools one the Shore; he Landed also with seven hun∣dred Men on the East-side of the Haven, from whence he march'd along a narrow Path a League up into the Countrey, where he found a running Stream, Pastures full of Cattel, and a Village, the Inhabitants whereof being warn'd by the Barking of their Dogs, fled, and left all manner of fresh Provisions to the 
Hollanders,
 viz. above two thousand Oranges, abundance of Lemmons, 
Bananas,
 Hogs, Calves, and Bacon; all which having sent aboard, they burnt the Village: After this they took a 
Spanish
 Barque before 
Havana,
 as also a Ship laden with Timber, another Barque with Poultry, 
Cochenile,
 Money, and Haberdashery Ware, one Vessel with live Tor∣toises, and another full of Salt, dry'd Fish, and some Merchandise. While the Fleet was thus Cruising up and down before 
Havana,
 the Admiral 
Henrickszoon
 dy'd; a Man of most approv'd Valor, and of great Conduct:
 After which 
Adrian Cheszoon
 carry'd the Flag; but the Men mutinying about the dividing of the Pro∣visions, which began to grow very scarce, all things fell into great disorder; the

Seamen rebell'd against their Commanders, saying, 
That they had been out long enough, and that they would not stay waiting any longer for the Fleet from
 New Spain 
or
 Honduras: Wherefore steering Home, they all arriv'd safe at the 
Texel
 and other places in 
Holland.


In our foregoing Relation we have given you an Account of the Fleet which came to assist the City of 
St. Salvador,
 divided into two Squadrons; eighteen Sail 
Boudewyn Henrickszoon
 kept under his Command, and twelve Sail remain'd in the Admiral 
Veron
's Squadron, who Sail'd to the Inlet 
Serre Leona,
 where he found the Admiral 
John Dirkszoon Lam
 with three Ships, which had lay'n there above two Moneths, by reason of the Sickness amongst the Seamen.


Frambore,
 King of this Place, granted 
Lam
 and 
Veron
 free liberty to Hunt, and to gather as many Oranges and Lemmons as they pleas'd, with which the Seamen were so refresh'd, that they set Sail again, and amongst many other things carry'd a Baboon with them from 
Sierra Leona,
 which so exactly resembled a Man, that it was wonderful to behold, having a Body, Hands, Eyes, Ears, Feet, and Actions like a Man, smoak'd Tobacco amongst the Seamen, made a noise like a Child when beaten. The Inhabitants of 
Sierra Leona,
 where these Monsters run in great Com∣panies through the Woods, believe that the Souls of the Deceased reside in them.


John de Laet,
 in his annual Journal of the Transactions of the 
West-India
 Com∣pany, affirms, That he saw a Female of these monstrous Creatures, which usually had her monethly Flowers.


The Fleet, as is before mention'd, Sailing from 
Sierra Leona,
 came to an Anchor at 
Commany,
 and Landed twelve hundred Men at 
Poquena,
 besides a hundred and fifty 
Negro's;
 which Regiment 
Andries Veron
 and 
Arend Jacobszoon
 carry'd to the Castle 
Del Mine,
 whither they before sent a Company, Commanded by 
Hans Gryf,
 to prevent the Sallies of the Enemy. The 
Hollanders
 tir'd and thirsty, Encamp'd themselves near the Fort, and whilest some of the Men were seeking for Water, others smoaking Tobacco, and lying without their Arms and in disorder on the Ground, and the Commanders were taking a view of the Fort from a neighboring Hill, two hundred 
Negro's
 fell upon the scatter'd Army with great rage and fury, and so much the greater, in regard the 
Portuguese
 had promis'd them great sums of Money for every 
Hollander
 they kill'd: never any Army was in such a distraction, they being dispers'd and kill'd like so many Sheep, the Admiral 
Veron
 and all the Officers slain, and in a short time four hundred and forty Men cut off; and had not Captain 
Arend Jacobszoon
 been in League with the Inhabitants of 
Commany,
 whi∣ther the routed Regiments fled, not one Man had escap'd that bloody Slaughter: Nor was it to much purpose to Besiege the Castle 
Del Mine,
 because the Bullets hit∣ting against the Walls of the Castle, built all of Rock-stones, did no Execution. But the four Ships inform'd of this miserable destruction, fell down to 
Commany,
 to fetch those that were left alive, and return'd home with the other eleven.


During the unfortunate Expedition of this Fleet, the 
West-India Company
 fitted out nine great Ships and five Ketches in the beginning of the Year 1626. under the Command of 
Peter Peterszoon Hein,
 to Cruise for the 
Spanish
 Ships that were expe∣cted from 
New Spain
 and 
Honduras.


The 
Fox
 Frigat being sent before to inform 
Henrickszoon
 of 
Heyn
's coming, reach'd about the latter end of 
May
 beyond the Isles 
Dominico, Guadalupa, Mevis, St. Christo∣phers,
 and by 
Santa Crux;
 there not finding a Harbor on the South-side, because of the Rocks, she Sail'd from 
Mona
 over to the Main Coast, where seven Leagues West∣ward of 
Carakess,
 he discover'd a high broken Land, whose Mountains seem'd to reach to the Clouds; from thence she steer'd to the Promontory 
Caldera,
 the Isles

Margareta
 and 
Coche,
 on which last he took abundance of Goats, not without the loss of forty six Men, kill'd by the 
Spaniards
 and 
Indians.


Mean while the Admiral 
Peter Heyn,
 in the beginning of 
June,
 Sail'd to the Southward of 
Barbados,
 Island pretty mountainous, as hath been formerly men∣tion'd, and full of Woods, and by 
Martinino,
 whose Hills are very high and over∣grown with Trees. Here 
Peter Heyn
 could get nothing else but sweet Water, and a Fruit resembling a green Grape, which grew on a round Leav'd Tree, whose Juice cur'd the Scurvey. Sailing from hence, and Landing on 
Guadalupa,
 he found a 
Canoo
 seven Fathom long and one broad, and cut out of one Tree. The Inhabi∣tants, a well timber'd People, went stark naked, and desir'd to be excus'd, that they could not furnish the 
Hollanders
 with more Provisions, because the 
French
 and 
Eng∣lish,
 Inhabitants of 
St. Christophers,
 had pillag'd them.


Near 
Mona
 the 
Fox
 Frigat joyn'd with the Fleet, with information, that he could hear no tydings of 
Henrickszoon;
 wherefore 
Peter Heyn
 judg'd it convenient to Sail along the South-Coast of 
Hispaniola
 with a separated Fleet, which was to joyn again near the great 
Caiman.
 Near 
Cape de Corientes
 the 
Dutch
 took a 
Spanish
 Ship laden with 
Sarsaparilla;
 after that another with Salt and Fish, and on the Shelves before 
Coche
 before the Promontory 
Antonio,
 a Fly-boat with Tallow and Hides, and at the same places two Vessels more with Ballast, the Men whereof inform'd him, that the Fleet from 
New Spain
 had about a Moneth before weigh'd Anchor from the Haven 
Juan de Ulva,
 and set Sail to 
Havana,
 so that without doubt they were arri∣ved there; wherefore 
Peter Heyn
 steer'd towards 
Tortugos,
 in hopes, if he could, to overtake some of the heavy Sailers. Before the Promontory 
De Florida
 he disco∣ver'd seven Sail, and coming up nearer, above thirty, which, had 
Henrickszoon
 been united with 
Peter Heyn,
 had without doubt fallen into the hands of the 
Netherlanders;
 but it being judg'd a madness to set upon so great a Fleet with so small a number of Ships, they Sail'd away undisturb'd. 
Peter Heyn
 steer'd his Course along 
Florida,
 where he met three 
Canoos
 with strange Men in them, who came aboard of him, their Bodies being naked, were painted with several colours, onely Mats of Rushes about their Middle, and on their Backs long Tassels hanging down: their Mer∣chandise consisted of a sort of Gum of little value. The 
Netherlanders
 in this Place took also a Vessel with 
Sina
 Leaves, and some pounds of Ambergreece: but the Scurvey increasing daily amongst them, they Tack'd about, and ran to an Anchor at 
Sierra Leona,
 where they stay'd till the latter end of 
January
 1627. and then set Sail to 
Brasile,
 and overtook a Vessel from 
Madera
 laden with a hundred and fifty Pipes of Wine, and other rich Goods, and ran into the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos
 with undaun∣ted courage, not regarding the Guns that were fir'd from the Fort and Battlements of the City 
St. Salvador,
 near which lay thirty Sail of Ships, to which he making up,
 steer'd between the 
Portuguese
 Admiral and Rere-Admiral, whom sinking, he forc'd the Admiral to surrender, whilest the 
Hollandia
 and 
Geldria
 Frigats fell upon the rest, which were forsaken by the Seamen, who leap'd over-board; then several Mann'd Boats of the 
Hollanders
 (notwithstanding the Enemy's continual firing) went and fetch'd off twenty two Sail of the 
Portuguese
 Vessels; all which they did in three hours time, onely with the loss of fifty Men, besides some that were wounded, amongst whom was the Admiral, being shot with a Bullet through the Arm, and wounded in the Legs with a Splinter; his Ship also was, with the 
Gelria
 Frigat, driven with the Spring-Tide on a Bank, whence, after the 
Gelria
 had receiv'd above sixty Shot from the Enemy, they both got off at last; but the Admiral's, Frigat be∣ing shot in a manner to a Wreck, was set on fire; which Misfortune ended not there, for the 
Orange-tree
 Frigat blew up, with sixty Men, fourteen whereof, though mise∣rably

scorch'd, had their Lives sav'd. Soon after which the Admiral sent into 
Holland
 the Ship 
St. Peter,
 the 
Hoop, Nostra Sennora de la Vittoria,
 and the 
Black-Lyon,
 which besides their Lading of Hides, Silver, Gold, and Precious Stones, were most of them full of Sugar; which safely arriving, did not a little encourage the 
West-India
 Company. After this 
Heyn
 took two Ships with Slaves from 
Angola,
 which because the Governor of 
St. Salvador
 would not redeem, were put ashore on 
Taperica.
 On the last of 
March
 he set Sail from the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 pass'd by 
Mono Pablo,
 and on 
Easter
 Eve with a strong Gale by the 
Abrolhos:
 before the High∣land between 
Cape Frio
 and the River 
De Jenero,
 he discover'd two Sail, one whereof being laden with Sugar was taken, but the other escap'd in the Night; then Sail∣ing on to the meandring Stream 
Spirito Sancto,
 he digg'd Pits on some of the River-Isles to get fresh Water, because it was not safe to Land on the Continent on each side, because the Inhabitants shot frequent showers of Arrows from the Thickets, in which they lay ambuscaded. Moreover the Town 
Spirito Sancto
 sent off several Fire-ships at the time of Flood, but they being easily quench'd did no harm. Here also a Vessel laden at 
Lisbon
 with Wines and Piece-Goods, was taken by 
Heyn,
 who setting Sail again divided the Fleet into three Squadrons, the Vice-Admiral 
Cor∣nelis Oole
 keeping three Ships to Cruise withal before the River 
La Plata, Henrick Best
 had one Frigat, a Ketch, and a Carvel, to guard the Mouth of the Stream 
Jenero,
 whilest the Admiral himself Sail'd with four Frigats, three Ketches, and a Barque, towards the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 where two Ships riding near the Shore by the Fort 
Tapecipe,
 were by him set on fire. Also taking a Barque he was inform'd, that six laden Vessels lay in the River 
Tapecipe,
 whither he sending some Boats to explore the truth, they found a great Ship without Men in the Mouth of the Stream, and half a League farther six 
Portuguese
 Vessels lying near the Shore; bringing back news thereof to the Admiral, he went aboard of the 
Fox
 Ketch the next Morning, and taking two Ketches and several Boats with him, Sail'd up the River, and per∣ceiv'd that the fore-mention'd six Ships were gotten up higher, and were Mann'd with a hundred and fifty Soldiers, Commanded by Captain 
Padilha;
 the 
Portuguese
 Admiral lying in Ambuscade, no sooner perceiv'd the 
Netherlanders
 Boats, but he let flie a whole Volley of small Shot at them, insomuch that it made them Retreat, and their whole Design had been fruitless, had not 
Heyn
 animated his Men to board the Vice-Admiral; which encouragement prov'd so successful that they master'd the same, killing all those that fell into their hands; which so amaz'd the two Vessels that lay by, that all the Men swam ashore, and left their rich Lading to the disposal of the 
Hollanders,
 besides which the vanquish'd Party lost above a hundred and fifty Men, and the Conquerors but fifteen. Somewhat farther up lay three Ships more, but the River being dry there at Low-water, and so narrow that the Trees on each Shore could touch one another, 
Heyn
 judg'd it convenient to prosecute the Design no farther, but to return with the three for-mention'd Prizes, which he did not without great difficulty; for the 
Portuguese
 had rais'd Battlements on each side of the Mouth of the River 
Tapecipe,
 and stopt the same with a sunk Vessel, which 
Heyn
 himself set on fire at Low-water, and return'd untouch'd through thick Volleys of Shot, which flew about his Ears to the Fleet, leaving the three Ships to be fetcht off afterwards; to which end he commanded that they should hang some of the taken Hides about the 
Fox
 Ketch's Pinnace, the Carvel and Boats, that so the Men which were in them might stand secure from the small Shot, and the rather, be∣cause the Ships could not be got out of the shallow and narrow River but by Toe∣ing. Mean while the Governor of 
St. Salvador
 lay with a considerable number of Citizens and Soldiers behind the fore-mention'd Battlements, not doubting but to

take revenge for the Losses sustain'd by 
Heyn;
 who nevertheless coming down thi∣ther Toed out the three Prize-ships with Boats hung about with Hides, firing into the Enemies Battlements with his great Guns, which he had put aboard of the 
Fox
 Ketch. About the middle of 
June
 he took in the Prize-goods in view of the City 
St. Salvador,
 where seven 
Netherland
 Ships from several places lay at an Anchor. Setting Sail from hence on the fourteenth of 
July,
 and reaching 
Noronho,
 known by a Mountain which appears like a Steeple, he met with 
Cornelis Oole
's Fleet, (who had been Cruising before 
La Plata
) with whom he arriv'd safe in the 
Texel,
 having in their Way thither from 
Noronho
 taken a Prize, laden with Sugar, Tobacco, and 
Brasile
 Wood.


During 
Peter Heyn's
 Expedition 
Thomas Sickes,
 fitted out by the 
West-India
 Com∣pany, weighed Anchor out of the 
Texel
 with two Sail, and coming to 
St. Vincent
 he found a 
Spanish
 Vessel burnt down to the Hulk, took a 
Portuguese
 Pink with Slaves from 
Angola:
 Near the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos
 he sunk a Barque, having first taken several Pots of Oyl and Packs of Linnen out of the same: Before 
Pernambuco
 he took a Carvel with a hundred and eighty Pipes of Wine, and a Vessel with Sugar and Hides, and drove another ashore against the Promontory 
St. Augustine.
 But 
Sickes
 being supply'd and strengthned by three Ships from the 
Texel,
 and four ta∣ken Vessels, ran with four to 
Todos los Sanctos,
 sent two to Cruise about 
Cape St. Augustine,
 and two more to the North of 
Pernambuco:
 At the Isle 
Noronho
 they were order'd to stay a Moneth one for another, from whence, after much hardship, they return'd home with so many rich Prizes, that they pay'd their Charges ten times double; which so encourag'd the Adventurers, that the Chamber of the 
West-India
 Company in 
Zealand
 fitted out three Sail under the Command of 
Henrick Lucifer,
 who weighing Anchor from 
Flushing
 Anno 1627. steer'd along the Coast of 
Africa
 to the 
Amazone
 River, and from thence North North-West to the Stream 
Wiapoco,
 to settle a Colony there; to which purpose Rowing up the River with Sloops, they came in the Night to two empty Houses, built at a place call'd 
Wacogenive,
 which they judg'd fit for their purpose; wherefore they carry'd all things ashore which they had brought out of 
Zealand
 with them for the new Planters, who while they were all busie building of Huts, a 
Negro
 was taken Prisoner, who being ask'd why the Inhabitants fled ? reply'd, That it was occasion'd from a guilty Conscience; for two years before a Barque and two Sloops with 
Christians
 coming thither from the 
Amazone
 River, had stay'd thirty days on 
Wacogenive,
 when unawares they were set upon by the Natives, and all kill'd except three, who were yet living. Upon which 
Lucifer,
 having four 
Indians,
 three Men and one Woman, aboard of his Vessel, threatned to put them all to the Sword, unless they would produce the three fore∣mention'd 
Christians:
 Whereupon the next day a 
German
 came to the Water side, of whom they could get little Information, he having in a manner forgot his native Tongue; but at length the other two coming thither, the eldest of them, nam'd 
John Hendricszoon,
 related to him, That the 
Portuguese
 in great numbers fell upon the Plantations near the 
Amazone
 River, Govern'd by Captain 
Oudaen,
 who after he had fought valiantly a whole day, being overpower'd by number, retreated to his Barque, and Sail'd into the Creek inhabited by the 
English,
 whither the 
Portuguese
 following in 
Canoos,
 cut off not onely 
Oudaen,
 but the 
English
 also, forty six Men onely escaping in a Barque under the Command of Lieutenant 
Peter de Bruine
 to the River 
Wiapoco;
 where they had stay'd about three days, when Sergeant 
Matruit
 treacherously shot Lieutenant 
Bruine:
 after which the forty six divided them∣selves into four Parties; but the Inhabitants to rid themselves of these Strangers, under the shew of great friendship, made them Drunk with the Liquor call'd 
Pernau,


and then murder'd them all, except himself and two 
Germans.
 Which villanous act 
Lucifer
 judg'd worthy of punishment; but his Orders being to shew Kindness and Civility to the Inhabitants, he suffer'd the Murder to go unpunish'd, but built a tri∣angular Fort near the River 
Wiapoco,
 on a Hill eight Fathom above the Shore, to prevent the passing by of Sloops; which done, he went to visit the Island 
Blanco,
 where he caught three hundred Goats. From thence he went to the Bay of 
Honda,
 the Inhabitants whereof are a valiant People, tall of Stature, having long Beards, and wearing Copper Rings through their Ears. Near the Sea-side is a Salt-pan, of which the Inhabitants make great benefit. 
Lucifer
 setting Sail again from hence, met with three Ketches sent out by the 
West-India
 Company at 
Amsterdam,
 before 
Corientes.
 The Commander 
Dirk Simonszoon van Uitgeest,
 steering his Course to∣wards the Promontory 
St. Anton,
 took a Frigat laden with Meal, Silk, and other rich Goods, and within view of 
Cuba
 near the River 
Poros,
 descrying two brave Gallions from 
Honduras,
 bore up to them with his three Ketches; one of which, call'd 
The Lyon,
 being got betwixt both the Gallions, was in no small danger, the 
Netherlanders
 not being able to get up out of their little Vessel into the high Gallions, in which the 
Spaniards
 stood pushing them down with their Pikes; but no sooner did the 
Netherlanders
 throw their Hand-Granado's amongst them, but 
Uitgeest
 got aboard of the Gallion, and carry'd her off, whilest the other by nimble Sailing got away. With this Prize 
Uitgeest
 thinking himself sufficiently enrich'd, steer'd home∣wards.


Joost Johnson
 and 
Claes Henrickszoon,
 Commanding each of them a Ketch, took a a Ship coming from 
Lisbon
 before 
Pernambuco,
 laden with Meal, Salt, Wine, and thirty Monks; and not long after a Pink with six hundred 
Negro's,
 a Barque with Salt and Iron, a Ketch with Wine, and a Frigat with 
Brasile
 Wood, Sugar and To∣bacco: Before 
Itamerica
 they took two Prizes more; with all which they return'd to the 
Texel.


The 
West-India
 Company thus enrich'd by the Spoil taken from their Enemies, fitted out twelve Ships again under the Command of 
Peter Adrianszoon Ita,
 which set Sail in the beginning of the Year 1628. and anchor'd first before 
Blanca,
 an Isle abounding with Goats, the Ground stonie, and in some places Rocky, and having a small, but very convenient Haven, from whence 
Ita
 ran beyond 
Porto Rico,
 where he took a Vessel with seven thousand weight of Ginger, and Landed opposite to 
Hispaniola
 on the stonie Isle 
Catalina,
 where he took in fresh Water, and then Cruis'd to and again before 
Cuba,
 took six Barques, the Prisoners whereof inform'd him, That the 
Honduras
 Traders were on their Way coming thither, and that they had two small Men of War for their Convoy: Not long after 
Ita
 discover'd them Sailing along the Shore towards the Haven of 
Havana,
 but before they could get in, Captain 
John Peters,
 whose Ketch carry'd two Brass, and fourteen Iron Guns, boar∣ded the Vice-Admiral, but having no Graplings to take hold with, the 
Spanish
 Ship ran aground, as likewise 
John Peterszoon
 in the pursuit of him; which the Admiral seeing, came to assist his Vice-Admiral, and ran aground on one side of 
John Peters,
 which drove the 
Netherlanders
 Ketch in great danger, she not being able to do Exe∣cution with her small Guns, whilest the 
Spaniards
 with their Demy-Cannon play'd vehemently upon her; neither was 
Ita,
 by reason of calmness and contrary Tide, able to come up with them, but was forc'd to stand Northerly, that so he might get an Easterly Wind, which about Noon always blows fresh here, and so by de∣grees got near the 
Spanish
 Fleet, till at last coming up with the Vice-Admiral, call'd 
St. Jago,
 he threw Fire-pots into her, and presently after boarding her, enter'd with that Valor, that of three hundred 
Spaniards
 above a hundred and fifty were slain;

for those that leapt over-board were kill'd in the Water, whilest 
Joachim Guyszoon, John Braems,
 and 
Anthony Gonde
 fell upon the Admiral 
Sennora de los Remedios,
 and took her. In both these Ships 
Ita
 took Two thousand five hundred Chests of In∣digo, above Six thousand Hides, Two thousand five hundred Packs of 
Sarsaparilla,
 several Pots of Balsam Oyl, Seventy thousand Pound of Ginger, One and twenty Bars of Silver, Twelve Brass, and Twenty eight I
 Guns; all which having taken out, he set fire in both the Ships.


A little before this Victory, the 
Fortune
 Frigat weighed Anchor from 
Flushing,
 with sixty three Men of War, to be Landed on the Island 
Tabago.
 At St. 
Vincent
 they found two Men that were left of seven, who having setled along the River 
Wiapow,
 under Captain 
John Van Ryen,
 were forc'd by the salvage Natives to remove, two whereof dyed by the way, the remaining five landing on the Isle 
Trinidad,
 had three of their Companions kill'd by the 
Indians
 of 
Granada,
 they being 
French-men,
 to whom the Natives bore an inveterate Hatred, so that they left onely the two 
Hollanders
 alive. The 
Fortune
 assisted by the 
South-star
 Ketch, took a rich Barque near the 
Isles des Virgines.


Not long after the 
West-India
 Company set out twelve Ships more, under the Command of 
Derick Simonszon Uitgeest,
 (who had the year before brought home the two fore-mention'd great Prizes,) who setting Sayl and getting into the large Bay of the Rocky Island 
Vincent,
 catch'd several Goats and Tortels. Before the Coast of 
Brasile
 he took two rich 
Carvels,
 one from 
Pernambuco,
 and another from the In∣let 
Todos los Sanctos;
 which Prizes having sent home with three Ketches, he sayl'd towards 
Sierre Leona,
 known by high and thick Woods, which grow on a high Coast; from whence returning again to 
Pernambuco,
 he took six rich laden Ves∣sels, amongst which was one Gallioon from 
Goa,
 with a great Treasure of Dia∣monds.


These successful Expeditions of the Fleets set out from time to time by the 
West-India
 Company, enabled and encourag'd them to undertake Matters of great∣er consequence, 
viz.
 They fitted out one and thirty Sail, which carryed four thou∣sand Men, one hundred and thirty Brass Guns, and five hundred fifty eight Iron Guns; of which 
Peter Peterszoon Hein
 being Admiral, took near the Soundings of 
Tortuga,
 two Barques from 
Havana,
 the Men whereof inform'd him, that the Plate-Fleet was not yet arriv'd there, nor that from 
Terra Firma,
 but were both expected every day. The strong Current drove 
Peter Hein
 farther Eastward beyond 
Havana
 than he expected, insomuch that he got sight of 
Matanca,
 where he overtook a Barque sent out by 
Landronce de Cabrera,
 Governor of 
Havana,
 to give notice to the Plate Fleet of the 
Hollanders
 Ships, which he had seen from the Castle 
Morro
 before 
Havana:
 Mean while 
John Van Hoorn
 took a Vessel which was sent out before by the Plate Fleet, the Men whereof inform'd him that the Fleet it self was near at hand; which 
Peter Hein
 found to be true, when the next Morning before Sun-rising he descry'd ten Sayl, of which some had ignorantly sayled to Leeward, and others to Windward of the 
Dutch Fleet;
 nine of them which were Laden with Hides, Meal, Campeche-Wood, Cochinele, Indigo, and other rich Goods, were taken by several Mann'd Sloops, because the Ships were not able to come up to them by reason of the Calm. About Noon 
Peter Hein
 discovering nine Gallions more, made sudden Chace after them; which they perceiving, made toward the Shore, and about Twilight in the Evening they ran aground in the Bay of 
Matanca,
 where the Commanders Landing saved themselves, each carrying with him what Jewels they could. About Break of Day 
Peter Hein
 made all the Sayl he could possible to come up with them, and seeing them fast aground, leapt into a Boat and Rowed

up to the Admiral, who fired eight Guns, whilest his Men got ashore: 
Hein
 ap∣proaching the Gallioon, saw no way to get up, till at last one of his Men spying a Rope, climb'd up the same, and made fast other Ropes for his Companions to get up by, the 
Spaniards
 standing still gaping upon him, as if their feet and hands had been ty'd, which made 
Peter Hein
 grant them their Lives; which the other Gal∣lions seeing, surrender'd themselves upon promise of Quarter; by which the 
Spa∣nish
 Crown lost, besides the Musk, Bezoar, Ambergreece, and the Cargo of two Gallioons and a rich Prize, above One hundred and fifty Tun of Gold.


The Night succeeding this great Victory being somewhat Tempestuous, drove the Gallioons from the Bank on which they stuck the Day before, into deeper Wa∣ter: Five Days they spent in unlading of the taken Vessels, after which 
Peter Hein
 set Sayl with four Gallioons, a new 
Spanish
 Merchant-Man, and his own Fleet, out of the Bay of 
Matanca,
 on the Seventh of 
September, Anno
 1628. for 
Holland,
 where in a short time he safely arriv'd.


The 
Tyger
 Frigat sent from 
Zealand,
 and Commanded by 
Lucas Pol,
 Anchor'd be∣fore 
Blanca,
 where he brought away above five hundred Goats: This Island which is six Leagues in circumference, hath on the West a Sandy Inlet, sit for great Ships to Ride at Anchor; Moreover, it is steep and Rocky, in the Valleys the Grass grows above half a Mans length. The Woods are overgrown with Thorns; the Soyl also would produce much more fruit, did not the Rats, 
Leguanes,
 Hedge-hogs; and other Animals, devour and spoil the Plants.


Pol
 leaving this Island ran to 
Tortuga,
 a low Isle, except on the West side; it pro∣duces 
Guaiacum,
 or Pock-wood, in great abundance, and nourishes great Flocks of Goats, and hath an eminent Salt-Pan; in all which things it is parallel'd with the Island 
Orchilla,
 known by its high Mountains on the East and West; the other part thereof not being above six Foot above the Water: 
Pol
 Landing here, carry'd off above two hundred Goats near the Western Shore, whose bryny Soil produces neither Grain, nor Grass. The Trees which are on the same are so dry and weak, that they may be pusht down with one hand; Neither are there any Birds to be found here, except Owls; nor Beasts, except Goats and great Hedge-hogs. 
Pol
 sayling from hence, steer'd by the nine Wooddy Isles call'd 
Roccas,
 and the three call'd 
Aves,
 to 
Bonaire,
 a pretty large rising Isle, which on the North-West hath a convenient Road, a fresh Water-spring, store of Sheep, on which the 
Spaniards
 live; Pock-wood, and Cotton Trees: Then steering to the Isle 
Mona,
 he found the same to be surrounded with Rocks, and full of Horned Cattel difficult to be catch'd because of the thick Woods, in which grow exceeding good Oranges. 
Pol
 leaving this Isle, set sayl and steer'd for 
Flushing,
 where he safely arriv'd without ha∣ving perform'd any remarkable Exploits.


Mean while the 
West-India
 Company fitted out twelve Sayl more, under the Command of 
Adrian Johnzon Pater,
 who set sayl in the middle of 
August,
 and Crui∣sed in vain about the 
Flemmish
 Isles for 
Spanish
 Ships: About the beginning of the Year 1629. he sent away three Ships under the Command of 
Martin Landrode,
 from the Island of St. 
Vincent,
 whilest he himself ran with the rest of the Fleet into the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 within a League from the City 
Salvador,
 where there lay onely seven Barques near the Shore, which he judging not worth the while to ha∣zard his Ships and Men for, steer'd to 
Pernambuco,
 took a rich Laden Barque in his Voyage, and was inform'd by a 
Brasilian
 that came aboard of him on floating Pie∣ces of Timber, that three Sayl of Ships full of Goods were return'd to 
Reciffa,
 so soon as they heard of the 
Dutch
 Fleet: But 
Pater
 judging no good to be done there, return'd back to the 
Caribbee Islands,
 where near 
Granada
 he found three 
Dutch
 Ves∣sels,

which had likewise Cruis'd in vain before the Coast of 
Brasile.
 Moreover, the 
Pegasus, Raven,
 and 
Hart
 Frigats, parted from the Fleet to Cruise about 
Monges,
 tou∣ching at 
Blanca,
 they took above a thousand Goats, and between the Cliffs of the little Isles 
Monges,
 abundance of Fish; but descrying no 
Spanish
 Ships, they Sail'd to the Island 
De Vacca,
 which hath a brave Harbor, delightful Woods, pleasant Pa∣stures, fresh-water Brooks, and abundance of wild Horses, Hogs, and Lyons, of which the Sea-men took an infinite number. Before the low Promontory 
Corientes,
 overgrown with Trees, they got two Prizes laden with 
Campeche
 Wood.


These three fore-mention'd Frigats, as also the 
Walcheren
 and 
South-star
 from 
Zealand,
 joyn'd with 
Pater
's Fleet, when he receiv'd Information, that a considera∣ble number of 
Spanish
 Ships were suddenly expected from 
Campeche:
 Whereupon 
Paters
 divided his Fleet into three Squadrons, whereof the Forlorn consisted of three Sail, the Reserve of the like number, and the Admiral kept five under his own Command: Thus divided, they stood to and again before 
Cape Corientes,
 when Captain 
John Stapel
 brought three, and 
John van Hoorn
 four 
Netherland
 Ships to their assistance.


Hoorn
 having set Sail from the 
Texel
 about the latter end of 
April,
 was beaten off from 
Granada
 with poyson'd Arrows, and took a Prize before the Promontory 
St. Anthony,
 the Men whereof inform'd him, that the Governor 
Gabriel de Chaves Osorio,
 an old Soldier, had great trouble in repairing the Walls, Forts and Houses in the City, which two years before had been blown down by a great Storm, and that six great Ships were lading to go for 
Carthagena
 with the Gallions for 
Spain,
 because they durst not Steer by 
Porto Rico
 for fear of the 
Netherlanders;
 moreover, that abun∣dance of Ginger was spoyl'd for want of Vessels to carry it away; and that the Citizens were in great want for Stuffs, none having come in along time from 
Spain;
 in like manner there went none but Copper Coin, so that nothing was to be got there. The Silver and Gold-Mines were not look'd after, the 
Spaniards
 not caring to work, and the old Natives were long since cut off, insomuch that if the Imperial Court was not kept in 
St. Domingo,
 to which belong'd 
Cumana
 and 
Coro;
 that City and Island, and 
Hispaniola
 it self, would soon be left desolate. 
Hoorn
 there∣fore Sail'd by the Promontory 
St. Cruiz,
 being a low Point overgrown with Trees, into the Bay, twenty Leagues from the Mouth whereof lie the Isles 
Jardin de la Reyna.
 Before 
Corientes
 he took a Barque with three hundred and six Guns, sent from 
Havana,
 the Men whereof inform'd him, That the Governor of 
Havana,
 call'd 
Laurence de Cabrera,
 having Intelligence of the 
Dutch
 Fleets approach, rais'd many Men, and gave notice to the Ships in all the Harbors thereabouts; after which he took another rich Prize, and joyn'd at last with 
Paters
 Fleet, which now consisted of twenty Sail, with which he Steer'd for the Soundings of 
Tortugas,
 where the Fleet met with a dreadful Tempest, wherein a Thunderbolt splitting the Main-Yard of the 
Hunter
 Frigat, fell down by the Mast, and rowl'd out at one of the Port-holes, kill'd the Purser, and wounded two more in the Head: great show∣ers of Rain fell daily, when 
Samuel Lucas
 and Captain 
Outger Minne
 brought seven Sail of Ships more to the Fleet, with which 
Paters
 put in for fresh Provisions into the spacious and secure Haven 
De Cabannas,
 where several Isles lie, formerly inha∣bited by Shepherds and Carpenters.


From hence 
Paters
 Sail'd by 
Havana,
 mended the Port-holes of his lower Deck, and took off the Top-gallant Masts, because in 
September
 the usual Storms begin here; and seeing that he could not do any Exploit with so great a Fleet, he sent nine Ships home, and with the rest went to 
Barbados,
 where at that time there were about fifteen hundred 
English
 that Planted Tobacco.




Paters
 Sailing from hence, ran to the Main Continent of 
America,
 inspected the River 
Oronoque,
 where he quenched the Town 
St. Thomas,
 that had been set on fire by the fled Inhabitants, and brought aboard all what they had left.


During his fruitless Expedition, the 
West-India
 Company Rigg'd out twenty seven Sail under the Command of 
Henrick Lonque, Peter Ita,
 and 
Joost Bankart;
 the Land-Soldiers being Commanded by 
Diederick van Waerdenberg. Lonque
 coming to 
St. Vin∣cent,
 stay'd a long time at Anchor there; for in regard the 
Spaniard
 in the 
Low Coun∣treys
 rang'd on the 
Veluwe,
 and had taken 
Amersfoort,
 the 
States
 of the 
United Nether∣lands
 were forc'd to keep those Men in their Service which the 
West-India
 Company had rais'd; but so soon as 
Wesel
 was re-taken, and the 
Hartogen-Bosch
 won by 
Frede∣rick Henrick,
 Prince of 
Orange,
 thirty six Sail were sent to 
Lonque
's assistance; of which some came sooner to him than others at 
St. Vincent,
 where he had stay'd four Moneths without doing any remarkable Exploit. On 
St. Steven
's Day he set Sail with fifty two Ships, thirteen 
loops, and two Prizes, all Mann'd with seven thousand Men, which meeting with contrary Winds and Calms, lay a great while under the 
Line,
 the Scurvey began to encrease amongst them daily, insomuch that above twelve hundred lay sick, and three hundred dy'd since they set Sail from 
St. Vincent;
 yet at last 
Lonque
 getting sight of 
Olinda,
 sent 
Waerdenberg
 on the fourth of 
February
 with sixteen Ships, carrying three thousand Men to 
Pavo Morello,
 a Wood, lying two Leagues Northward from 
Olinda,
 where he suddenly Landed, notwith∣standing the 
Portuguese
 guarded the Shore with two thousand Men, whom 
Waerden∣berg,
 after a short Skirmish, putting to flight, was the whole Night in Arms, and the next day became Master of 
Olinda,
 by breaking in on the North at the same time, when Colonel 
Schutte
 Storm'd on the South. Moreover, the Enemy surren∣dred the two Forts on 
Reciffa,
 and forsook the Island.


About the middle of 
March
 nine Ships which were wanting to make up 
Lonque
's Fleet, came to an Anchor by him, having brought him above six hundred Soldiers, many Guns, all manner of Ammunition under the Command of Lieutenant Colo∣nel 
Alexander Seton,
 and the three Adjutants 
John de Bruine, Philip Serooskerken,
 and 
Horatius Calandryn,
 who immediately order'd the Cloyster on 
Antonio Vaes
 to be for∣tifi'd, and built a Fort with four Bulwarks at the Entrance of 
Pozo
 in the Countrey 
Reciffa. Seton
 also set fire on the Suburbs of 
Olinda,
 in which the Enemy had Lodg'd the Night before, and endeavor'd to poyson the fresh Water on 
Antonio Vaes,
 when on a sudden the 
Netherlanders
 fell upon them; two which drank of the Water dy'd, and others fell into great Fits of Sicknesses, and it wanted little but that the Admi∣ral 
Lonque,
 with a Company of fifty Musquetteers, had been kill'd returning from 
Reciffa
 to 
Olinda,
 he being unawares set upon by two Companies of 
Portugueses
 and 
Brasilians,
 who kill'd above thirty six of his Men, and dangerously wounded six more, so that he brought off but eight Men unhurt. The like Misfortune be∣fell the Wood-cutters on 
Antonio Vaes,
 surpris'd by the 
Portuguese
 from an Am∣buscade.


Whilest Affairs stood thus about 
Olinda,
 there first arriv'd two Ships from the 
United Netherlands
 at 
Reciffa,
 not long after four more, Commanded by 
John Walbeek,
 and eight more under the Admiral 
Dirik van Uitgeest,
 who was follow'd by the 
Noahs Ark.


About the same time 
Dirk de Ruiter
 set Sail with six Ships, and 
Peter Ita
 with ten, to Cruise at Sea.


About the beginning of 
February, Lonque
 having put all things in good order, pre∣par'd to return home, and weigh'd Anchor with nine Ships. But 
Ita
 going from 
Reciffa
 to 
Olinda,
 to take his leave of the Council there, was suddenly surpris'd af∣ter

a strange manner; he had ninety Musquetteers for his Guard, whose Matches were all put out, and their Arms all wet by a great shower of Rain, which they perceiving from their Ambuscades, immediately got cross the River, and kill'd thirty of the 
Netherlanders,
 the rest running away, left 
Ita
 to defend himself, which he did for some time with his Sword, but had absolutely been slain, had he not re∣ceiv'd Aid from 
Olinda.


Because the 
Portuguese
 made several Attempts upon the 
Netherlanders,
 not with∣out damage on both sides, the 
West-India
 Company often sent Ships to their assi∣stance; and likewise many 
Brasilians
 deserting the 
Portuguese,
 joyn'd with the 
Ne∣therlanders,
 who built a five-corner'd Fort with Bulwarks about the Cloyster on 
An∣tonio Vaes;
 which to prevent, the 
Portuguese
 ventur'd many a Sally, though not with∣out considerable loss on their part. They also reported, that 
Frederick de Toledo
 was making thither with a great Fleet, to drive the 
Netherlanders
 out of 
Brasile;
 at which they taking the Alarm, put themselves all into a posture of Defence, rais'd new Works about the Castle on 
Reciffa,
 whilest the Ships which Cruis'd on that Coast brought in several Prizes.


John Walbeek
 being chosen General by the 
West-India
 Company over 
Brasile,
 had a Design on the Promontory 
St. Augustine;
 but it came to no effect, because the Sea beat so vehemently against the Shore.


The Report of the great preparation of a Fleet which was making ready in 
Spain,
 mov'd the 
West-India
 Company to raise mo're Men, and to send out Admiral 
Paters
 with seventeen Ships, which all arriv'd safe, except the 
Black Lyon
 Frigat, which carrying the Lieutenant-Colonel 
Eltz
 and Captain 
Uitgeest,
 was never heard of.


Joost Bankart
 was also sent out in 
March
 with eight Ships to 
St. Helena,
 to Cruise there for the rich 
Carraks
 which us'd to Water there; but though he stay'd till 
Au∣gust
 before this fruitful Island, yet saw not one Ship at Sea, nor a Man on the Island, but great numbers of Sea-pies, which are so tame, that they suffer themselves to be taken up with the Hand, or knock'd on the Head with Sticks.


Near this Isle 
Ita
 took a Ketch Prize, and rallying his whole Fleet together, Steer'd for the 
Caimans;
 the most Eastern Isle whereof being about three Leagues long, is full of Rocks, with a high Point on the East; the other part thereof is plain. Then dividing his Fleet into seven Squadrons, he made them all ready for an Engage∣ment, when he was inform'd by an 
English
-man before 
Corientes,
 that 
Frederick de To∣ledo
 had set Sail with eighty Ships from 
Havana
 to 
Spain,
 of which he had sent back eight Gallions to 
Carthagena:
 Hereupon bending his Course near 
Havana,
 he put the whole Countrey to an Alarm, burnt a rich laden Vessel, and another that carry'd a Flag on the Fore-top, and a third laden with Ballast.


Joachim Guysen
 being made Commander of the 
Dolphin
 Frigat, and sent to joyn with Admiral 
Pater
's Squadron, was driven below 
Jamaica,
 and at last strook against the great 
Caiman,
 where his Vessel was all shatter'd to pieces; but all his Men and Goods being sav'd, he spent sixteen Weeks in making a Ketch of the pieces of the 
Dolphin,
 and brought a hundred and twenty Men, four Brass, and two Iron Guns to the Fleet, having buried the rest on 
Caiman.


Five Leagues beyond 
Havana,
 a 
Spanish
 Ship laden with 
Campeche
 Wood and 
Sar∣saparilla,
 being chased against the Shore, was set on fire by her own Men, which the 
Hollanders
 attempted twice in vain to put out.


After this 
Ita
's Fleet lay long upon the Coast 
Cuba,
 but finding no 
Spanish
 Ves∣sels, and their Provisions growing scarce, return'd back to the 
Texel,
 where they arriv'd without doing any farther Exploits.




In the mean while 
Pater
 lying before 
Punta del Gallo,
 intending to Invade the City built on the Shore of the Island 
Trinidad;
 but the Fort built at the Mouth of the River, and contrary Current preventing his Design, he ran through the mid∣dlemost Hole of 
Boccas
 to 
Blanca,
 where he caught two thousand Goats and a 
Bo∣naire,
 set several Towns on fire, whilest the 
Spaniards
 made a Smother of dry Stub∣ble all along the Fields, through which the 
Hollanders
 were to return, that so they might be choak'd with the Smoak; which their Invention had prov'd successful, had not the 
Hollanders
 forc'd a Way through a Wood. At last the Fleet leaving 
Hi∣spaniola,
 Steer'd for 
St. Martha,
 a Town built on the Main Coast between 
Cartha∣gena,
 and the River 
La Hacha,
 being instigated thereto by a Letter (taken by the 
Hollanders
 in a Prize) writ by the Governor 
Hieronymo de Quero
 to the 
Spanish
 King; which Letter set forth the present Condition of 
St. Martha,
 whereby they conceiv'd great hopes of a possibility of taking it, and of the Advantages that would accrue thereby: nor did it happen contrary to their expectation; for the Admiral Landing his Men, took the City without the least resistance; and though the great Fort fir'd some Guns, yet it soon surrendred on promise of Quarter; the City also was sav'd from being burn'd, by paying fifty five hundred Pieces of Eight, after they had plunder'd the same, and carry'd away whatsoe're they thought good. Mean while the Provisions growing scarce in the Fleet, 
Pater
 judg'd it convenient to return home, where he arriv'd safely with all his Prizes.


Notable Exploits were perform'd by 
John Lichthart,
 one of which, amongst others ought not to be omitted, 
viz.
 he setting Sail homewards from 
Reciffa
 about the beginning of 
October
 Anno 1630. chanc'd to fall with his Ship, the 
Over-yzel,
 amongst five 
Biscayan
 Pyrats, Cruising between the 
French
 and 
English
 Coast, which thought to clap him aboard on a sudden; but they seeing him bear up to them, were afraid to venture, and Tack'd about: after which he was set upon about three Leagues to the Northward of the 
Lizard,
 by three Frigats belonging to 
Dunkirk,
 the biggest whereof carry'd thirty six Guns, the second twenty eight, and the last twelve; with which three he maintain'd a Fight eight hours, in which he had fourteen Men kill'd, and thirty two wounded; his Ship resembled a Wreck, the Main-mast being shot overboard, the Rudder hung by pieces at the Stern, and the Tackling all shatter'd and torn, besides seven Shot under Water, and not less than four hundred through the sides above, but not without sufficient marks of retribution on the 
Dunkirkers
 side; but 
Lichthart
 getting into 
Plymouth,
 mended his Ship, and from thence Sail'd to 
Amsterdam,
 where he was Presented with a Gold Chain in recompence of his Valor.


The Expedition of the 
Brown-Fish
 Frigat is also remarkable, which Sailing be∣yond 
Cape deVerd,
 Steer'd by 
Cape Roxo
 along the Shore to the River 
Catchieu,
 at whose Mouth lie two Shelves, and between them ran a Channel through which the Ships pass'd. The 
Brown-Fish
 Sailing about a League up the River, which is a Mile in breadth, took a 
Portuguese
 Barque. The Seamen also Landing on the Isle 
Bissis,
 spake 
Portuguese
 with the Natives, who are Coal-black, and have strong Bodies, go Arm'd with Darts, Bowes, Arrows, Symiters, and were Baptiz'd by a Priest sent thither from 
Portugal,
 who with a few Countrey-men had built a Chappel and some Houses there.


From hence the 
Brown-Fish
 Sail'd to the most Northern Isle 
Bisegos,
 which is con∣tinually at Wars with 
Bissis.
 The King of this Isle receiving some Presents from the 
Nepherlanders,
 gave leave to his Subjects, shie at first, to go aboard of them.


Steering from hence to 
Noronho,
 they found the Inhabitants carry'd away, and their Gardens and Houses ruin'd, so that they could get nothing but wild Pum∣pions;

to refresh themselves with; therefore leaving the Isle they anchor'd at 
Reciffa.


In the interim, whilest these Expeditions were carry'd on as hath been related, Captain 
John Boon-eter
 (who parted from the Admiral 
Ita
's Fleet with eight Sail of Ships) Cruis'd to and again before 
Hispaniola
 till 
May
 Anno 1631. near 
Mona
 he took a rich Vessel coming from 
Porto Rico,
 another before the Island 
Vacca,
 and a third full of Ginger, with which he Steer'd to the 
Tortugas,
 being seven in number, resembling rather sandy Flats than Isles. Before 
Havana
 he also chased several Ves∣sels, but lost sight of them in the Night. Mean while their Provisions growing short, the Seamen were desirous to return; which 
Boon eter
 would no way yield to, because the time began to approach in which the 
Spanish
 Ships came from all places to 
Havana;
 but the Men mutinying forc'd him to Steer to the 
Texel,
 where they ar∣riv'd without doing any considerable Exploit advantageous to the 
West-India
 Company.


But at the same time fourteen Ships, three Sloops, and seven great Pinnaces, weighed Anchor from 
Reciffa
 with a thousand two hundred and sixty Men, divided into twelve Companies, under the Command of 
Hartman Godefrid
 and 
Stein Callen∣fels;
 who Landing on the Island 
Tamarica,
 march'd along a bad and narrow Path,
 partly craggy and partly sandy, to a Fort built on a high Ascent overgrown with Brambles in such a manner, that it was impossible for them to break through, whilest they in the Fort fir'd continually upon 
Stein Callenfels,
 who judg'd it conve∣nient to draw off, and Storm the Castle on another side.


The Admiral 
Pater
 newly come from the 
Texel
 to 
Olinda,
 sent three Ketches, a Sloop, and two Pinnaces, beyond the Town 
Tamarica,
 to prevent the Enemies cros∣sing over to the Main, and keep off their Fire-ships. They also receiv'd Informa∣tion from three 
Portuguese
 and five 
Brasilian
 Prisoners, That the Castle, surrounded with Fens and Brambles, had sixteen Guns; and that 
Albuquerque
 had sent eight hundred Men to assist the three hundred that lay in Garrison there before. The Captains 
Le Grand
 and 
Arcisseusky
 found two other Ways that led to the Fort, but al∣together unfit to march along with their Men and Guns. 
Pater
 also Row'd round the Island with Sloops, and fathom'd the Water, whilest 
Arcisseusky
 Sailing up the River to 
Garasi,
 suppos'd that he had found a much better place to make an Onset on the Castle in, than had been found out yet; but the Council of 
Olinda
 and 
Stein Callenfels
 look'd upon it as too great a hazard to Storm a Fort, to which the Ways lay so much to the Enemy's advantage, a small number in the same being able to beat off a considerable Party; therefore it was judg'd best, and concluded upon, to build a Fort on a little Isle near 
Tamarica,
 at the Mouth of the River; to which purpose the Engineer 
Buuren
 contriv'd a square Castle with a long Horn-work, which was call'd 
Orange;
 in which the Captains 
Arcisseusky, Mellingen,
 and 
Beyer,
 were left in Garrison with their Companies, whilest the rest of the Regiment re∣turn'd to 
Reciffa.


Mean while 
Antonio de Oquendo
 brought a great Fleet to 
St. Salvador;
 and 
Callenfels
 drew four Companies of Musquetteers, and a great company of Seamen with Pick∣axes and Spades out of the Fort 
Frederick Henrick
 into the Field, and marching South∣ward along private Ways, he found the River strongly fortifi'd near the Forts 
Affo∣gados,
 having above and below a row of strong Pallisado's; yet the 
Portuguese
 that guarded these Works after a small resistance fled, and left all: But because a gene∣ral Alarm drew many People in Arms out of 
Real,
 and several other places, 
Callenfels
 drew off in good order, and was inform'd by a Prisoner call'd 
Peter Alves,
 that the Fort 
Affogados
 receiv'd that Denomination from the River on which it was built;

that there lay generally a hundred and fifty Men in Garrison there; that about a Mile farther was the Fort 
Pirange;
 that 
Peter de Acunha
 bore the chief Command next to 
Albuquerque
 over the 
Militia,
 who us'd few Musquets but what had Fire-locks; and that they wanted no Ammunition, for six great Carvels loaden with the same had not long since stor'd them with great plenty thereof. The 
Netherlanders
 also understanding by Letters which they had taken, that the 
Tapuyans
 were very much incens'd against the 
Portuguese,
 who stood in great fear of these salvage People, it was judg'd convenient by the Council at 
Olinda,
 to invite the 
Tapuyans
 to be their Friends.


On the eleventh of 
September
 Anno 1631. Admiral 
Pater
 and Vice-Admiral 
Mar∣tin Thyszoon,
 whose joint Forces were fifteen Men of War and three Ketches, carry∣ing nine Companies of Foot, Commanded by Captain 
Engelbert Schutte,
 descrying the 
Spanish
 Fleet about an hour before Sun-set, animated all the Officers and Cap∣tains to regard their Honor and Oath which they had taken; telling them, That on this Engagement would depend the Welfare or Ruine of the 
West-India
 Com∣pany. But his Men were not so much heartned by his Speech, as daunted at the sight of the 
Spanish
 Fleet, which consisted of twelve 
Castilian
 and five 
Portuguese
 Gal∣lions, and twenty six other Vessels, as Pinks, Fly-boats and Carvels, all well Mann'd and full of Guns, the Gallions carrying whole and Demi-Cannons; the Admiral, call'd 
Antonio de Oquendo,
 carrying forty eight great Guns in his Gallion, call'd 
St. Jago;
 whereas, they had receiv'd information but of four Gallions and eighteen lesser Vessels; nevertheless 
Pater
 no whit discourag'd, boarded him about ten a Clock the next Morning, whilest Captain 
John Mast
 boarded him on the other side, which occasion'd a bloody Engagement; and it would have prov'd fatal to the 
Spaniard,
 had not 
Pater
's Stern taken fire, which he endeavoring in vain to put out,
 and none coming to his assistance, after he had hung a good while by a Rope at the 
Spanish
 Admiral's Bowe, he was forc'd through faintness to let go and fall into the Water, whilest his Ship was blown up, a few of his Men onely being sav'd by 
Oquendo.
 In the mean time 
Martin Thyszoon
 boarded the Gallion 
Antonio de Padua,
 Commanded by the Vice-Admiral 
Francisco de Vallezilla
 on one side, and the 
Utrecht
 Frigat on the other, which after half an hours Engagement lost her Main-mast, and after a sharp Fight of four hours the Fire took hold of her Sails; which the 
Nether∣landers
 not being able to quench, leap'd desperately over into the 
Spanish
 Vice-Admiral; but he having two hundred and sixty Men aboard, beat them off, forcing them to leap into the Water, or sell their Lives at a dear rate. But Captain 
Thys∣zoon
 had better success, for he not onely sunk the Vice-Admiral, but took the 
Bona∣ventura
 Gallion, and likewise gave the Gallion 
John Baptista
 so many shot under Wa∣ter, that she sunk likewise. The Night approaching ended this bloody Engage∣ment; and the 
Netherlanders
 Fleet much damnifi'd stood Northwards, with inten∣tion to return to 
Reciffa.
 The next Morning 
Oquendo
 had lost sight of them, but de∣scry'd them again on the fifteenth of 
September,
 and kept in view of them the six fol∣lowing days, five Leagues from him to the East, or East South-East, 
Martin Thys∣zoon
 coming to an Anchor before 
Reciffa
 on the twenty second of 
September.


About the same time the 
Amsterdam
 Frigat set Sail from thence for 
St. Salvador,
 with intention to joyn with 
Pater
's Fleet there, but not finding the Admiral, re∣turn'd, and near 
Cape St. Augustine
 discover'd the 
Spanish
 Fleet; wherefore running close behind them she receiv'd four Guns from 
Oquendo,
 which she answer'd, and kept at a distance from them the whole Night, in hopes to meet with one single Vessel or other belonging to the Fleet; but the 
Spanish
 Vice-Admiral bearing lit∣tle Sail, guarded the Rere, and fir'd continually at the 
Amsterdam
 Frigat, who fear∣ing

an unlucky Bullet, made all the Sail she could possible, and brought news of the approach of the 
Spanish
 Fleet to 
Reciffa.
 Soon after which the 
Elephant
 came from the 
Dutch
 Fleet thither, with a full Account of the fore-mention'd Engage∣ment, 
viz.
 That besides the Admiral 
Pater,
 there were slain Captain 
Thomas Sickes, Cormillion,
 and Lieutenant 
Steenbergen,
 also that two Ships, the 
Prince William
 and the 
Povince of Utrecht,
 were sunk: In lieu of which they had taken the Gallion call'd 
The Bonaventura,
 with twenty six Brass Guns, weighing above sixty four thousand Pound, two hundred and forty 
Castilians,
 and a great parcel of Sugar and Tobacco; Amongst the Prisoners was one call'd 
Francisco de Fuentes,
 who being Examin'd, gave this Information, 
viz.
 That the Fleet carry'd two Regiments of 
Spaniards
 and one of 
Italians;
 in which three Regiments were four thousand Men, under the Command of 
Conde del Bangniola;
 and that upon the setting out of 
Ferdinand,
 the King's Brother, to the 
Netherlands,
 all the chiefest Gallions and 
Dunkirk
 Ships were sent for, and 
English
 Vessels hir'd, to convey him safe to the 
Flemmish
 Coast, which made 
Oquenda
 set Sail with so much the lesser number to 
St. Salvador;
 that the sunk Gallion, call'd 
Antonio de Padua,
 had fourteen Brass Guns in her Hold, besides twenty six that were mounted.


Soon after a 
Brasilian
 that had pass'd by 
Albuquerque
's Army to 
Olinda,
 brought In∣formation, That he was sent by 
Jandui
 and 
Oquenou,
 two Kings belonging to the 
Ta∣puyans,
 to enquire if the 
Topatingas
 (for so they call'd the 
Netherlanders
 that belong'd to the 
West-India
 Company) did yet reside in 
Pernambuco,
 with Proffers to assist them with their Forces. Moreover, he inform'd them, That since his departure from 
Boudewyn Henrickszoon,
 a great many of the 
Tapuyans Petivares
 were kill'd by the 
Por∣tuguese
 near the River 
Grande
 and Inlet 
Trajiciaon,
 because they had assisted 
Henricks∣zoon,
 who had left them helpless at his departure. He added also, That if the 
West-India
 Company would give the other 
Brasilians
 any assurance to assist the 
Tapuyans,
 it would be necessary to Consult about it near the River 
Grande.


This Proposal was found to be of so weighty a Concern, that 
Ellert Smient
 being sent with the Ship call'd 
The New Netherland,
 and a great Sloop, to 
Siara,
 to make farther enquiry into the Business, was accompanied by a Renegado 
Portu∣guese
 call'd 
Samuel Cochin,
 and several 
Brasilians
 (whom 
Henrickszoon
 upon their Re∣quest carry'd with him from the Inlet 
Trajiciaon
 to 
Holland
) who went, under pre∣tence of visiting their Relations at the River 
Grande
 and 
Siara,
 to invite their Coun∣trey-men to joyn with the 
Netherlanders.


During

Smient
's absence many Consultations were held about the demolishing or defending of the City 
Olinda,
 about which there had formerly been many Con∣tests; but at last the Voices carry'd it, which were for the demolishing thereof, in regard it was of little Consequence, and could not be kept without many Men and great Charges, because of its bad Situation, whenas their Men might do greater Service in other places: Wherefore they began to carry all things necessary from 
Olinda
 to 
Reciffa,
 and on the twenty fourth of 
November
 the City was set on fire with Barrels of Pitch and Tar, being in a light flame at every corner, whilest 
Stein Callen∣fels
 drew off the Garrison in good order to 
Reciffa;
 and immediately sixteen hun∣dred Men under his Command were put aboard of sixteen Vessels, with intention to go to 
Parayba;
 but the Enemy having a fortnight before had notice of this De∣sign, had fortifi'd himself all along the River. 
Callenfels
 approaching, espy'd twelve 
Portuguese
 Standards, and the Men ready on the Breast-works to prevent his Land∣ing; yet nevertheless he not regarding their Bullets, press'd in amongst them, and forc'd the Enemy from his Works.


Near the Water stood a Stone Castle, and on one side of it a large Store-house;

on the Mountain near the City appear'd the 
Franciscan
 Cloyster; the Fort rais'd of Earth had four Bulwarks, and twenty six Guns, according to the Information of the Eye-witnesses 
Drevis
 and 
Berster,
 who were sent thither as Spies.


Callenfels
 Landed not so carefully but that he lost forty Men, either kill'd from behind the Breastworks, or out of a neighboring Wood. Being inform'd by a 
Por∣tuguese
 Prisoner, of the ill Condition of the Town, and how slenderly it was provi∣ded, he immediately rais'd a Sconce, two Watch-houses, and a Pallisado, from which he fir'd with two Guns on the Castle, and made several Trenches; but the Besieged were stronger in People and Guns than the Besiegers, who being scarce able, by reason of their small number, to keep Guards in all places, were also tir'd out under a hot Climate, and fainted for want of Provisions, insomuch that in two days there dy'd and fell sick above two hundred; wherefore 
Callenfels
 judg'd it best to draw off in time; which that they might do securely, they made a Redoubt, and the six Companies Commanded by the Captains 
Redinchoven, Meppelen, Cloppen∣burg, Schenk, Byma,
 and 
Cook,
 resolv'd upon a desperate Attempt, as followeth: Marching privately through a Wood behind the Enemy's Works, they fell in at one side upon the 
Portuguese
 Trenches, from whence they drove them after a small resistance, and forc'd them to flie towards the Fort, whither they were pursu'd with such eagerness, that those who were in the Fort, lest the 
Hollanders
 might get in with them, lock'd up the Avenues against their own Men; at which they were so amaz'd, that some of them climb'd up by the Walls of the Fort, but were either kill'd by the Assailants, or knock'd on the Head by their own People, because several 
Hollanders
 went to climb up amongst the 
Portuguese;
 the rest running about the Fort, fell into the midst of the 
Netherlanders,
 where they were all cut off, being in number above a hundred. The 
Hollanders
 also in this resolute Design, had about twenty Men kill'd, and fifty wounded; after which they put lighted Matches on Sticks in their Ene∣my's Works, as if they had never made any Attempt on the City 
Parayba.


Whilest this Expedition fell out so unfortunately, 
Smient
 performing his Voyage, found in the Inlet 
Trajiciaon
 a 
Portuguese
 Vessel hal'd near the Shore under the protection of two Pallisado's; wherefore supposing it best not to make any Attempt on the same, he ran to an Anchor before 
Ubranduba,
 twenty Leagues below the Ri∣ver 
Grande;
 where the Natives 
Marcial, Tacou, Ararova,
 and 
Matauwe,
 who had been in 
Holland,
 Landing, went to see, and speak with their Countrey-men to joyn with the 
Netherland West-India
 Company: and some days after the Seamen Landing again in the same place, met with 
Tacou,
 together with eight more stout Men, and seven∣teen Women and Children, who carry'd a slain 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Juan Perera,
 to the River 
Grande,
 about whom they had found Letters containing the whole Condition of 
Siara;
 which the 
Brasilians
 imparting to 
Smient,
 he sent a Ketch thither before, and follow'd after himself; they Steer'd along the Shore beyond the Shelves 
Guamare,
 by the Mountains 
Sailinas
 and 
Porto de Mel,
 the Haven 
De Onces,
 and River 
Juaguarive,
 to the 
White Point,
 where the 
Brasilians
 Landing spake with their People, and towards the Evening brought good tydings, and desir'd that they might be Landed at 
Siara,
 where they would put their Design in practice: 
Smient
 following their Advice, receiv'd them aboard the 
New Netherland,
 and Sail'd along by the square Fort 
Siara
 towards a smooth Shore on each side, hedg'd in by thick Woods, where the 
Brasili∣ans
 intended to Land; but the 
Portuguese,
 and 
Brasilians
 belonging to their Party, being gotten into the Wood before, fir'd so vehemently, that they were forc'd to Retreat, and Sail five Leagues farther beyond the Cape 
Opese,
 made dangerous by the many blind Cliffs that lie about the same. 
Smient
 anchoring here, Landed the 
Brasilians,
 on promise that they would return in two days; but the Seamen seeing

sometimes ten, sometimes fifteen Arm'd 
Portugueses
 ashore, judg'd that the 
Brasili∣ans
 had been slain by them, and therefore weighed Anchor to the great dislike of the 
West-India
 Company.


Since this unsuccessful Design on 
Parayba,
 the Council at 
Reciffa
 were no whit discourag'd, but resolv'd to make an Attempt on the River 
Grande
 with twelve Ships and two Sloops, carrying ten Companies of Soldiers, besides Seamen; but by reason of the difficulty of Landing (because the Coast being very Rocky, makes the Sea go very hollow) the strength of the Place, both in respect of its Fortificati∣on and number of Defendants, and the joyning of the 
Brasilians
 with them, they were forc'd to return without effecting their Design.


About the same time eight Sail arriv'd at 
Reciffa
 from 
Holland,
 and 
Jonathan de Nekker, Cornelis Corneliszoon,
 alias 
Houte-been,
 and 
Reinier Peterszoon,
 set out with three Frigats from the 
Texel
 to the Isle 
Vacca,
 where with Hunting, Fishing, and gather∣ing of Fruit, they refresh'd themselves, and afterwards Steer'd to the River 
Magda∣lena,
 discernable at three Leagues distance by the thick yellow Water it discharges into the Sea through three Mouths. Between the Western and middlemost Mouth lies an Isle in the middle of the River, behind which 
Houte-been
 came to an Anchor, whilest 
Nekker
 and 
Peterszoon
 kept Guard near 
Punto Verde;
 where though the Wind blew very fresh in the Night, yet the Water remain'd smooth: About Day-break 
Nekker
 discovering a Sail, made chase after the same, but not able to come up with her, lost her the following Night, and in the Morning saw a Barque, which run∣ning ashore was set on fire by 
Peterszoon;
 after which 
Nekker
 chased two other Ships, which likewise getting from him, he stood off at Sea out of sight of the Isles 
Zamba,
 which are low on the West, and Hilly at the East-end, where the Sea beats vehemently against a Promontory, and chased a Barque ashore, whither he sent a Boat with eight Men; which being beaten to pieces by the Waves, drowned four of them, and the rest getting ashore were kill'd by the 
Spaniards.
 Soon after which four 
Spanish
 Ships set Sail after 
Nekker
 and 
Peterszoon,
 and had not the Night favor'd them they had been but in a bad Condition; for they were not able to get their Sea-men aboard, who having taken some Wine ashore, had made themselves Drunk; about Day-break they descry'd the four 
Spnish
 Vessels, which were gotten so far from them, that they could but just discern them from the Main-top. Not long after they took two Barques, and came to an Anchor behind 
Zamba
 by 
Houte-been,
 who being driven by a Storm out of the River 
Magdalena
 to 
Jamaica,
 had chased a Barque ashore there, and a Ship with four hundred 
Negro's
 against 
St. Martha,
 and since took a rich laden Barque near the River 
Magdalena.
 In like manner 
Nekker
 and 
Peterszoon
 took a Ship coming from 
Caraques,
 leaving 
Houte-been
 alone before 
Magda∣lena,
 who not long after discover'd eighteen 
Spanish
 Ships near the High-land 
St. Martha,
 which were Steering to 
Carthagena;
 one whereof belonging to 
Carthagena
 he made Prize of, but was forc'd to forsake her in a great Storm; after the ceasing of which he took another Frigat, the Men whereof inform'd him, That the Admi∣ral 
Thomas de Caspure
 was going with eleven Ships from 
Cape Antonio
 to 
Porto Belo,
 to lade the 
Peruvian
 Silver there. The Ship with 
Angolan Negro's,
 taken by 
Houte-been,
 he set free, but kept a Frigat laden with Tallow, Hides, Tobacco, and Flesh, which he had taken just before the Coast of 
Rio Grande;
 and thus he went Privateering up and down, when the Plate-Fleet from 
New Spain
 weighed Anchor from 
Juan de Lua,
 the like of which in Riches had never set Sail before, for it carry'd 2169340 
Ryals
 of 
Eight
 for the Merchants, an unvaluable Treasure for the King, besides many rich Commodities which several bought upon their own Accounts, that were not entred in the Custom-house: all which Treasure, laden in nine Gallions, be∣sides

a considerable number of Frigats and small Vessels, was committed to the Charge of 
Miguel de Echacareta;
 but he dying before the Fleet set Sail, 
Manuel Serano de Ribera
 was chosen Admiral; but a dreadful Storm arising as they were Sailing be∣fore the Coast of 
Campeche
 in their Way to 
Havana,
 the whole Fleet was in a manner utterly destroy'd, with a most unvaluable Treasure: The Admiral, Vice-Admiral, Gallion 
Teresia,
 and several other Gallions, sunk, with at least two thousand Men, a great number of Persons of Quality, and amongst the rest the Marquess 
Salinas,
 who was most treacherously slain by thirty Persons,
 who made themselves Masters of a Sloop, into which he went for fafety out of the sinking Admiral 
Juseppe:
 That which instigated them to this horrid Act, was the sight of a small Trunk of Jewels which he carry'd into the Sloop: Not long after falling out amongst themselves about dividing the Spoil, several of them were discover'd, apprehended, and put to death.


This Fleet weighed Anchor the day after their Admiral 
Miguel de Echacareta
 was buried, who dy'd so suddenly that he could make no Will. A few days after the departure of the Fleet, a hundred and seventy Houses were burnt at 
Juan de Lua.
 It appears that the 
Spaniards
 out of fear of the 
Netherlanders,
 set Sail on the tenth of 
October,
 notwithstanding it was at an inconvenient time, because about that Season the Hurricanes rage most terribly in the Bay of 
Vera Crux.


By a Letter from the Treasurer 
Franciscus Suarez
 it appears, that the two Regi∣ments in the City 
St. Salvador,
 the one Commanded by 
Christopher Mexia Bocanegra,
 consisting of nine Companies, each of sixty Men, and the other Commanded by 
Vasco de Mascarennas,
 consisting of thirteen Companies, cost the King of 
Spain
 yearly 21515 
l.
 to maintain them.


The 
Netherland
 Council at 
Reciffa
 no way discourag'd by their successless Attempts made the last Year on 
Rio Grande,
 sent thirteen Companies of Soldiers aboard of seventeen Vessels, to build a Fort at the River 
Formosa,
 where the 
Portu∣guese
 being too weak to resist them, set fire on a Store-house with three hundred Chests of Sugar, and fled. 
Walbeck
 was Commander in Chief in this Design, who Landing on 
Formosa
 found no fit place to build a Fort in, because the Shore, not being above a Musquet-shot broad, was inclos'd with Woods, behind which lay high Mountains that Commanded the Shore; therefore marching to 
Serinhain
 he burnt several Houses and a new Sugar-Mill, near which in a Store-house he took twelve hundred Chests of Sugar, which for want of Carts he could not carry to his Ships. Also before 
Porto Calvo
 he burnt a Carvel, and took a great number of Cat∣tel on 
Camarigibi,
 and return'd without any farther Exploits to 
Reciffa,
 where the Cruisers had brought in several Prizes during his absence.


The Council resolving not to sit idle, set out another Fleet of eighteen Ships under the Command of 
Martin Thyszoon,
 with a Regiment of fourteen Companies under 
Stein Callenfels.


This Fleet approaching 
Cape Augustin,
 they found a ridge of Rocks along the Shore, against which the Sea beat with great vehemency; at length they came be∣fore a small Inlet, at whose Mouth lay a small Fort from which the Enemy fir'd up∣on the Mann'd Boats which Row'd by the same: at some distance they discern'd two Breastworks, one rais'd above the other near the Shore; on which when the 
Hollanders
 thought to Land, three hundred 
Portuguses
 fir'd at once upon them; and on a Hill not far from thence appear'd more Men, which amaz'd the Council of War, for the Inlet was so narrow, that not above six Boats could Land at once; and it was evident, that though the Enemy should chance to be beaten from behind his Breastworks, yet the 
Hollanders
 would lie expos'd to the Enemy's Guns from the

Fort 
Nazareth
 built on the Mountain; besides, 
Nazareth,
 if gain'd, could scarce be defended, unless the whole Mountain were Intrench'd round, which would not onely be very chargeable, but also impossible, because of the red Earth, altogether unfit for Fortifications; and the barren Mountain afforded neither Wood, nor any thing else; besides, the Storming of it would be very dangerous: The Entrance into the Haven was difficult, because a stonie Bank before the same suffer'd no Pas∣sage but betwixt small Openings; the chiefest whereof was guarded by a Water-Castle, and farther within by the Fort 
Puntael.
 Along the Sea-shore their Landing was prevented by the violent beating of the Waves, and a great square Tower on the Way up to the Fort 
Nazareth,
 whose Church is seen at a great distance off at Sea. All which consider'd, they judg'd it best to draw off their Men again, and so they return'd without having effected any thing to the purpose, onely Captain 
Schuppe
 took two Carvels with five hundred Chests of Sugar in the River 
Formosa.


Soon after 
Martin Thyszoon
 being sent out with twenty two Sail, sent four Ships for 
Holland
 with the Lieutenant-Colonel 
Stein Callenfels,
 and the Councellor 
Seroos∣kerken;
 yet thirteen Sail remain'd still before the Coast of 
Brasile,
 under the Com∣mand of Captain 
John Mast,
 who whilest he stood to and again from the Shore, and Cruising up and down, the Governor of 
Reciffa
 and Colonel 
Rembach
 march'd with five hundred Men and forty 
Negro's,
 from 
Reciffa
 about six a Clock at Night, by 
Olinda
 along the Shore: Whereupon the 
Portuguese
 Horse-watch ran instantly to 
Real,
 two Leagues from 
Olinda,
 to give notice thereof to 
Albuquerque;
 but they sur∣mounted all the Difficulties they met with by the Way (which were the greater in regard of the abundance of Rain that had lately fall'n,) and on the first of 
May
 1632. came to the City 
Garasu
 about Noon;
 where whilest 
Rembach
 stood still in good or∣der with three Companies, the Governor of 
Reciffa
 fell upon the Town with three Companies. The Inhabitants had not the least thoughts of being molested by the 
Netherlanders
 there, because they judg'd the Ways which led thither could not be pass'd in that rainy Season. In the first Onset a hundred 
Portugueses,
 most of them great Merchants, were slain, they being come thither with their Goods from 
Olinda;
 and amongst the Prisoners which they took, were six 
Franciscans.


This Victory the 
Hollanders
 obtain'd with the loss but of eight Men, and twenty five wounded, besides Captain 
Rembach,
 who was also wounded. The Governor of 
Reciffa
 entering the City, stav'd two hundred Pipes of Wine, to keep his Soldiers from over-drinking; and because there were many fair Women there, he caus'd them all to be lock'd up in the Church of 
St. Cosmo,
 to preserve them from the Sol∣diers outrages.


The Priest 
Duarte Mendez Serraon
 (a Letter of whose 
John de Laet
 quotes) values the Booty carry'd away by the 
Hollanders
 from 
Garasu,
 at 9000 
l.
 
Sterl.
 besides the da∣mage which the Place suffer'd, being almost ruin'd. He relates farther, That the City call'd 
Villa de Santo Cosmo de Garasu
 lay five Leagues to the Northward from 
Olinda;
 and that in it were three Churches, 
viz. Cosmus, Misericordia,
 and 
Heremi∣tage de Santa Crux;
 as also two Cloysters, 
viz. Invocation de Antonio,
 inhabited by 
Capuchins,
 and another dedicated to 
Franciscus,
 inhabited by Persons of his Order; That the chief Church 
Cosmus,
 built like a flat-roof'd House, had a fair Entrance, before which stood two Turrets, and in them hung Bells; That the 
Franciscan
 Cloyster was inclos'd within a great Wall in the middle of a pleasant Garden, and had on each side a Tower; That most of the People who kept the Feast of 
St. Phi∣lip
 and 
St. Jacob,
 were at Mass when the 
Hollanders
 came thither, and though they saw the Soldiers out of their Windows, judg'd them to be 
Portugueses,
 who (as it was reported) had a Design upon 
Tamarica.




The Governor of 
Reciffa
 marching with his Booty from 
Garusa,
 set several Hou∣ses on fire, and march'd towards the Fort 
Orange,
 on the Island 
Tamarica, Albuquerque
 inform'd thereof, dispatch'd a 
Spanish
 Regiment, Commanded by Colonel 
Ferdinand Ludovico Barbalho,
 and 
Paulo de Perado,
 with a considerable Body of Volunteers; but they all came too late: Whereupon the 
Portugueses,
 being thus kept in continual Alarms ashore, and sustaining every day more and more Losses at Sea, began to desire Peace, and the rather, because they could not hear of any Fleet coming from 
Spain
 to their assistance; and hearing a Report, that the 
West-India
 Company were making great Preparations. To which purpose 
Peter Alvares
 (acquainted with the 
Dutch
 Commanders, as having been their Prisoner) was sent by 
Duarte de Albu∣querque
 (to whom the Lordship of 
Pernambuco
 properly belong'd) and by his Brother (being General of all the Forces in 
Brasile
) to 
Reciffa,
 to Treat about the deciding of the Differences between them and the 
Netherland West-India
 Company: But the Council in 
Reciffa
 weighing the many Disadvantages that would ensue, if they should upon easie Terms patch up a Peace with the 
Portugueses,
 return'd 
Alvares
 this Answer: 
That the 
West-India
 Company was resolv'd, to the utmost of their power, to keep all those Places which they had taken by force of Arms; but that if he could move 
Albuquerque
 to deliver up the Countrey to them, he should be bountifully rewarded.


After this the 
Hollanders
 Landing at 
Barra Grande,
 took great quantities of Wine and Tobacco, and burnt two Villages; as also the Sugar-Cane Fields, and Sugar-Mills on 
Catuwanha,
 also one at 
Barra Grande,
 and three at 
Porto Francisco.


At the same time the 
Hollanders
 also scatter'd Letters amongst the 
Portuguese,
 sig∣nifying their trouble for the great effusion of Blood in those Parts, which was oc∣casion'd by their own stubborn and unreasonable Proceedings; likewise intima∣ting the great Preparations that were making on their own part, and on the other side the great unlikelihood, and indeed impossibility, as things then stood, of receiving farther Succors from 
Spain.


These things bieng powerfully urg'd, had perhaps taken greater effect with the 
Portugueses,
 had not the secret Counsels of the 
Netherlanders
 been betray'd by 
Leonard van Lom,
 Overseer of the Prizes, and Translater of the 
Portuguese
 Letters, who confess'd that he was perswaded to that villanous Action in 
Amsterdam
 by a 
Por∣tuguese
 Merchant, call'd 
Duarte Rodrigues Delves,
 with whom he had made some Agreement; and for the better confirmation had receiv'd the 
Sacrament
 upon it of an 
Amsterdam
 Priest: His Agreement was, "That he should go to 
Reciffa,
 enquire "after all Concerns, and give speedy advice thereof to 
Rocque de Barros;
 which he did by a 
Mulatto,
 who carry'd Letters between them.


This Villain the Council judging worthy of Death, first caus'd his two fore-Fingers to be cut off, next his Head, and afterwards his Body to be divided into four Quarters. The 
Mulatto
 was likewise Beheaded.


About this time the Treasurer 
Ceulen
 viewing the Isle 
Mayo,
 found the same to be surrounded with steep Rocks, abounding with Horses, Asses, Partridges and Goats, besides two Salt-pans. The Inhabitants, which go Arm'd with Half-pikes and rusty Hangers, are said to be a sort of out-law'd 
Portugueses,
 to the number of thirty, amongst whom was one Woman. They had a Governor, call'd 
Amaro,
 to whom they gave yearly eight thousand Goat-skins.


Ceulen
 Sailing from hence Steer'd by the Island 
Del Fogo,
 known by a great Mountain, whose high top vomits Fire. Not far from which he took the Ship 
St. Peter
 laden with Wine, with which he return'd safe to 
Reciffa,
 where a while after 
Gysselling
 arriv'd also, and was no sooner Landed, but four Ships, two Sloops,

six Cock-boats, a Barque and a Hoy, set Sail under the Conduct of 
John Mast
 with four or five Companies of choice Musquetteers, Commanded by Colonel 
Schuppe,
 who Landed behind the stonie Bank of the River 
Alexio,
 surpris'd some 
Portuguese
 and 
Negro's
 in their Houses, and march'd in the Night so fast, that by Day-break they were got to the Shore of the River 
Formosa,
 where they took two rich laden Fly-boats and a Carvel; and afterwards Landing in the Road 
Camarigibi,
 they took fifty 
Portuguese
 in a Village, as also a Store-house full of Chests with Sugar and To∣bacco, burnt all the Buildings thereabouts, and amongst others a brave Sugar-Mill: Captain 
Byma
 burnt also an eminent. Sugar-Mill near the Brook 
Maria Fa∣rinha. Martin Thyszoon
 lay a long time under the 
Line;
 but at last getting to the Isle 
Vacca
 he gave each Captain his Orders, and divided the Fleet, which joyn'd again before 
Havana,
 pass'd through the Straights 
Bahama
 (where he met with great Storms, and many other Inconveniences) to 
Holland.
 But 
Galeyn van Stapels,
 who parted with a Frigat from 
Thyszoons
 Fleet near 
Bonaire,
 Steer'd by the Promontory 
Cotoche
 to 
Sisab;
 which Village having plunder'd, he set it on fire, fetch'd a Barque in the Night from the Road of 
Campeche
 (whose City is seen at a great distance off at Sea, by the white Cloyster 
Francisco
) and so set Sail for 
Zealand. Houte-been
 arriv'd also about the middle of 
June
 with a rich Booty in the 
Texel.


Not long after 
Houte-been
 weighing Anchor with the 
Otter
 Frigat, return'd to 
Reciffa,
 and in his Way thither took a Ship laden with Wine. Colonel 
Schuppe
 im∣mediately upon his arrival had a Command given him of five hundred Men, and 
John Lichthart
 of three Sail of Ships, a Pinnace and five Sloops; with which they set Sail to the River 
Formosa. Schuppe
 Landing his Men there, march'd up to the Fort 
Formosa,
 fortifi'd with Moats, steep high Walls, and four Guns, Storm'd and took the same, killing all those that were in the Garrison, except the Governor 
Peter Al∣buquerque:
 In which Victory nevertheless the 
Hollanders
 lost the valiant Captain 
Philbert du Basson,
 who being shot in at the Throat with a Bullet, which came out behind the Ear, dy'd of the same, the Wound immediately festering, to which all Wounds are very subject in 
Brasile.
 The 
Hollanders
 also burnt four laden Barques, a Store-house full of Sugar, and pull'd down the Fort they had taken.


Setting Sail again, they Landed to the Northward of the River 
Antonio Grande,
 where they gain'd a Platform with five Guns, destroy'd six Ships, and took two more in the Haven 
Camarigibi;
 from whence they return'd to 
Reciffa,
 after having spoil'd and taken thirteen of the 
Portuguese
 Ships, several Sugar-Mills, Store-houses, and a Castle.


The 
Swol
 Frigat came also in a shatter'd condition to 
Reciffa,
 having been En∣gag'd with a 
Spanish
 Gallion carrying twenty eight great Guns, and full of Men, which nevertheless she would have master'd, had not an unfortunate Shot spoil'd all her Rigging.


About the same time the Captains 
Byma, Everwyn,
 and 
Rinking,
 set; Sail with their Companies in three Ships to 
Porto Francisco,
 where Landing, they burnt three Sugar-Mills, besides several other brave Buildings, and brought away a rich Carvel, whilest 
Laurence van Rembach
 was made Colonel in 
Waerdenberg
's place, and 
Sigismond Schuppe
 Lieutenant-Colonel.


The Proffers which the 
Tapuyan
 Agent made to the 
Hollanders
 had been very ad∣vantageous, had not the Summer Season been too far spent: for he had promis'd, That if they would Land a considerable Party of Men two Leagues Southward from the River 
Grande,
 all the 
Tapuyans
 should joyn with them, and assist them in driving the 
Portuguese
 out of 
Brasile.


After this 
Schuppe
 and 
Lichthart
 went with thirteen Companies of Soldiers, and

two hundred Seamen, to fall upon the Enemy's Camp at the 
Afogados,
 where 
Albu∣querque
 had rais'd several Works, partly for the securing of 
Verga,
 the best Spot of Land in all 
Pernambuco,
 where there are likewise more Sugar-Mills than in the whole Countrey, and partly to keep an open Way between 
Arryal
 and the Promon∣tory 
St. Augustine:
 To which purpose they march'd by the Fort 
Aemilia
 along the plain Countrey, to the Stream 
Capivaribi,
 which they had cross'd before the 
Portu∣guese
 knew any thing of their approach, who being but a hundred and thirty, for∣sook their Works and ran into the Woods; but assisted with four Companies of 
Italians,
 they Sally'd out of 
Real,
 and fell with great eagerness on the Seamen, who being guarded by forty Musquetteers were raising of Works in the Road which leads to 
Real,
 and put them to flight; but being rally'd, and seconded by Colonel 
Redburgh,
 they drove the Enemy into a By-way, guarded by 
Byma
 and 
Bongarson;
 where being stopt, and Captain 
Cloppenburgh
 from another side falling in amongst them with his Musquetteers, they became encompass'd, and had been all slain, had not 
Le Grande,
 by making way for 
Cloppenburgh,
 given them an opportunity of get∣ting away between them.


The Council at 
Reciffa,
 to secure the footing which they had got on the other side of the River 
Capavaribi,
 took order about the building of a Fort, which requir'd the greater Labor, because the Earth was very stonie: not far from whence Cap∣tain 
John Smith
 walking, was shot by a Party of 
Portuguese
 lying behind some Chests of Sugar; the Blow whereof giving notice to his Ensign, he speedily march'd thi∣ther, and surprising the 
Portuguese,
 kill'd most part of them. The like success had 
Le Grande, Cloppenburgh,
 and 
Bongarson,
 who marching out upon a Design, surpris'd unawares in 
John de Mendoza
's Sugar-Mill, two Companies of 
Portuguese,
 who ha∣ving watch'd there the whole Night, and composing themselves in the Morning to sleep, were set upon, and most of them kill'd, and the old Commander 
Antonio Or∣tizo de Mendoza
 taken, who not long before came thither with a Regiment of 
Por∣tugueses;
 the Sugar-Mill was also set on fire.


These successful Expeditions still adding to the 
Hollanders
 fresh Courage, they follow'd the career of their Successes, and placing three Companies in the Works of the 
Afogados,
 drew their Army into three Divisions; Colonel 
Rembach
 was to Com∣mand the Forlorn; 
Schuppe,
 the main Body; and 
Byma,
 the Reserve; in which Or∣der they waded through the River 
Capivaribi,
 placing some Musquetteers in a House built near the High-way, to secure their Return that way, and came without any resistance to the 
Arryal;
 where they found a long Street, with Shops on each side full of all sorts of Goods, which they pillag'd, notwithstanding the Enemy fir'd furiously from the Castle upon them, and wounded Colonel 
Rembach
 and Captain 
Redburgh.
 To the Northward before the Castle lay a Redoubt with two Guns, which 
Schuppe
 mastering, kill'd all that were in the same; but being too weak to carry away the Guns, he nail'd up the Touch-holes, and march'd off with his Men, but in such disorder, that the 
Portuguese
 Sallying out of their Garrison, fell in amongst them in that manner, that they were not able to bring away their woun∣ded Men, amongst whom was Captain 
Redburgh;
 and it had been worse, had not 
Remback
 (who though he was shot in at the Shoulder, under the Blade-bone whereof lay the Bullet) kept them off till such time as the 
Hollanders
 were got over the River 
Capivaribi,
 near the fore-mention'd House, guarded by a Company of Musquetteers, who kill'd above fifty of the 
Portugueses,
 besides fifty that had been slain in the for∣mer Skirmishes; the 
Hollanders
 themselves also had lost a hundred and thirty Men: yet notwithstanding they ceased not, but march'd in Parties through all parts of 
Verga,
 where they met with no opposition, but found the Sugar-Mills full of Sugar,

left to be kept by a few 
Negro's. Rembach
 also sent a Drummer to 
Real,
 to demand the Wounded, especially Colonel 
Redburgh,
 with a Letter from the Prisoner 
Anto∣nio Mendoza,
 requesting the Governor 
Albuquerque
 and Duke of 
Bagnola,
 that they would be pleas'd to release the 
Hollanders
 on Exchange, or else upon Ransom. The Drummer being civilly Entertain'd by 
Albuquerque,
 brought back with him a strange Oyl call'd 
Aury,
 for the wounded 
Mendoza;
 with which a Wound made by a Bullet being anointed about three Fingers breadth, it draws out the same. 
Bagnola
 afterwards sent it to 
Rembach,
 in requital for his kindness in sending 
Mendoza
 in a Hammock to 
Real.
 Mean while the 
Hollanders
 still fortifi'd their Works at the 
Afo∣gados
 with Pallisado's and Platforms, on which they put five Guns. They likewise work'd daily on the fore-mention'd Castle, whilest 
Schuppe
 march'd with four hun∣dred Men in the Night over the River 
Jangada
 to 
Moribeca;
 which approaching, he perceiv'd the Way stopt up with fell'd Trees; wherefore he march'd about to the Village, which he found forsaken by the Inhabitants, and all the Houses left empty, onely five hundred Chests of Sugar that had been brought thither from 
Verga,
 which 
Schuppe
 Commanded to be set on fire with the Village, leaving onely the Church, and at his Return burnt also a Sugar-Mill.


The Governor 
Albuquerque
 having formerly never spar'd any 
Hollanders
 which fell into his hands, began now to be better advis'd; and it was also Agreed upon between the King of 
Spain
 and 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands,
 That they should burn no Church, unless the one, or the other Party made resistance in the same; That the Victor should be oblig'd, upon request of Quarter, to spare his Enemies, and release the Prisoners for an indifferent sum of Money; That both Parties should forbear to use chew'd or poyson'd Bullets.


Schuppe
 being chosen Chief over the 
Militia
 in 
Rembach
's Place (who dy'd of his Wound,) lay not long still, but setting Sail with eleven Ships to the Isle 
Tamarica,
 Landed seven Companies before the Castle 
Nostra Sennora de Conception;
 which, though well provided and fortifi'd, the Governor 
Pignioro
 surrendred, on Condition that he might depart with all his Men and the Church Ornaments.


Matthias van Ceulen
 and 
Schuppe
 Rowing up the Stream 
Goiana
 with Sloops and Boats, put to flight 
Laurence Cavalcanti,
 burnt divers Sugar-Mills, and took abun∣dance of rich Merchandize: Ten days they made havock in the middle of their Enemies Countreys without any resistance; for all of them fled to the 
Aldas,
 (so they call the 
Brasilian
 Villages): At last they return'd home with great Booty, especially of Sugar and 
Brasile
 Wood; whilest those at 
Reciffa
 were not idle, doing the 
Portuguese
 great mischief by their continual Sallies, 
Tourlong
 burning a Fishers Village, and 
Bongarson
 a stately Banquetting-house belonging to 
Cavalcant
 near 
Arryal;
 as also 
Pedro Acunha de Andada
's Sugar-Mill, from whence he took great Booty.


About the same time the 
Portuguese
 of several Parts, terrifi'd by continual Alarms and Losses, began to incline to the 
West-India
 Company, believing that they should utterly be ruin'd, if they continu'd to joyn with 
Albuquerque
's Party (who claim'd 
Pernambuco
 wholly to himself) and therefore car'd not whether he or the 
Hollanders
 were Masters, so they might live peaceably. Mean while the 
Hollanders
 march'd from the 
Afogados
 to 
Arryal: Schuppe
 marching before with two hundred and fifty Sea∣men, was follow'd by the Lieutenant-Colonel 
De Vries,
 and he by a Company of 
Negro's
 that carry'd Provisions; next 
Byma
 march'd with the Reserve. The Trea∣surer 
John Gyseling
 also accompanied the Army, which Encamp'd near 
Francisco Brito Machado
's Wind-Mill, and Garrison'd the half-finish'd Fort near the Sugar-Mill be∣longing to 
Marcus Andre,
 whilest three Companies Commanded by Captain 
De Vries


march'd to 
Monteroos-Mills
 to take the same; but the 
Portuguese
 lying in an Ambus∣cade had given them a shrewd Rebuke, had not 
Schuppe,
 hearing the Guns, sent away the Captains 
Picard
 and 
Garstman,
 who coming out from amongst the Sugar-Canes, put the Enemy to flight; yet the 
Portuguese
 began to increase daily, insomuch that they got above two thousand Men together at 
Arryal,
 whilest the 
Dutch
 Army began to want Provisions; wherefore 
Jacob Huigen
 was order'd to fetch a Supply from 
Reciffa;
 but as he was coming up the River with the 
Exeter
 Ketch, and a Boat hung about with Hides to secure his Men from the Bullets, and being within Musquet-shot from the Works where Captain 
Schuppe
 lay, the Enemy's whole Power shot so vehemently upon him from the top of a Hill, that both the Ketch and Boat were sunk;
 
Huigen
 himself receiv'd two mortal Wounds, and most of his Men were kill'd, a few wounded onely escaping with Life. 
Schuppe
 therefore was forc'd to return for want of Provisions, and the rather, because he was inform'd that 
Bagnola
 was coming with a Supply of seven hundred Men.


Mean while the two Captains, 
Smient
 and 
Dunkirken
 perform'd a valiant Exploit, 
viz.
 they went with a few Men in a Boat, and took a great 
Portuguese
 Vessel richly laden, having no more than four Blunderbusses and their Swords in the Boat with them.


Byma
 also fell upon the Village 
Moriwere,
 where he found most of the People at Church. 
Albuquerque
 inform'd thereof, sent two hundred Men immediately, Com∣manded by 
Francisco Almeda,
 to intercept him in his Return; but he marching on to 
Tamarica,
 they pursu'd him; he marching but slowly, because the narrow Way was stopt up with fell'd Trees, they overtook him half a League beyond 
Garasu,
 near 
Peter Rocha
's Sugar-Mill; where after a sharp Encounter between them, a great slaughter was made amongst the 
Spaniards, Almeda
 and many other Persons being slain, and the rest put to flight. 
Byma
 having obtain'd this Victory, march'd to 
Ga∣rasu
 and burnt the same, sparing onely the Churches and Cloysters, according to the Articles made between 
Albuquerque
 and 
Rembach.


Schuppe
 prevented from crossing the River 
Jangada
 by the many muddy Creeks, return'd back to 
Reciffa
 with great Booty, which he had taken out of a Store-house. The 
Dutch
 Cruisers also brought in many Prizes.


The Exploits perform'd by 
John Johnszoon van Hoorn,
 with four Ships, three Ketches, and a Sloop, are likewise very remarkable; for with this Fleet in the first place he took the City 
Truxillo,
 and from thence Sailing towards the City 
Cam∣peche,
 and Storming the same valiantly, soon became Master of it; the Booty of which two Places being brought aboard, increas'd considerably the 
West-India
 Com∣panies Stock.


In regard 
Albuquerque
 understood the Situation of 
Pernambuco
 better than the 
Hol∣landers,
 and had all the Natives to assist him, and by conserence was the better able to defend himself against their continual Alarms, the Council at 
Reciffa
 therefore judg'd it convenient to make a farther Voyage to the South, that the 
Portuguese,
 who were highly discontented about the Losses which they had sustain'd, might be the sooner induc'd to submit to their Government: To which purpose ten Ketches, Mann'd with seven hundred Soldiers, besides Seamen, set Sail on the tenth of 
Octo∣ber,
 under the Command of 
John Gyseling, Schuppe,
 and 
Servaes Carpentier,
 who first ran into the River 
Porto de Piedras,
 where they took a considerable number of Chests of Sugar, out of Mills, Barques, and Store-houses, waded through the little Stream 
Tatona Mansa,
 burnt a Village of the same Denomination, and Sail'd to the River 
Camarigibi,
 which they Rowing up in the Night, were got not above four Leagues by Day-break, the contrary Tide, and the Plants call'd 
Mangues
 having

hindred them from getting farther; but being inform'd by certain 
Portuguese
 Pri∣soners, that abundance of Sugar lay in 
Porto Francisco,
 they marching thither, found under a Straw Roof in a Wood, seventy four Chests of Sugar, and a great deal more in several Store-houses. They also pillag'd the whole Countrey towards 
Alagoa del Noort, St. Miguel,
 and 
Alagoa del Zur.
 Not far from which 
Schuppe
 falling upon the Village 
Sennora de Conception,
 burnt the same, as also a Ship upon the Stocks, the Houses at the Mouth of the Stream 
Alagoa,
 and the Tackling belonging to the two Ships, and carry'd away with them a very great Booty.


Tourlon
 also march'd with four Companies from 
Tamarica
 to 
Mangianguape,
 where the Garrison from 
Garasu,
 and some 
Jesuits
 lay, to disswade the People from sub∣mitting themselves to the 
West-India
 Company, to which they were much inclin'd. But 
Tourlon
 march'd not so privately, but that the Enemy had notice thereof, and fled; wherefore he finding 
Mangianguape
 empty, offer'd the same to the Flames, as also several Sugar-Mills, but spar'd the Lives of all those who begg'd Quarter.


Byma
 about the same time with a hundred and forty Musquetteers, besides two Companies of Seamen, leaving the 
Afogados
 in the Night, march'd to 
Amaro
 by Day-break, which he set on fire, with a Sugar-Mill and a Store-house full of Sugar, after every Soldier had taken as much as he could carry: upon which the Enemy taking Alarm, plac'd their Ambuscades so cunningly, and fell upon them so furi∣ously, that they had undoubtedly kill'd every Man of them, had not a Party come in timely to their assistance, and forc'd the 
Portuguese
 to fly to a neighboring Sugar-Mill built on a Hill, from whence they fir'd with great eagerness, and made a mighty noise, blowing their Trumpets and beating their Drums.
 
Byma
 being for∣ced to pass by the Mill within the reach of the Enemy's Guns, resolv'd upon a bold Attempt, and commanding his Men to throw away their Sugar, and other Booty with which they burthen'd themselves, on a sudden ran up to the top of the Hill; which Action so amaz'd the 
Portuguese,
 that they fled without offering the least resi∣stance. 
Byma
 thereupon proceeded on his Way to the 
Afogados,
 leaving behind him above seventy slain, and divers wounded.


During these Exploits on Shore, the Commander 
Smient
 Cruis'd with six Sail before 
Paraiba;
 two Ships belonging to his Fleet steering towards the Haven of 
Formosa,
 discover'd five Carvels, a Pink carrying twenty six, and a great Fly-boat eighteen Guns, both 
Dunkirkers;
 one of the Carvels ran aground, and was stav'd to pieces, two of them got into 
Rio Grande,
 and the other two were taken.


About the same time 
Lichthart
 with two Sloops pass'd into the River 
Conayou,
 set upon seven Barques of the 
Portuguese,
 Mann'd with seventy Seamen, and ply'd them with his Brass Guns after such a manner, that few escap'd with their Lives: he took what he thought fit out out of the Barques, and afterwards set them on fire.


The Treasurer 
Matthias van Ceulen
 weighed Anchor with four Ships and seven Ketches, Mann'd with eight hundred Men, with which he set Sail to 
Rio Grande,
 with intention to fall upon the Fort 
Tres Reyes.
 In the River he took two Carvels, though they lay close under the Castle, Landed a Company of Soldiers, and a hun∣dred and fifty Seamen on the Southern Shore, guarded the fresh River with Boats, march'd directly to 
Tres Reyes,
 and Encamp'd himself near the Redoubt which lay before the Castle, being follow'd by 
Byma, Garstman,
 and 
Cloppenburgh,
 who in their Way took a House built on a Hill, and considerable Booty in it. 
Byma
 getting about Noon to the Village 
Natall,
 left some of his Men there, whilest he march'd with the rest to the Castle 
Tres Peyes. Ceulen
 sending to demand the Castle, receiv'd at first a resolute denyal from the Governor 
Peter Mendez de Govea;
 but when the

Besieged saw the 
Hollanders
 resolutely bent upon a Storm, they sent to desire a Treaty, and after some small Capitulation the Castle was surrendred upon Articles. 
Garst∣man
 being made Commander of the Castle, had a hundred and fifty Soldiers allow'd him. The Fleet set Sail again, after they had pull'd down and destroy'd all the Works which had been rais'd, and made the Inhabitants take an Oath to be faithful to 
Garstman,
 who chang'd the Name of the Castle from 
Tres Reyes
 to that of 
Ceulen,
 being the Name of the Treasurer, who bore the chiefest Commmand in the Siege, and when the 
Brasilian
 King 
Jandui
 came with a great Train to congratulate the Companies success, receiv'd him with great civility.


In the beginning of the Year 1634. twenty six Sail weighed Anchor from 
Reciffa,
 to Cruise up and down in Squadrons before the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 the Promon∣tory 
St. Augustine,
 the Rivers 
Francisco
 and 
Parayba. Schuppe
 and 
Lichthart
 also set Sail with two Ships, a Ketch, two Pinnaces, and a Sloop, carrying two hundred Sol∣diers besides Seamen.


Mean while fresh Forces were sent from the 
Texel,
 the 
Maes
 and 
Zeland,
 to 
Re∣ciffa,
 where the Council undertook another notable Design, 
viz.
 to surprize the Forts along the River 
Parayba:
 whither coming with twenty Sail, they divided themselves into two Squadrons under the Command of the Treasurer 
John Gyse∣ling, Schuppe,
 
Servaes Carpentier,
 and 
Lichthart.
 Having receiv'd some repulse at the Fort 
Nazaretta,
 they resolv'd upon Action in some other place, and to that purpose Steer'd towards the Point 
St. Augustine;
 by Day-break a part of the Fleet ran into the Mouth of the Haven, notwithstanding the 
Portuguese
 fir'd upon them with great Guns from the Castle, and all their Works, without doing any considerable damage, onely the 
Sea-knight
 Ketch running aground was shatter'd all to pieces; whilest the 
Hollanders
 Commanded by Captain 
Lichthart
 Landed near 
Puntael,
 and fell upon the 
Portuguese
 in such a manner, that they forc'd them to forsake he Place, burnt above two thousand Chests of Sugar, several Store-houses, and a great Ship, besides two Barques.


Lichthart
 being Master of the 
Puntael,
 was very busie in finishing a Stone Re∣doubt which the Enemy had begun, and secur'd it by a Wall and Pallisado's. Here he plac'd two Companies, and rais'd several Works, whilest the 
Portuguese
 receiving Aid from all the neighboring Places, set upon the recovery of the 
Puntael,
 being the rather encourag'd thereunto, in regard the 
Hollanders
 Forces were still in their Ships.
 Fifteen hundred 
Portugueses
 were divided into two Parties, the greatest of which came through behind the adjacent Morasses, and forc'd in on the side or the place near which the fifteen Ships taken by 
Lichthart
 lay at an Anchor, whilest the other Party fell upon the Out-works; where though the 
Hollanders
 defended them∣selves valiantly at first, yet they were forc'd to Retreat to the Redoubt, where both Parties fought with great eagerness; but the 
Hollanders
 Ketches haling near the Shore, and firing in amongst the 
Portuguese
 with their great Guns, forc'd them to flye, and contrary to their Custom, to leave their dead Bodies behind them.


Soon after, whilest 
Gysseling, Schuppe,
 and 
Lichthart
 stay'd at the 
Puntael,
 the 
Por∣tuguese,
 designing to take 
Reciffa,
 kept the 
Afogados
 and the Fort on 
Antonio Vaes
 in continual Alarm; which made the 
Hollanders
 send most of their 
Militia
 thither, and to fortifies yet more strongly than before. The Castle 
De Bruin
 first discovering the 
Portuguese
 wading through the Water, fir'd great Guns at them, upon the hearing of which 
Waerdenburgh
 and 
St. George
 fir'd also. The Treasurer 
Ceulen
 and Lieute∣nant-Colonel 
Byma
 march'd with a Company of Soldiers to the Stone Redoubt, from whence they fir'd stoutly upon the Enemy; yet thirty of them got by the Pallisado's and Stone Redoubt: wherefore 
Ceulen
 march'd in with some of his

Men to assist the Citizens, and keep the woodden Battery, where the 
Portuguese
 were stopt, and with great and small Shot put to flight. The Prisoners which the 
Hollanders
 took inform'd them, That 
Martin Suares,
 chief Commander over the 
Pot∣tuguese
 that made this Attempt, had divided his Men into three Parties; the Reserve, which consisted of three hundred Men, was to march on upon the making of a sign when the other Parties were past, one along the River 
Bibiriba,
 and the other along the Shore by the Stone Redoubt into 
Reciffa,
 to burn the Place, as also all manner of Provision and Ammunition.


Whilest this Design of the 
Portuguese
 fell out so unfortunately, being discover'd to 
Ceulen
 by a Renegado, the 
Hollanders
 at 
Reciffa
 receiv'd two Companies from their Regiment at the 
Puntael,
 and a considerable number of Men rais'd in 
Holland
 by the 
West-India
 Company. 
Ceulen
 and 
Byma
 thus supply'd, went continually out in Par∣ties, burnt in view of the Garrison in 
Arryal
 the Sugar-Mills belonging to 
Francisco Montero
 and 
Lewis Ramires,
 and were inform'd by five 
Italian
 Renegado's That there were not three hundred Men in Garrison in 
Arryal;
 which so encourag'd 
Byma,
 that he resolving to fall upon the same, march'd thither in the Night with a thou∣sand Men from 
Reciffa,
 and by Day-break shot sixteen Granado's from a neighbor∣ing Hill, of which seven fell into 
Arryal,
 but did little Execution; besides, the Strength of the Place was such, and the number of Men so considerable, that his Design had no other success, than that a Hand-granado falling short amongst the Houses before the Fort, set fire on them, and in a short time burnt a whole Street with rich Shops, and the Habitations of the 
Italians.


The 
Portuguese
 at the 
Puntael
 being inform'd, that 
Byma
 had Besieg'd 
Arryal
 with a thousand Men, judg'd that most of the 
Hollanders
 were gone thither from the 
Puntael;
 which they were the apter to believe, because the 
Hollanders
 coming but little abroad stay'd within their Redoubts, which 
Lichthart
 had joyn'd to a Battery; wherefore they made another Attempt with a hundred and twenty Men on the 
Puntael;
 but a Carvel with two Brass Guns, and a Company of Soldiers lying at Anchor near the Place by which the 
Portuguese
 were to pass, and they not expecting to meet with any resistance there, they were, as soon as they approached the Carvel, fir'd upon by the 
Hollanders,
 who killing several of their Men, so affrighted them, that they return'd without making any farther Attempt.


Whilest every day more and more Prizes were taken by the 
Hollanders,
 and brought into 
Reciffa,
 and fresh Supplies sent them from 
Holland,
 there began to be some Overtures of Peace from the 
Portuguese;
 wherein also the King of 
Spain,
 by reason of the several Damages he had sustain'd from the 
Dutch,
 began to concern himself, and to menace them with the great Forces he was able to raise, by reason of the late safe arrival of two rich Plate-Fleets, if they came not to reasonable Terms. But answer was return'd from 
Byma,
That if they were minded to Treat about giving of Quarter, or any such like Point in difference between them, they should find him ready; but that the 
West-India
 Company would never re∣sign those Places taken in 
Brasile
 with the Sword, either for Money or Goods, but would defend them to the utmost of their Power.


The 
Hollanders
 also chang'd the Names of several Places taken from the 
Portu∣guese;
 for the Castle near the Promontory 
St. Augustine
 was call'd 
Gysseling;
 the Town on 
Tamarica, Schuppen-stadt;
 the Fort at the 
Afogados, Prince William;
 and the 
Puntael, The Fortress Vander Dussen.


Notwithstanding the Requests of the 
States
 of the 
Netherlands
 and 
West-India
 Com∣pany, to the Commissioners 
Ceulen
 and 
Gysseling,
 to stay longer in the 
West-Indies,
 yet they prepar'd for their Voyage home, and the speedier, because they expected

great scarcity of Provisions, unless a sudden Supply came from 
Holland.
 During their two years Government here, they had taken five thousand five hundred and nineteen Chests of Sugar, a hundred fifty nine thousand nine hundred thirty and nine Pound of 
Brasile
 Wood, one and thirty Ships laden with several Goods, which amounted to 230000 
l.
 besides the value of the Ships and Guns, the taken Forts, destroy'd Sugar-Mills, and other Buildings. They left at their going away above four thousand Soldiers, divided into thirty two Companies, to guard 
Brasile,
 under the Command of 
Schuppe
 and 
Arcisseusky,
 and carry'd with them a hundred Soldiers, besides one and fifty sick and maimed: Moreover, thirty two Sail of Ships, Mann'd with a thousand and eighty seven Seamen,
 were order'd to Cruise up and down be∣fore the Coast of 
Brasile,
 besides four Ketches before the Promontory of 
St. Augu∣stine,
 and six Ships in the Haven of 
Pernambuco.


After 
Ceulen
 and 
Gysseling
 had set Sail for 
Holland,
 divers Prizes were brought in∣to 
Reciffa,
 as also several Ships arriv'd there from the 
Texel
 and the 
Maes.
 The 
Hol∣landers
 went out continually in Parties, whilest 
Schuppe
 and 
Lichthart
 set Sail also with eight Ships, Mann'd with six Companies of Soldiers, besides Seamen, to plunder and pillage all the Havens to the South, where several 
Portuguese
 Vessels lay laden with Sugar. But 
Janduy,
 who with his Subjects the 
Tapuyans,
 joyn'd with the Go∣vernor 
Garstman,
 kill'd at one time thirty seven 
Portugueses,
 and not long after two hundred and sixty more; taking his leave of 
Garstman,
 went home with six 
Hol∣landers,
 leaving his Son, the young 
Janduy,
 and his Brother 
Caracara,
 together with his Nephew 
Copun,
 to his care.


Janduy
 made it his Business to perswade the adjacent 
Tapuyans
 to joyn their For∣ces with his, and so by the 
Hollanders
 assistance to fall upon the 
Portuguese.
 Mean while the young 
Janduy
 and 
Copun
 went to 
Reciffa,
 which was the rather permitted, that they might be able to damp the Reports which the 
Portuguese
 had spread amongst the 
Tapuyans, viz.
 That the 
Hollanders
 were very ill provided, and there∣fore made all possible Preparations to defend 
Reciffa,
 and consequently the whole Countrey of 
Brasile,
 and so leave those 
Tapuyans
 that joyn'd with them to the mercy of the 
Spaniards.


Not long after were dispatch'd from thence the Councellors 
Jacob Stackhower,
 and Colonel 
Arcisseusky,
 with the Interpreter 
Antonio Parapoavo,
 to Treat with 
Janduy
 about the Design which they had upon the 
Portuguese,
 and also what Advantages he should receive, if he would assist the 
West-India
 Company with his Forces, when∣ever he should be sent to.


King 
Janduy
 bore Command over sixteen hundred Men, whose Wives carry'd their Hammocks after them to sleep on in the Night, having no setled Habitations, but ranging in Parties up and down from place to place to get their Food; the young People went commonly along with 
Beretiawa,
 and the old with 
Janduy;
 round about whose Countrey dwelt the poor Natives 
Aciki,
 as also 
Juckerijou, Ocioneciou, Pajoke,
 and 
Aponorijou:
 the first are Commanded by King 
Coctaculy;
 the second, by 
Mara∣kou,
 a Friend of the 
Portugueses;
 the third, by 
Nonhu;
 the fourth, by 
Kidoa;
 and the last, by 
Jarepo:
 which two last are no way inferior in Power to 
Janduy,
 but the others much weaker.


Four sorts of People continually Warr'd against 
Janduy, viz
 the 
Jenho,
 who live so far up in the Countrey, that no 
Christians
 ever came to the knowledge of them; the other three are the 
Woyana, Carivy,
 and 
Caririwassu,
 who assist the 
Portuguese.


The fore-mention'd Interpreter 
Parapoavo
 was met in his Journey by a Com∣pany of 
Tapuyans,
 led by 
Commendaoura, Janduy
's Sisters Son, who was to succeed him after his death, according to the Custom of the 
Tapuyans,
 whose Sons do not

succeed their Fathers in the Throne, but their Sisters Sons. 
Commendaoura
 told him, That he was impower'd by his Uncle to Treat with the 
Hollanders;
 to which pur∣pose coming with forty Men before the Castle 
Ceulen,
 he inform'd them, That 
Jandouy
 could not come to them with his whole Power, because there was no fresh Water in the Mountains 
Mitiapa
 in the Summer; Moreover, that he Mourn'd for his deceased Wife. 
Janduoy
 was also requested to go to 
Parayba,
 where he should get great store of Booty, and that the 
Hollanders
 would follow them with a consi∣derable Power.


Arcisseusky
 being inform'd of the Condition of 
Conayou
 by two, who having been taken Prisoners by the 
Portuguese,
 leap'd over-board from a Carvel, bound from thence to 
Portugal,
 and swam ashore, march'd from the Fort 
Ceulen
 in the Night with two hundred Men, besides forty 
Tapuyans,
 who kill'd more Venison for the 
Hollanders
 than they were able to eat; and coming within two Cannons-shot of 
Co∣nayou,
 he divided his Men into four Parties, that so they might Storm the four Cor∣ners of the Fort at once; which having done by swimming over the Moat, and climbing up the Walls, which were a Pikes length, they got into the Fort, in which they found eleven dead Bodies, ten Iron Guns, two Hooks, and several Chests of Sugar; and amongst other Prisoners they took the Captain 
Alvares Fragoso d' Al∣buquerque.


Stackhower
 also setting Sail when 
Arcisseusky
 left the Castle 
Ceulen,
 intending to meet him again at an appointed time before 
Conayou,
 was kept back by contrary Winds.


After this 
Arcisseusky
 set Sail to 
Mongoangape,
 where Rowing up the River, he took a Ketch with two hundred Chests of Sugar, as also a Carvel and a Boat, and Landed where the River bends about a Mountain, which so affrighted the 
Portu∣guese,
 that they quitted 
Antonio Marino
's Sugar-Mills. Soon after the Fleet took a Barque with Wine, and return'd to 
Reciffa.


Mean while 
Schuppe
 was not idle, for going up the River 
Camarigibi,
 he burnt di∣vers Houses, as also on each side of the River 
Alagoa;
 where he also took four rich Sugar-Mills, whilest many Vessels from the 
United Netherlands
 brought several Ships into the Haven of 
Pernambuco,
 which they had taken on the Coast of 
Brasile.


About the latter end of 
November
 1634. thirty two Sail, divided into two Squa∣drons (the first carrying in one and twenty Ships, a thousand nine hundred forty and five Soldiers, the second on eleven Ketches, four hundred and nine) under the Com∣mand of 
Schuppe, Arcisseusky, Carpentier,
 and 
Stackhower,
 weigh'd Anchor to go to 
Pa∣rayba;
 where 
Schuppe
 Landing first with six hundred Men, fell upon the Enemy in such a manner, that he put them to flight, and forc'd them to leave a great part of their Arms, Hats and Coats behind; and it wanted little but the Governor 
Antonio d' Albuquerque
 had been taken in the pursuit: Mean while the rest of the 
Hollanders
 Landed, and 
Casper Ley
 march'd along a Cart-Road with three Companies directly to the Fort 
Santa Margareta,
 and Encamp'd himself behind a Hill, about a Musquet-shot from the Walls of the Fort: 
Schuppe
 going along the Shore,
 found divers for∣saken Works, and Intrench'd along the River on the East-side of the Castle. 
Ar∣cisseusky
 march'd on the Right-hand along the Sea-shore in view of the 
Portuguese
 in Garrison. In the River lay an Isle, on which was built the Castle 
Restinga,
 which could receive constant Aid from the Castle 
Margareta
 on the Main.


Lichthart
 going in between the Island and the Castle 
Margareta
 with six well Mann'd Boats, took two Barques and a Boat behind the Island, and march'd through a Wood to 
Restringa;
 where he found that the Fort separated from the Island, was surrounded with Water, wherefore he withdrew into the Wood till









the Water was fall'n down, and then Storm'd the Fort 
Restringa,
 and notwith∣standing the 
Portuguese
 fir'd continually upon him with two Brass Guns, he soon became Master of it, and cut off all those whom he found had born Arms; whilest 
Schuppe
 fir'd upon the Fort 
Margareta
 from a Platform,
 and also threw Granado's in∣to the same. 
Arcisseusky
 likewise approach'd nearer and nearer with his Trenches, on which the 
Portuguese
 discharged many Guns; but after the Breastworks were most of them spoil'd, the Governor, 
Simon de Albuquerque,
 surrendred the Fort to 
Schuppe,
 who permitted a hundred and fifty Men that were in Garrison there, to go to their several Dwellings up in the Countrey, the rest were Transported to other places, on promise that they would not bear Arms against the 
West-India
 Company during the space of six Moneths. In the Castle the 
Hollanders
 found six Brass Demi-Culverins and fifteen Drakes, besides other Ammunition, with which the Victors pursu'd their Conquest, putting themselves in a posture to go up a Creek which runs two Leagues along a River to 
Parayba,
 and to fall upon that City, when two 
French
 Renegado's coming from the 
Northern
 Fort 
Antonio
 brought information, That that Fort was guarded but by a few Men, and had but little Gun-powder, and if the 
Hollanders
 would but once make a shew of Storming the same, it would soon be deliver'd to them, though for its Situation it is invincible; but 
Schuppe
 suppos'd that there might be a Plot in this Information, and the rather, because he heard that the Duke of 
Bagnola
 was coming thither with six hundred Men; nevertheless, to be better assur'd thereof,
 he sent a Drummer to demand 
Antonio:
 The Gover∣nor thereof, call'd 
Magaglianes
 desir'd three days time to consider, which was utterly deny'd him, and he had onely leave to carry away the King's Standard, and his Request granted, That the 
Hollanders
 should make a shew of Storming the Castle, that it might not be said he had surrendred such a Fortress without a Gun being fir'd; after which 
Lichthart
 went into the Castle, wondring at such a Victory; for the Fort, on which no Charges had been spar'd, lay upon an inaccessible place, and had five Brass Culverins and nineteen Iron Guns.


The 
Hollanders
 encourag'd by their good Success, went the same Night up the River 
Parayba
 to the Creek 
Tambia Grande;
 where Landing, they found all the Works empty, three Iron Guns lying dismounted on the Ground, the City 
Parayba
 without People, and the Guns about the same either made useless, or sunk in the Haven. A 
Hamburgher
 that had liv'd a considerable time in 
Parayba,
 otherwise call'd 
Philippea,
 inform'd the 
Hollanders,
 That 
Bagnola
 seeing no means to defend 
Parayba,
 was gone to 
Goyana
 with two Companies, one of 
Italians,
 and the other 
Spaniards,
 who were march'd into the Woods, after they had burnt three Ships, and two Store-houses full of Sugar, in which there were consum'd near upon three hun∣dred Chests.


Before this Design upon 
Parayba
 was undertaken, the 
West-India
 Company sent out four Vessels under the Command of 
John Walbeek,
 to the Isle 
Curacao;
 the Situa∣tion of which 
John Otzon
 knew exactly, having been a long time a Prisoner there: 
Walbeek
 getting through a narrow Mouth between several Rock into a convenient Harbor before 
Curacao,
 Landed seventy five Musquetteers who were Encountred by seventy 
Brasilians
 Arm'd with Clubs, which the 
Spaniards
 had animated to fight, by making them half Drunk. The 
Hollanders
 having march'd all over the Island, burnt the Village 
Maria,
 and at last agreed with the Governor 
Alonso Lopes de Morla
 to leave the Isle.


Schuppe
 chang'd the Name of 
Parayba,
 or 
Nossa Sennora das Nieves,
 or 
Philippea,
 into 
Frederick-Stadt,
 in honor to the Prince of 
Orange,
 nam'd 
Frederick Henrick.


This City hath two great Market-places, twelve Streets, and a large 
Franciscan


Cloyster, built near a Lake, and inclos'd within a Wall by a broad Bay, which the River 
Parayba
 makes before the City; the Countrey about which is mountainous: In other places, especially along the River, lie many fruitful Plains, abounding in some places with the Grain 
Mandihoca,
 which is ground to Meal, Potato's, Lem∣mons, Cabbages, Cucumbers, 
Bananas, Cocoa
-Nuts, Ginger, 
Araba,
 very delicious when Preserv'd with Sugar, and 
Cacious,
 somewhat like Chesnuts, of which the Natives make an intoxicating Liquor.


Whilest all things were put in good order at 
Parayba,
 Colonel 
Picard
 march'd with eight Companies to the House 
Validaris,
 if possible, there to take the Governor 
Antonio Albuquerque
 Prisoner; but he being forsaken by all the 
Brasilians
 (who came back with 
Picard
 and their Commander, the Jesuit 
Emanuel de Morais
) absconded himself; not long before which a Proclamation had been publish'd in the Name of the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands
 and the 
West-India
 Company, promising great Civilities and Advantages to all the Inhabitants of 
Parayba,
 whether Natives or others, that would come in and submit to their Government.


This Invitation was so well receiv'd, that many who were kept back so long as 
Albuquerque
 appear'd, as soon as they heard of his obscuring himself, came in to the 
Hollanders,
 as 
Duarte Gomes,
 and several eminent 
Portugueses,
 with a considerable 
umber of indifferent quality; as also the Inhabitants of the Province of 
Rio Grande
 
ame to 
Frederick-Stadt,
 to claim the benefit of the Proclamation.


Arcisseusky
 and 
Stackhower
 marching to 
Goyana
 with seven hundred and fifty Men, took up their Quarters in the Village 
Capivaribi,
 lying at a River of the same Name; where all the Inhabitants of 
Goyana
 being fully satisfi'd with the 
Hollanders
 Propo∣sals, own'd their Government, and fell off from the King of 
Spain.
 But the 
Spanish
 
aptain 
Rebellino,
 animated by the 
Jesuits
 in the Village 
Mosuick,
 got three hundred 
oldiers together, besides a considerable company of 
Brasilians,
 Commanded by 
amaron,
 and burnt all the Sugar-Canes and 
Brasile
 Wood in 
Goyana;
 whither 
Arcis∣seusky
 marching, soon put them to flight, and burnt the Village 
Mosuick,
 with the 
hurch and 
Jesuits
 Cloyster, from whence the Enemy ran to the strange Mountain 
iritbi,
 which in the rainy Season, especially when great Showers fall, makes a 
oise like claps of Thunder, or like great Guns. The same Wonder is observ'd of 
e Mountain 
Pasayra,
 in a Wood behind 
Girgolio Barro
's Sugar-Mills; the mystery whereof we leave to Philosophers to enquire into. 
Arcisseusky
 follow'd 
Rebellino,
 who had ambuscado'd himself about half a League from 
Mosuick;
 from whence he being also driven, his Men began more and more to desert him, whilest 
Schuppe
 with a considerable number of Men came to 
Arcisseusky;
 Encamping themselves about 
Musarope,
 they sent eighty Musquetteers, Commanded by Lieutenant 
Metting,
 
o an adjacent Wood, where 
Rebellino
 Quartering, Engag'd with 
Metting,
 till 
Schuppe
 coming to his assistance, he fled to 
Nazaretta.
 After which the Countrey there∣abouts enjoy'd the happiness of Peace.


Arcisseusky
 staying to settle all things in good order in 
Parayba,
 took up his Quar∣ters near the Castle 
Real,
 about a Cannon-shot from the River 
Afogados,
 and a League and a half from the 
Hollanders
 Fort so call'd; yet his Design was not to lay close Siege to the same, but to prevent all manner of Aid from coming to it, the rather, because he was inform'd, that there were not above sixty six hundred Cans of Meal, and sixty five Head of Cattel in the Fort, for three hundred 
Portuguese
 and seven hundred 
Brasilians;
 to which purpose he built several Redoubts, Batteries and Platforms: after he had lay'n before it three Moneths it was surrendred upon these following Articles, 
viz.
That the Besieged should march out with lighted Matches, Bullets in their Mouths, flying Colours, and with Bag and Baggage,

and be Transported either to 
Tercera
 or 
Madera.
 The Church Ornaments they had also leave to carry away with them, but the Guns and other Ammunition were to remain in the Fort. Hereupon the Governor 
Andres Marini
 march'd out with five hundred choice Soldiers, besides a hundred and fifty which he had out of the Countrey; and two hundred Families that dwelt about 
Real,
 ransom'd their Goods for 5000 
l.
 In the Fort the 
Hollanders
 found fifteen Brass, and five Iron Guns.


Mean while 
Lichthart
 set Sail with six Ships and five little Ketches, carrying five Companies; with which Landing on 
Barra Grande,
 he march'd two Leagues along the Shore to the Church of 
St. Bento,
 built on a high Hill, round about which he Encamp'd himself, and fortifi'd the same with Pallisado's.


Hither the Inhabitants of 
Porto Calvo
 came in great numbers to take the Oath of Allegiance to the 
West-India
 Company.


Lichthart
 assisted by Captain 
Cornelis Exel
's Company, march'd directly to 
Porto Calvo,
 notwithstanding he had but three hundred and twenty seven Men, with which he went a
ong a troublesom Way, up Hill and down Hill, and coming near 
Porto Calvo,
 was inform'd by a 
Portuguese,
 That the Duke 
Bagnola
 posses'd a Church there full of Port-holes, with two hundred choice Men, besides a Company newly arriv'd there from 
Serinhain;
 and that he had a strong Fortification near the Ri∣ver; nevertheless 
Lichthart
 marching towards him, discover'd his Forces rank'd on a steep Mountain, whither he running with his Men, forc'd 
Bagnola
 to quit the Church, as also those that lay in Ambuscade near the High-way, whilest eighty 
Brasilians,
 some 
Portugueses,
 and a Company of 
Neopolitans,
 thought to have fall'n upon the Barques of the 
Hollanders;
 but seeing the 
States
 Flag upon the Church, and 
Bagnola
 routed, they soon Retreated. This Victory cost the 
Hollanders
 but seven Men, be∣sides eighteen wounded; for which the 
Portuguese
 lost many more.


The Inhabitants of 
Camarigibi, Antonio,
 and about 
Porto Calvo,
 accepting of the Articles propos'd in 
Parayba,
 took the Oath of Allegiance to the 
Hollanders.


In the interim after 
Arcisseusky
 had taken the Fort 
Real,
 and given Command thereof to 
Verdoes,
 he set forth with ten Companies and three hundred 
Brasilians,
 to joyn with 
Schuppe,
 who Besieg'd the Fort 
Nazaretta
 near the Promontory 
St. Au∣gustine;
 but the Governor 
Albuquerque
 fearing he should be surpris'd, fled from thence with three hundred Men, and left 
Peter Correa de Gamba,
 and 
Lewis Barbalho Bizerra
 in his stead. But 
Schuppe
 approach'd so near with his Trenches and Granado's, that 
Correa
 inform'd of 
Arcisseusky
's coming, surrendred the Castle upon advantageous Articles.


After this Success 
Schuppe
 march'd along the Shore, and 
Arcisseusky
 up into the Countrey, both with intention to fall upon the Enemy in 
Serinhain. Arcisseusky
 marching along a troublesom Way, came to 
Miguel de Poyaca
 with six Companies, where the Councellor 
Schotte
 had fortifi'd a Church; and somewhat farther he met with a brave 
Franciscan
 Cloyster, where he was inform'd, that the Governor 
Albu∣querque
 had again surpris'd the Fort 
Porto Calvo;
 which prov'd too true; for 
Schuppe
 hastening to his assistance through 
Serinhain, Una,
 and 
Barro,
 staid at 
Furicoso,
 a League from 
Porto Calvo,
 for 
Arcisseusky,
 who was coming thither with seven Companies over the deep and crooked Stream 
Serinhain;
 and before 
Villa Foamosa,
 a pleasant Vil∣lage, in which stood an old 
Jesuits
 Cloyster and a little Church, both their Forces joyn'd together, making up seventeen Companies of Foot, and one Troop of Horse; but they came too late: for after a long and stout Assault, and no less Resistance from the Besieged, the Place was surrendred to 
Albuquerque,
 who caus'd 
Domingo Calabar
 to be Quarter'd; a Man not inferior for Strength and Activity to that 
Milo Crotoniates,
 so famous amongst the ancient 
Grecians:
 Amongst other proofs of his







OBSIDIO ET REPUGNATIO PORTUS 
VT




A. 
Castram paracon.


B. 
Ʋrbi.


C. 
Basilica.


D. 
Castella duo hosti d
relickta.








Strength it is related, that he took a Stag running full speed by the Horns, and turn∣ing its Neck, pull'd the Tongue out of its Mouth. The reason why 
Albuquerque
 caus'd him to be put to that death, was because he had once joyn'd with the 
Hol∣landers,
 and done the 
Portuguese
 much hurt. But 
Schuppe
 and 
Arcisseusky
 marching to 
Porto Calvo,
 to Engage with 
Albuquerque,
 who was eight hundred 
Portuguese
 and a thousand 
Brasilians
 strong, found the Place ruin'd, and about a hundred 
Hollanders
 unbury'd, and 
Albuquerque
 march'd away, driving the Inhabitants about 
Porto Calvo
 before him, with three hundred Prisoners: The 
Hollanders
 following him, built a Fort at 
Praipuera,
 to prevent the 
Portuguese
 from returning to 
Porto Calvo. Schuppe
 also demanded three Companies more to supply the places of the sick and slain Men, as also those who were so miserably plagued by the 
Bicios,
 that they were not able to go. These 
Bicios
 are little Animals, which creeping in at the Pores, cause an insufferable pain. 
Schuppe
's Request was the sooner granted, because the Coun∣cel at 
Reciffa
 judg'd it convenient to pull down the Forts 
Real
 and 
Nazaretta,
 being already much decay'd and unserviceable, and that those who were in Garrison in them, should Encamp in the Fields.
Schuppe
 had long before this time fall'n upon the Enemy in the 
Afogados,
 but that he wanted Provisions, and little Vessels, which were requir'd for that Expedition. But marching up into the Countrey, he left the Command to 
Arcisseusky,
 who much forwarded the building of the Fort on 
Paripuera.


The Year 1635. being almost expir'd, one Morning about Day-break thirty two Sail were seen to Steer directly towards 
Reciffa;
 two Ships of an extraordinary bigness were follow'd by nine Gallions, and these by the rest of the Fleet, con∣sisting of Pinks, Carvels, and Barques; all which approaching, were known to be 
Spaniards,
 which struck no small amazement to the Inhabitants of 
Reciffa,
 most of their Ships being Cruising abroad before the Coast of 
Brasile,
 and their Men a great distance off in the Field; onely five Ships fitted for an Engagement being at An∣chor, and five more deeply laden: Mean while the 
Spanish
 Admiral approach'd within a Cannon-shot of the 
Fame
 Ketch, discharg'd one Gun, and stood off to Sea again, being inform'd that 
Real
 and 
Nazaretta
 were taken by the 
Hollanders.
 On the other side, all the Places in their possession had notice of this Fleet, which 
Lichthart
 follow'd with six Ships and two Ketches, carrying two Companies of Soldiers, be∣sides Seamen, and keeping just within sight of them, saw them at last come to an Anchor, before 
Paripuera
 (where a part of the 
Dutch
 Forces lay under the Command of 
Arcisseusky,
) and make preparation to Land their Men: Whereupon 
Lichthart
 Landed also, with the Councellor 
Carpentier,
 and joyning with 
Arcisseusky,
 took up a valiant Resolution, to Sail close up to the 
Spanish
 Fleet with his eight Ships, whilest 
Arcisseusky
 march'd in the Night with six hundred Men to 
Jaragoa,
 to prevent the Enemy's Landing; but having a 
Portuguese
 for his Guide, was led a wrong Way; wherefore returning, he secur'd the Way to 
Paripuera,
 whilest the 
Portuguese
 Inhabi∣tants, contrary to their Oath, refus'd to carry or bring Provisions to the 
Dutch
 Forces, and joyning together combin'd with the 
Spanish
 Seamen, and kill'd all the 
Hollanders
 which they could meet either on the High-ways, or in their Houses, ma∣king use of the 
Negro's
 to carry the 
Spaniards
 what Intelligence they could give them of the 
Hollanders
 Proceedings: Wherefore they thought it the best way to be rid of such Villains, to destroy them all that dwelt in the Countrey between 
Paripuera
 and 
Porto Calvo,
 and for the space of ten Leagues burnt all their Sugar-Canes in the Fields, their Mills and Houses. 
Arcisseusky
 caus'd Edicts to be put upon every Church Door, That all the Inhabitants should remove from 
Porto Calvo,
 where the 
Dutch
 Army was to Encamp, to keep them from the 
Spanish
 Oppression.




That Summer having been so dry, that no man ever remembred the like, had dry'd up all the Morasses, so that the 
Spaniards
 marching over them and high Moun∣tains, got a back Way into the Countrey. In the mean time 
John Walbeck
 made a Fort with five Bulwarks on the Island 
Caracao,
 near the Haven 
Santa Cruz.


Houtebeen
 also ran with two Ketches, the 
Otter
 and 
Brack,
 to Anchor before 
Cura∣cao,
 and from thence to the Haven 
St. Jago de Cuba,
 where the Watch made no Alarm, because he carry'd 
Burgundy
 Colours, by which also several others, both 
Portuguese
 and 
Spaniards
 were deceiv'd. Not long after he burnt one Barque with 
Tortoises,
 sunk another, and set a third a Drift; after which having refresh'd at 
Jamaica,
 he Engag'd with several 
Spanish
 Men of War and took them, besides a great number of Prizes, in one of which he found such abundance of Copper, Indigo, Money, 
Canaster,
 Tobacco, and Piece-Goods, that the two Ketches were not able to load the same;
 but at at last Steering for 
Holland,
 he was set upon by seven 
Dunkirkers,
 Com∣manded by 
Colaert,
 and after long and stout resistance was taken.


Captain 
Abraham Roosendael
 setting Sail from the 
Texel,
 met with a Frigat carry∣ing forty six Chests full of 
Ryals of Eight,
 being in number eighty six thousand, de∣sign'd to pay the Forces at 
Porto Rico;
 besides a quantity of Plate, which amounted to a considerable sum of Money; with all which he arriv'd safe in his desired Port.


Arcisseusky
 fortifi'd himself along the crooked River 
Paripuera,
 full of Crocodiles, which hurt none, unless provok'd. This River runs five Leagues to the North∣ward of 
Punta de Jaragoa,
 where the 
Spanish
 Forces Landed.


Southward from 
Jaragoa
 lie the 
Alagoas del Nort
 and 
Zul,
 distinguish'd by a high Tract of Land; where the 
Spanish
 General 
Lewis Rochas Borgia
 left his Guns and a thousand Men, under the Command of the Duke 
Bagnola,
 whilest with three times as many more he went to 
Porto Calvo
 to be there before the time which the 
Hollan∣ders
 had in their Edicts set the Inhabitants for their removal.


Arcisseusky
 had by this time built on the North part of the Mouth of 
Paripuera
 a Redoubt like a Castle, out of the middle whereof rose a woodden Tower, fill'd with Earth, and secur'd by a Half-Moon; on one side whereof he lay Encamp'd with fifteen Companies. On the South side of the River stood also two strong Forts. 
Arcisseusky
 having not the least thought that 
Borgia
 would come over the Mountains, and through inaccessible Woods and Morasses, a back Way into 
Porto Calvo,
 receiv'd news on the thirteenth of 
January
 1636. by a Renegade 
Negro,
 that the 
Spanish
 Army, consisting of three thousand Men, were come to 
Rodrigo de Bar∣rors
 his Sugar-Mills, about five Leagues from 
Paripuera,
 and was suddenly expected to fall upon Colonel 
Schuppe
 in 
Porto Calvo;
 whereupon 
Arcisseusky
 immediately set forth with twelve hundred Men and two Field-pieces, burnt all the Houses, Sugar-Mills and Canes he could meet with. Mean while 
Borgia
 (upon whose Approach 
Schuppe
 had left 
Porto Calvo
) observing by the Smoak in the Countrey, that 
Arcisseusky
 had put his Edicts in Execution, leaving a considerable Garrison in 
Porto Calvo,
 went to meet 
Arcisseusky
 with the choicest Men. 
Arcisseusky
 being got between 
Ca∣marigibi
 and 
Porto Calvo,
 without having any notice of the Enemy's being so near, and his Forlorn being unawares Engag'd, and running back in great disorder, drew up his Men into a posture of Defence about a Musquet-shot from the Ene∣my; but the darkness of the Night made a great confusion in both Armies, being as it were mingled pell-mell one with another. 
Arcisseusky
 was much inferior in number to the 
Spaniards,
 but considering it was impossible to march back, in regard the Enemy was as well behind them as before, and that thousands of 
Brasilians
 lay watching for them in the Woods, in case they should be dispers'd, he saw there







view of city






was no way but to stand to the hazard of Bartel. About Day-break both Armies stood an hour looking upon one another; the place where they stood being surrounded with Woods and deep Valleys. 
Borgia
 drew out his Men on a Hill, overgrown with Bushes. 
Arcisseusky
 had drawn out his Men on somewhat a lower Ground. 
Borgia
 at last sent some of his Musquetteers down the Hill,
 who fir'd with a full Volley upon the 
Dutch,
 whilest 
Arcisseusky
 onely discharg'd a Field-piece at a Tree, under which 
Borgia
 stood to take a view of the 
Hollanders
 Forces; upon the firing of which Gun 
Borgia
 began to come down the Hill with all his Army, against whom 
Arcisseusky
 drew out his first and second Division, whilest Captain 
Vanden Brande
 led his Companies within two Pikes length from the Enemy, before he dis∣charg'd, which was no sooner done, but contrary to Order they broke into the left Wing of 
Borgia
's Army, and put his Musquetteers to flight, who were soon fol∣low'd by the whole 
Spanish
 Army, some running into the Woods, others into the Morasses, but most of them along the narrow Way which leads to 
Porto Calvo.
 Among the Slain was Borgia himself, who was Descended from the greatest Families of the Dukes of 
Lerma
 and 
Borgia;
 he was about forty eight years of Age, and had serv'd the 
Spanish
 King a considerable time in the 
Netherlands.
 This Victory cost the 
Hol∣landers
 about forty Men, besides as many more wounded. Amongst the 
Spanish
 Pri∣soners was a 
Neopolitan
 Gentleman, call'd 
Hector de la Calce,
 who upon Examination inform'd the 
Hollanders,
 That with the last 
Spanish
 Fleet there Landed two thousand four hundred Men in 
Alagoa,
 with twenty Brass Field-pieces, abundance of Wheel∣barrows, Spades and Pick-axes, which cost in 
Portugal
 eight hundred thousand 
Cru∣sado's;
 with which great warlike Preparations 
Borgia
 made no doubt to have got fast footing in the Countrey, and to have cut off all manner of Assistance from the 
Hollanders;
 That the 
Spanish
 King rais'd a great many Men both in 
Spain, Italy,
 and 
Germany,
 that with the first opportunity he might fit out a Fleet, which was to be conducted by four thousand two hundred Seamen, to whom the 
Castilians
 were to add eight thousand five hundred Soldiers and two hundred Seamen, and the 
Portu∣guese
 the like number, to serve ashore, and to drive all Strangers out of 
Brasile;
 That this Design had long since been put in Execution, had not the 
Albuquerquers
 continually deceiv'd the King of 
Spain,
 under pretence that 
Brasile
 was in no danger; That 
Albuquerque
 would be forc'd to resign up the Interest which he had in 
Brasile,
 for which the King would give him a Dukedom in 
Portugal
 in exchange.


Schuppe
 and 
Arcisseusky
 judging it no way convenient to fall upon the Enemy in 
Porto Calvo,
 Garrison'd 
Paripuera
 with four hundred Men, under the Command of the Captains 
Day
 and 
Philip Andrews,
 whom they furnish'd with Provisions for five Moneths, and left Order to defend the Countrey against the Incursions of the Ene∣my; which done, they went aboard with eleven hundred Men, and took in two Companies of 
Brasilians
 at 
Barra Grande;
 with whom Landing behind the Isle 
Alexio,
 they came to 
Serinhain
 before Day-light, and found all the Inhabitants fled into the Woods, fearing they would take Revenge on them for murdering of their Sick which they had left there. They were no sooner Encamp'd here, but they receiv'd. Information from 
John Talibon,
 that the 
Spanish
 Army intended to Besiege the Re∣doubt in 
Barra Grande,
 which therefore, as lying on an ill place, and not able to re∣sist long, they slighted: After which being furnish'd with Provisions out of some Ketches Commanded by the Admiral 
Lichthart,
 they return'd, with Intentions to take up their Quarters in 
Serinhain
 during the Winter Season, whilest the Enemy lay in 
Cockau,
 on one side of 
Una
 and 
Serinhain,
 and kept private Correspondence with some of the 
Portuguese
 that had taken the. Oath of Allegiance to the 
Hollan∣ders;
 but 
Arcisseusky
 fell so fiercely upon them, that they all fled to 
Porto Calvo,
 and

took three Monks Prisoners, who had been the chief Authors of this private Cor∣respondence.


Soon after twenty eight Ships arriving at 
Reciffa,
 brought fresh Supplies of Men thither from the 
Maes
 and 
Zealand,
 with Ammunition and Provisions, which was much wanted; also two Councellors, 
Henrich Schild
 and 
Paulus Serooskerken.


This Fleet was scarce got in, when in the Evening news was brought, that eight hundred 
Spaniards
 were broke in through 
Poyuca,
 and had taken 
John Paez Baretto
's Sugar-Mill, and destroy'd all they came at; but that the 
Hollanders
 defend∣ing the Church with great Valor, obtain'd Quarter upon the surrendring of it.


This raging Army, led by Colonel 
Rebellino
 and 
Madurera,
 march'd to 
Laurenzo
 and 
Massiapi,
 whither there resorted daily more Men to them, which put the Coun∣cil at 
Reciffa
 to a great Dilemma, foreseeing, that if they should send for 
Schuppe
 from 
Serinhain,
 the Enemy from 
Una
 and 
Porto Calvo
 would hem him in, neither had they sufficient Forces to withstand 
Rebellino;
 therefore it was judg'd convenient to send to 
Arcisseusky
 to joyn with 
Schuppe
's Army, that they might both unawares fall upon the Enemy. In the interim a hundred and twenty 
Tapuyans,
 sent by 
Janduy,
 came to 
Reciffa,
 with information that 
Janduy
 was coming himself, with seve∣ral other neighboring Kings, to their Assistance. 
Schuppe,
 according to the Councels Order, march'd in the Night through the Sugar-Mills of 
Rio Formoso,
 rested the next day in the Valley 
Orekinda,
 and guarded all the Avenues: Whilest he went about to Storm the Village 
Una, Mansveld
 was to Engage with a hundred 
Spaniards
 on one side of 
Iletta
's Sugar-Mills, and 
Arcisseusky
 was to fall upon the Village; whither marching early in the Morning, they saw onely a few of the Inhabitants, the Enemy being gone with his Forces over to 
Manbucava,
 nor could they pass any farther, finding the River too deep to wade through: But it, had like to have gone worse with 
Stackhower
 and 
Litchthart,
 who with 
Maulpas
 making twelve hundred Men, were surpris'd by 
Rebellino,
 rushing forth of an Ambuscade near 
Laurenzo,
 where 
Maulpas
 receiving a Wound dy'd of the same. This rough En∣tertainment at first much daunted the 
Hollanders;
 but regaining their Courage, they press'd upon the 
Spanish
 Army in such a manner, that 
Rebellino
 being wounded in his Shoulder, fled in great disorder through the Sugar-Fields to 
Porto Calvo,
 and of fifteen hundred Men sav'd not above four hundred, the rest being either kill'd, or scatter'd up and down the Countrey; twelve taken 
Hollanders
 were also released by this means. The 
Portuguese
 Design on 
Paripuera
 also succeeded not much better.


Arcisseusky
 receiving Letters of Advice from the Councellor 
Serooskerken,
 that 
Camaron
 lay Encamp'd with fifteen hundred Men about the Fortress 
Capavaribi
 in 
Goyana,
 and that the Besieged could not hold out above four days longer, and that the Enemy had also taken two Barques full of Provisions and Ammunition, sent thither to relieve the Besieged, march'd with excessive toyl through uncouth and in∣tricate Ways, which were rendred unpassable by the great Rains that had lately fall'n,
 and came about an hour after Sun-set to 
Capaviribi;
 from whence 
Camaron
 be∣ing fled two hours before, had left Ammunition in three Carriages, secur'd from small Shot by thick Planks, which were drawn close under the Walls; also a 
Bur∣gundian
 Flag, two Field-pieces, and two Barques which he had taken with Provi∣sions. The Enemy fled to 
Tapiserica,
 and from thence to 
Terra Nova.
 Whilest 
Arcis∣seusky
 view'd the Works, and his Men stood in good order, great numbers of 
Brasi∣lians
 Sally'd out of the Redoubt, took the Provisions which 
Camaron
 had left, spread themselves up in the Countrey, robb'd the 
Portuguese
 Houses, and kill'd the Peo∣ple. As soon as 
Arcisseusky
 had put all things in good order, he left the 
Brasilians
 in 
Goyana
 under the Command of the Councellor 
Eyssens,
 and pursu'd the fled

Enemy, notwithstanding there fell great Showers of Rain, rested a little in the de∣serted Village 
Tapiserica,
 formerly inhabited by three thousand People, who pos∣sess'd several fair Structures, brave Walks, a large 
Jesuits
 Cloyster, and a Church. The sweet Water and pleasant Pastures invited the 
Hollanders
 to stay here a Night. The next Morning marching forward to 
Terra Firma,
 they saw a strong Fortifica∣tion newly rais'd, but without People, and heard the Enemy's Sentinels fire; where∣upon 
Arcisseusky
 appointing part of the Army to follow at a distance, march'd be∣fore with the rest, and being fir'd upon from an Ambuscade by 
Camaron
's Party, he order'd Captain 
Talibon
 to press in upon the Ambuscade; but because it was per∣form'd in great disorder, he fell in himself on the right-hand of the Enemy, whilest 
Lichthart
's second Division stood still; which so affrighted the Enemy, that without making the least resistance he fled into the Woods, leaving many dead behind him. The next day Captain 
Bohart
's Party tracking the flying Enemy, fell in amongst them, and gave them a total Rout.


Arcisseusky
 resolv'd to stay some time in 
Terra Firma
 to wait for 
Camaron,
 but he not appearing, he laid waste the Countrey thereabouts.


Rehellino
 and 
Lewis de Sosa
 falling upon the Councellor 
Eyssens,
 Governor of 
Pa∣rayba,
 routed him, and set fire on the Sugar-Mills belonging to 
Emanuel Pirez,
 which forc'd them with their Swords in their Hands to break through Flame and Smoak upon the Enemy, who kill'd nine of them upon the Spot (amongst whom 
Eyssens
 and his Secretary) the rest being either taken or fled.


Immediately after 
Arcisseusky
 being inform'd by two Prisoners, that the 
Spanish
 Forces Commanded by 
Sosa, Dias,
 and 
Rebellino,
 were all joyn'd together in the Wood 
Antonio,
 where 
Camaron
 was also expected, he march'd away presently with half his Army, and as soon as the Captains 
Metting
 and 
Tourlon,
 whom he com∣manded to follow him the next day, were come up to him, he fell upon the Ene∣my, who lay on a Hill, at whose Foot was a deep Valley, through which he climb'd to the top; which valorous Attempt so amaz'd the 
Spaniards,
 that without firing a Gun they fled into the Wood: After which 
Metting
 and 
Tourlon
 went back to 
Lau∣renzo;
 and 
Arcisseusky
 destroy'd the 
Rossas,
 of which the 
Farinha
 is made, that so by scarcity of Provisions he might prevent the Enemy from so often joyning together in Parties: In the mean time ten Ships from 
Holland
 arriv'd with fresh Forces, Am∣munition, Provisions, and two taken Prizes, at 
Reciffa.


Houte-been
 being releas'd from his Imprisonment in 
Dunkirk,
 set Sail from 
Hol∣land
 with three Ships, and took ten Iron Guns out or one Ship, and several Pipes of Wine out of another before 
Matanca;
 after that a 
Tartan
 from 
Havana,
 two Frigats with Meal, one full of Wood with two Guns, two Barques carrying 
Bananas,
 a rich laden Pink, two Ships with Hides, and one with Sugar. Near the Island 
Baru
 he heard several great Guns shoot off, whereupon making thither, he found the 
Zealand
 Privateer 
Martman
 Engag'd with a Ketch carrying ten Brass and six Iron Guns, which was run ashore; whereupon 
Houte-been
 went to his assistance with a well Mann'd Boat; which the 
Spaniards
 seeing, set fire on their Ketch and fled; but the Flame having onely hurt the Stern, fifty Men were order'd to get her afloat, who having begun to unlade the Tobacco, and to take out the Brass Guns, the Gun-Room took fire, and blew up both Men and Goods;
 of which twenty four being sadly hurt, dy'd, the rest escaping miraculously. Not long after 
Houte-been
 took a Ship with Hides, fraighted the 
Alcmaer
 Pink with his Prizes for the 
Texel,
 ran close by 
Carthagena,
 and kept a considerable time in sight of the Plate-Fleet, of which he carry'd one of the heaviest Sailers away with him; Being thus enrich'd, he re∣turn'd home.




Whilest Businesses were carry'd on after this manner both by Land and Sea in 
Brasile,
 the 
West-India
 Company resolv'd to send some Person of Quality thither as President or supream Governor; and after no long Consulation who should be the Person, 
Grave Maurice
 of 
Nassaw
 was pitch'd upon, as being not only eminent for his Noble Alliance by Marriage to Emperors and Kings, but also for his excellent skill in Martial Affairs the proofs whereof were known to all Men, as his marching to the 
Paltz
 against 
Spinola,
 his being in the great Siege of 
Grol, Hertogen-Bosch, Maestricht, Venlo, Rhynberk,
 and 
Schenkenschans,
 at all which he receiv'd great Honor; all which consider'd, they made him chief Governor of 
Brasile,
 giving him a Commission Sign'd by the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands
 and 
West-India
 Company, to Govern with absolute Power, as well in Civil as Martial Affairs, to the best ad∣vantage of that 
State.
 At first they resolv'd to send a Fleet of thirty two Sail thi∣ther, but they afterwards reduc'd that number to twelve, which they Mann'd with two thousand seven hundred Men. 
Grave Maurice
 set Sail on the twenty fifth of 
October
 1636. onely with four Sail, whereof the Admiral Ship call'd 
The Zutfen,
 carry'd but three hundred and fifty Men: about the 
Sorlings
 they met with bluster∣ing Weather, insomuch that the Fleet was forc'd to put in at 
Falmouth,
 and after forty days stay there, weigh'd Anchor, and Steer'd for 
Cape Verd,
 and refresh'd at the Isle of 
May,
 famous for Salt-pans, and inhabited by a few 
Negro's,
 and ba∣nish'd 
Portugueses.


On the twenty third of 
January
 1637. 
Grave Maurice
 arriving at 
Reciffa,
 was by every one receiv'd with great joy; as also 
Adriaen vander Dussen:
 and soon after 
Mat∣thias van Ceulen, Servaes Carpentier,
 and 
John Gysseling,
 were chosen to be of his Privy Council; whose first Work was exactly to know their Forces, which were either Inhabitants that were to guard Towns and Fortresses, or Soldiers that march'd in∣to the Field, two thousand six hundred whereof were appointed to defend 
Reciffa,
 the 
Afogados,
 the Promontory 
St. Augustine, Tamarica,
 and 
Parayba:
 the greatest Party, which lay in the Field, consisted of two thousand nine hundred Men, and another lesser Party of six hundred; which last flying Regiment was to be continu∣ally employ'd to make work for the Enemy. They also took an Account of what Provision and Ammunition they had in store, and found that there was want of both, especially of Match. Next he enquir'd after the Enemy's Condition and Power.


From 
Porto Calvo
 the 
Portuguese
 made continual Sallies out into the Countrey, which they spoil'd and pillag'd, insomuch that the 
Brasilians
 being oppress'd by them, deserted their Villages, and came for refuge to the 
Hollanders.
 The Garrison in 
Serinhain
 was also much too weak to withstand the Incursions of the Enemy, the rather, because the 
Portuguese
 came along private, and to the 
Hollanders
 unknown Ways. All which 
Grave Maurice
 considering, caus'd a Fast-day to be proclaim'd, on which they desir'd Gods assistance in the carring on of their Designs.
 After which he march'd with the Army to 
Serinhain,
 from thence cross the River 
Una
 to 
Barra Grande,
 and thenceto meet with 
Bagnola,
 who though he was four thousand Men strong, besides 
Negro's
 and 
Brasilians,
 had stopt up all the Ways with fell'd Trees, and fortifi'd others. On a Mountain, a League from 
Porto Calvo, Bagnola
 kept his Station. At the foot of the Mountain flow'd a Brook, whose Shore was overgrown with Rice and young Trees, before which lay a high Bank; opposite to which 
Grave Maurice
 Encamp'd himself towards the Evening, with intentions to fall upon him the next Morning, notwithstanding his Army consisted not of above fifteen hundred Men, of which there were six hundred 
Brasilians. Grave Maurice
's Guard marching before were follow'd by 
Schuppe
 and 
Arcisseusky,
 and they by 
Lichthart,


whose Men were all Seamen; all of them firing their Guns amaz'd the Enemy, whilest two Companies of 
Brasilians,
 and three of 
Hollanders
 crept through the over∣grown part on the right-hand of the Mountain, and as many more on the left, fell unawares upon him; but 
Maurice
's Guard Engaging with a thousand▪ 
Portugueses,
 ran through the Water up against the Works with such undaunted Courage, that 
Bagnola
 Retreated, leaving four hundred Men slain, besides three Brass Guns, and a great number of Prisoners; those which escap'd fled to 
Porto Calvo:
 But 
Bagnola
 fearing to be Besieged there, left 
Povacon,
 which Castle, built on one side of 
Porto Calvo,
 lies twenty five Leagues from 
Reciffa,
 on a Plain, partly surrounded with Mountains and Pastures. The River 
Porto Calvo
 runs so crooked, that it almost surrounds the Castle and Town. The Countrey hereabouts is full of Pools. Two Forts, each built on a Hill near 
Povacon, Bagnola
 had caus'd to be undermin'd and fill'd up with Gun-powder; but they taking fire, were blown up before the 
Hollanders
 came thither, who found them smoaking, and lying like a heap of Rub∣bish. 
Maurice
 marching forward, Besileg'd 
Povacon;
 and Encamping himself be∣low the Hill where one of the Forts had stood, he rais'd a Redoubt, and with a Trench approach'd the Moat. Whilest 
Schuppe
 lay along the Town from the Church, 
Lichthart
 made a Battery to the North, and somewhat farther 
Arcisseusky
 another; then firing from four Batteries on 
Povacon,
 the Besieged answer'd them again from their Walls, and on the thirteenth day the Governor 
Michael Giberton
 surrendred the Castle upon honorable Articles: for those in Garrison being 
Itali∣ans, Portugueses,
 and 
Castilians,
 to the number of five hundred, befides the Wounded and Sick, were to be Transported to 
Tercera. Maurice
 entring the Castle, took two and twenty Brass, and five Iron Guns, four Mortar-pieces, a great many Bullets, Matches, Gun-powder, and other Ammunition, this being the King of 
Spain
's Ma∣gazine.


Near 
Moribeca,
 and before 
St. Laurenzo,
 the Enemy receiv'd a shrew'd Repulse by the flying Regiment, led by 
Stackhower;
 but Lieutenant 
Helmich
 obtain'd special Honor herein.


Grave Maurice
 after these Exploits took Shipping in 
Barra Grande,
 at a great Inlet near 
Porto Calvo,
 and Landed again at the Promontory 
Sergoa,
 from whence he pur∣su'd the Enemy to the River 
Francisco;
 the Inhabitants about which desir'd, and ob∣tain'd free Conduct. 
Bagnola
 lay on the other side of the River 
Francisco,
 in the Town 
Openeda;
 wherefore 
Schuppe,
 who was sent to the 
Afogados
 to be near the Ene∣my, was afterwards commanded to go to 
Openeda
 to secure 
Grave Maurice
's Passage over thither; but he coming thither after him, 
Maurice
 cross'd to the Shore on which 
Openeda
 lay with Boats, and got great Booty; and the more, because the Natives had not secur'd any thing, 
Bagnola
 assuring them that the Castle 
Povacon
 could en∣dure at least a Siege of four Moneths.


Openeda
 belong'd properly to the Lord 
Melchior Albes.
 Near the Town rose a stonie Rock out of the deep River 
Francisco,
 eighty Foot high; from which Rock there jutted out like Redoubts five Points, and it was call'd 
Maurice Castle.
 Along the Shore of the fore-mention'd Stream lay several very pleasant Isles. 
Bagnola
 escaping pri∣vately from hence, was follow'd by his Men kneeling on floating pieces of Tim∣ber, which with Sticks they Row'd over to the Northern Shore, notwithstanding the Stream glides so swift, and is so broad, that a six-pound Bullet cannot be shot over the same; at the Mouth thereof 
Maurice
 built another Castle. A League from his Camp seven hundred 
Tapuyans
 (a great salvage and strong People, whose Lan∣guage the 
Portuguese, Brasilians,
 and 
Tapuyans
 that belong'd to 
Jandui,
 could not un∣derstand) had Ambuscado'd themselves, and with signs and motions of their Bodies





 they gave the 
Hollanders
 to understand, that they would kill the 
Portuguese
 if they offer'd to cross the Rivers.


Maurice
 advising 
Prince Frederick Henrick
 of his Transactions, desir'd that he would send over Planters thither, whether they were banish'd 
Germans
 or Vaga∣bonds, out of their Houses of Correction; for without them the fruitful Countrey of 
Brasile
 would render but a slender Account to the 
West-India
 Company, nor be able to prevent the Invasions of the 
Spaniards.


The fruitfulness of this Tract of Land was not inferior to any Countrey in the whole World, Cattel grazing up and down in Herds of five, six, and seven thou∣sand. Moreover, 
Maurice
 advis'd them about the scarcity of Provisions, without which they were not able to maintain War.
 He also setled the Traders in a good Order, dividing all those free People which bore no Offices, into four Companies, under Captains, Ensigns, and Lieutenants. The Customs and Tributes were Farm'd, Marriages were order'd to be perform'd by the 
Netherland
 Priests, the 
Jews
 had leave not to Watch on their Sabbath, all manner of Debosheries were strictly forbid from being acted on the Lords-Day, and Punishments ordain'd for Drunk∣ards and other Deboshees; several Schools were also erected for Youth, and for the instruction of the 
Brasilians
 in the 
Christian
 Religion; an lastly, it was permit∣ted to any that would, to build in the ruin'd City 
Olinda,
 or else to repair those Hou∣ses that were fall'n to ruine.


Some of the 
Portugueses
 fill'd 
Maurice
 his Ears with a Report of the Silver-Mines at 
Couhaou, Copaou, Terra Nova,
 and about 
Cape St. Augustine;
 but he not regarding them, plac'd Sheriffs over the Villages, and Oveseers over the Alms-houses and Hospitals, issuing out Orders also for the delivering of the Provisions, which be∣ing very scarce, every Man had a certain Allowance, that so it might last the longer; but when in this Distribution the meaner sort began to be scanted, the Peoples Complaints were such, that an Insurrection was like to ensue, if not carefully and speedily prevented: whereupon the decay'd and deserted Sugar-Mills of the 
Portu∣gueses
 were put to Sale, and sold some for three, others for six and seven thousand





 Pound, insomuch that the 
West-India
 Company got above 200000 
l.
 for them all. Soon after they fortifi'd their Castles and other strong Holds, and broke down those that were judg'd useless. The 
Brasilians
 obtain'd liberty also to inhabit their Villages and till their Land, that they might make Provision for themselves, and not oppress the Planters that liv'd near them. The 
Portuguese
 that had submit∣ted themselves to the Government of the 
Hollanders,
 had free leave granted them to exercise the 
Roman-Catholick
 Religion, onely they were not to send for any Priests from 
St. Salvador,
 which if they did, they should be dealt with as Plot∣ters of Murders and Treasons; they had liberty also to re-build their Houses in 
Olinda,
 paying Tribute with the 
Hollanders:
 Moreover, they were promis'd that they should live free from all Oppressions of the 
Hollanders.
 There was also order taken about paying the tenth part of the Sugar and 
Farinha.
 The Income also of Fishing and Fowling, amounted to a considerable sum of Money. And to prevent deceit in Trade, Measures and Weights were made according to those of 
Amsterdam.
 For the Converting of 
Pagans, Jews,
 and 
Roman
 Catholicks, able Teachers were sent into the Countrey to promulgate the Gospel.


About this time there went a Report, as if the 
West-India
 Company were in∣clin'd to remove their Seat from 
Reciffa
 to the Island 
Tamarica;
 but 
Maurice
 advi∣sing them that it would not be so convenient for them, they chang'd their Reso∣lution.


Whilest 
Lichthart
 Cruis'd a considerable time before the Haven 
Todos los Sanctos,
 he Crain'd his Ship in the Bay of 
Camaniu,
 took the Town 
Isleos,
 with a hundred and fifty Men. In the Town, which is built on a Promontory, he took but little Booty, and sav'd the Houses, which were built most of Stone, as also the four Churches and 
Jesuits
 Cloyster, and return'd to 
Reciffa.


About this time the invincible Castle 
Mina,
 afterwards call'd 
St. Joris,
 was taken by the 
Hollanders,
 upon the Advice of 
Nicholas van Yperen,
 Commander of 
Guinee,
 who sent word to 
Grave Maurice,
 that the said Castle might easily be conquer'd, if any Forces could be sent him front 
Reciffa:
 Whereupon 
Maurice
 immediately sent

sent 
John Coin
 thither with nine Ships, which set Sail on the twenty fifth of 
June, Anno
 1637. who in the Road 
Commendo
 joining with 
Yperen,
 soon after he was set down before it, and was preparing to Storm, had it surrendred to him upon Terms no less advantageous to the 
Hollanders,
 than dishonorable to the Besieged, yet not without the loss of many Men; for in their March thither they were fiercely set upon by the 
Negro's
 inhabiting the Village near the Castle; in which Conflict Co∣lonel 
Latan
 amongst others was slain.
The Fort might very well have endur'd a longer Siege, it being surrounded with double Moats, each twenty five Foot deep, and high Bulwarks, which could not be undermin'd because of the Rocky Ground on which they were built; and to make it yet more stronger, 
Coin
 after he had taken it rais'd a Fort on the Hill, from whence he had fir'd on the Castle, in which he found thirty Brass Demi-Culverins; and leaving 
Walraeven Malburg
 as Governor, he re∣turn'd to 
Reciffa.


During these Proceedings of the 
Dutch
 in 
Guinee,
 the Duke of 
Bagnola
 ransack'd the Countrey about 
Seregippa del Rey; Maurice
 not able to go himself, having had a Feaver three Moneths, sent 
Schuppe
 and 
Gyseling
 with two thousand three hundred Soldiers, four hundred 
Brasilians,
 and two hundred and fifty Seamen, whilest 
Lich∣thart
 Steer'd to 
Todos los Sanctos,
 that so he naught draw the Enemy down to the Sea-Coast. 
Bagnola
 flying to 
Terra Gratia d' Avila, Schuppe
 demolish'd the Town 
Sere∣gippa,
 the Sugar-Mills, and all manner of Fruit-Trees, and march'd with incredible speed to the Stream 
Francisco;
 where Encamping on the Southern Shore, he drove three thousand Head of Cattel before him, that so he might starve the Enemy.


In the interim the 
Brasilians
 in 
Siara
 desir'd Aid against the 
Portuguese,
 offering, That if the 
Hollanders
 could conquer the Fort there, they would soon destroy all the 
Portuguese;
 that the Charges of the Siege might easily be made good, the Coun∣trey producing abundance of Amber-greece, Crystal, Cotton, Pearls, Salt, and other Merchandise. In confirmation of this their Resolution, the 
Brafilians
 left two eminent Persons Children of 
Siara
 in 
Reciffa:
 Whereupon 
George Garstman
 being sent thither, was no sooner Landed, but he made his Arrival known to the 
Brasilian
 Governor 
Algodoi;
 who came to meet him with two hundred Men, bearing white Flags in token of Peace: Thus assisted he set upon 
Siara,
 which is a square Fort, built at the foot of a Hill, hath within its Walls six Houses, two Redoubts full of Port-holes, one on the North, and the other on the South, jutting half way out from the Wall; as also two Gates, secur'd with large Portcullises: without the Fort appears the Governor's House, about which were several Huts for 
Portugueses.


This Lordship, already spoken of, is reckon'd amongst the Northern parts of 
Brasile,
 and hath onely twelve Leagues in circumference. The Haven before the Castle, which the River 
Hacu
 makes, is of little consequence: The Ground in some places rises with high Mountains, in others, especially on one side, it is over∣grown with Wood: hath also several brave Pastures, especially along the River.


Garstman
 approaching the Castle 
Siara,
 found little resistance, so that he took it with small expence of Blood, most of the 
Portuguese
 being taken Prisoners, a few onely escaping by flight.


After this 
Grave Maurice
 took great care of the Civil Affairs, building a Guild-Hall at his own Cost and Charge; sent all manner of Minerals, digg'd out of the 
Brasilian
 Mines, to the 
Netherland;
 laid great Penalties on those that stole the Cu∣stom of Goods, and punish'd with Death Murders, Robberies, and such like Capital Offences, besides several wholsom Laws relating both to the Civil and Ecclesia∣stical Government; and as soon as he was recover'd from his tedious Sickness, he march'd up into the Countrey to the Rivers 
Grande
 and 
Parayba,
 to take care to

furnish the Forts with Provision and Ammunition. Near the Castle 
Ceulen
 he was receiv'd by the 
Tapuyan
 Agents, and Presented by them with Bowes, Arrows, and brave Ostrich Feathers, us'd by them when they go to the Wars: in return for which they receiv'd Linnen Shirts, Knives, Shells, Bugles, Fishhooks, and Nails. 
Maurice
 caus'd a deeper and wider Moat to be digg'd about the decay'd Castle 
Cabo Dello,
 rais'd the Works, and call'd it by the Name of his, Sister 
Margareta;
 he also pull'd down the Fort 
Antonio,
 keeping onely a Tower to defend the High-way. 
Re∣stringa
 was likewise strengthned with Pallisado's, and the Cloyster near the Town 
Parayba
 fortifi'd against an Assault, and 
Elias Harkmans
 made Governor of the same.


Whilest these things were transacted on the Land, Captain 
Schuppe
 at Sea Enga∣ging alone between 
Todos los Sanctos
 and 
Terre Garcie d' Avila
 with three 
Spanish
 Ships, drove one of them aground, and brought another away with him to 
Reciffa.
 The Letters found in the taken Vessel made mention, that in the River of 
Lisbon
 lay ten Galleys, and twenty more before 
Cales,
 to which were to joyn thirty Pinks; which Fleet some suppos'd was coming for 
Brasile;
 others, that it was onely a Plot of the King of 
Spain
 to get Money from his Subjects, according to the Custom of several other Princes.


Hereupon 
Maurice
 wrote to the 
West-India
 Company, that they would Rig out a Fleet with all possible speed, which might fall upon the fore-metion'd 
Spanish
 Fleet, and fetch those Sugars which lay ready in 
Brasile
 to be Laden.


About the same time a Party of the 
Portugueses
 crossing the River 
Francisco,
 came to the Stream 
Miguel,
 whither 
Picard
 marching, put them all to flight.


Grave Maurice
 having a Design on 
St. Salvador,
 the 
Portuguese
 Metropolis in 
Bra∣sile,
 formerly taken by 
Peter Hein
 and 
Jacob Willekens,
 and not long after lost by the faint-heartedness of 
William Schouten
 and 
Hans Kyf,
 though in all likelihood not strong enough to undertake so weighty a Design, yet considering it he should stay longer, the Season would not permit him, therefore he went aboard, hoping that he should receive some Aid from the 
Netherlands;
 his Army consisted of three thou∣sand four hundred 
Netherlanders,
 and a thousand 
Brasilians.
 He had the greater hopes of Victory, because he receiv'd information from 
St. Salvador,
 that the Soldiers in Garrison there mutiny'd for want of Pay, and that the Governor and Duke of 
Bag∣nola
 were at difference concerning the management of the War. But before he set Sail he had seeur'd all Places against any Invasion, and got ready twenty two Sail, furnish'd with Ammunition and Provision, with which on the eighteenth of 
Au∣gust
 Anno 1638. he weigh'd Anchor, and met with six Ships at Sea, which he took, and arriv'd on the sixth day following before the Mouth of the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 which he could not enter by reason of contrary Winds, but Cruis'd up and down before the River 
Vermelho
 and the Isle 
Tapoam;
 whereupon the Governor of 
St. Sal∣vador
 and 
Bagnola
 drew the 
Portuguese
 Forces down thither to prevent his Landing: About Noon the Wind coming about fair for the 
Hollanders,
 brought 
Maurice
 within Shot of the Ships, Forts, Walls and Batteries of the City 
St. Salvador,
 so that he thundred with his Cannon against them, and Landed on a Promontory near the Sconce 
Bartholomew,
 without the least resistance, in a convenient place about a League and a half from the City; where Encamping himself, he was inform'd by the Prisoners which he had taken, that about half a League farther was a narrow Bank, border'd with Morasses, so that none could pass along the same but at Low∣water, and then onely at a certain time. 
Tourlon
 being sent before with three hundred Musquetteers to discover the Place, found the Way not onely as the Pri∣soners had inform'd, but also fortifi'd by the Enemy; against whom 
Maurice
 drew out his Men, ordering Captain 
John vander Mast
 in the mean time to run with ten

Sail directly upon the City, and to drop his Anchors just without shot of it. Ha∣ving beaten the Enemy from his Works, he broke through all the Paths, Hedges and Banks, till at last he came and Intrench'd himself near the Out-works of the City, by which his Army was secur'd from any Assaults from the Sea-side. Colonel 
Brand
 also with little trouble took the Fort 
Philippo,
 built on the Shore, and fortifi'd with five Guns. The next day 
Maurice
 Storming the Castle 
Philippo,
 soon became Master of it, notwithstanding it was well Garrison'd, and had thirteen Brass Demi-Culverins. The taking of this Castle afforded the Besiegers a free Passage to their Fleet. They also rais'd two Batteries, from one of which they shot night and day with seven great Guns, and from the other with the like number of Field-pieces, on the Castle 
Rosario,
 which the 
Portuguese,
 forsook but going about to take a Horn-work on the top of the 
Carmelites
 Cloyster, he lost many Men in the Attempt, and amongst the rest the Captains 
Howin, Echbrecht, Boward, Hollinger,
 and the En∣gineer 
Berchem;
 and in the end, after many bold and resolute Attaques, what with the strength of the Place, both for number of Defendants, and well fortifi'dness thereof, and what with the want of his expected Supplies, and lastly the sickliness of his Army, by reason of the extraordinary Rains that fell, to the loss of many Officers of note as well as common Soldiers, besides what were slain by the Enemy, he made as honorable a Retreat as he could, so that this Expedition prov'd altoge∣ther unsuccessful.


Mean while the Provincial 
States
 of 
Holland
 and 
Zealand
 differ'd about allowing of a free Trade to 
Brasile,
 and sending of Colonies thither: Whereupon 
Grave Maurice
 writing to them his Opinion, demonstrated with good Reasons, that a free Trade, and fresh Colonies, would be much to the Companies advantage; which was approv'd of by the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands
 and 
West-India
 Com∣pany, who onely engross'd the Trade of 
Negro's
 and 
Brasile
 Wood; and on the Im∣ported and Exported Goods they put a certain Custom.


The 
West-India
 Company considering what Treasure 
Peter Hein
 had brought from 
Matanca
 to 
Holland,
 they resolv'd to venture another Expedition thither; and to that purpose set out fourteen Sail under the Command of 
Cornelis Houte-been,
 who weigh'd Anchor out of the 
Texel
 on the fourteenth of 
August
 Anno 1638. and ar∣riv'd safe at 
Reciffa;
 where 
Houte-been
 having spent some days in Consulting with 
Grave Maurice,
 went aboard again, and at his entring into the Ship, bruis'd his Leg between the Boat and the sides thereof, which some superstitious Persons look'd upon as very ominous; but this Wound was not so great as to keep him back from whatsoever Service came in his way: for discovering the 
Spanish
 Fleet from 
Terra Firman
 near 
Cuba,
 before the Rocky Isle 
Organes,
 which consisted of eight great Gallions, and six lesser Ships, whose Lading was valu'd at two hundred Tun of Gold,
 and Commanded by 
Carel Dievaro,
 he clapt the Admiral aboard, threw in his Grapling-Irons, and made him self fast, with a Resolution either to take him or die, whilest the 
Dutch
 Vice-Admiral 
Abraham Michaelzoon Roosendael
 boarded the 
Spa∣nish
 Vice-Admiral, and the Rere-Admiral 
John vander Mast
 the Enemy's Rere-Admiral; and doubtless, had not the Vice-Admiral and Rere-Admiral been slain, together with 
Verdoost,
 Captain of the 
Orange-Tree,
 and other eminent Officers, and those that surviv'd fail'd in their Duty to him for want of Courage, he had given them a signal Overthrow; but whilest with much ado he had prevail'd with his Captains to renew the Combat (having been forc'd by the coming on of the 
Spa∣nish
 Vice and Rere-Admirals to quit his hold) and was preparing for a second On∣set, the Sea began to be rough, and the Enemy was gotten to the Windward. Some few days after being inform'd, that the 
Spanish
 Fleet lay before the Flats of 
Cuba


and the Rocky 
Organes,
 Steer'd thither, resolving to venture once more; but when he came there, the 
Spaniards
 were gone; whereupon he sent some of his Ships to 
Brasile,
 others to Cruise before 
Cuba,
 whilest he himself went for the 
Netherlands.


Whilest this Expedition fell out so unfortunately, 
Cameron,
 General of the 
Brasi∣lians,
 sent three Agents to 
Grave Maurice,
 desiring to enter into League with the 
West-India
 Company, upon some Differences that were risen between him and the Duke of 
Bagnola. Grave Maurice
 seeming much inclin'd to his Offer, treated the Agents very nobly; who not long after, oblig'd by his Civility, inform'd him, that 
Came∣ron,
 an inconstant Man, had made Peace again with 
Bagnola.
 But that which chiefly obstructed 
Grave Maurice
's Designs, was the want of Provisions, Ammunition and Men, notwithstanding his continual Complaints to the Company.


About the beginning of the Year 1639. the 
Spanish
 Fleet, consisting of twenty eight Sail, most of them Gallions, appear'd in sight of 
Reciffa,
 but Steer'd South∣wardly; 
Grave Maurice
 hereupon sent out the best Sailers to follow them, and see whither they were bound, or if they intended to Land, whilest himself march'd along to 
Porto Calvo;
 but inform'd that they were gone into the Inlet 
Todos los San∣ctos,
 he return'd to 
Reciffa,
 after he had stor'd the Forts 
Porto Calvo, Una, Serinhain,
 and that at the Promontory 
St. Augustine,
 with all Necessaries.


About the same time 
Arcisseusky
 arriving from 
Holland
 with a Commission to be General over the Forces there,
 imparted to some Friends the Copy of a Letter that he intended to send to the 
Amsterdam
 Burgomaster 
Albert Coenraedszoon vander Burgh,
 containing many Accusations against 
Grave Maurice
 and his Council; of which he being inform'd, call'd a general Assembly, to whom he makes a large Speech, wherein he declar'd how faithful a Servant he had been to the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands
 for the space of twenty years, complain'd of the malice of 
Arcisseusky
 in wrongfully aspersing him, both in the aforesaid Letter and otherwise, answer'd particularly to every thing which was laid to his Charge, (as he did afterwards in a Letter also from himself to 
Vander Burgh
) and lastly made it his peremptory Request, that he might return home, and leave 
Arcisseusky
 in Power, or that 
Arcisseusky
 might be sent home, and he remain undisturb'd in his Government; and so withdrew, leaving them to their own Consultations. It exceedingly perplex'd them, and took up a long Debate what Judgment to give in this Matter, which before they concluded on, they propos'd several Expedients of Reconciliation between them; but seeing it was all in vain, they unanimously judg'd it convenient,
 that 
Arcisseusky
 should return; who not long after accordingly weigh'd Anchor from 
Parayba
 for 
Holland.


Arcisseusky
 arriving in 
Holland,
 appear'd unexpectedly before the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands
 and 
West-India
 Company,
 where several Judgments were pass'd upon him; some said he deserv'd severe punishment, for his misbehavior to 
Grave Maurice;
 others seem'd to have compassion of him, because he had done so many noble Exploits; most laid the blame on the Company, who rashly sent him with a Commission as Chief over the 
Militia,
 not without impairing 
Grave Maurice
's Power; but these Discourses fell amongst those who were not call'd to give their Opinion of this Case.


John Coin
 was chosen Field-Marshal in 
Arcisseusky
's stead, whilest the Councellors 
Matthias Ceulen, Adrian vander Dussen, John Guiseling,
 and 
Servaes Carpentier,
 were ready to come for 
Holland,
 and on the twenty ninth of 
October
 1639. they set Sail from 
Parayba, Vander Dussen
 bringing with him an exact Relation of the Condition of 
Brasile,
 so far as concerns the 
West-India
 Company, which being material, we shall reserve it for a more fit place.


It being fear'd that the 
Spanish
 Fleet in the Harbor of 
Todos los Sanctos
 might

undertake some Design or other against the 
Hollanders, Grave Maurice
 kept a watch∣ful Eye upon them, repair'd all decay'd Forts, rais'd new Forces, sent out some Vessels to watch the Fleet, and prohibited the Transporting of Provisions, anima∣ted the 
Brasilian
 Commanders to fight against the 
Portuguese,
 and forc'd the Owners of Sugar-Mills to Plant store of 
Mandihoka,
 that so his Provisions might last the longer.


A Party of the Enemy, consisting of about twelve hundred Men, having pass'd the River 
Francisco,
 was soon after oppos'd by Colonel 
Donker.


The 
Spanish
 Fleet having lay'n a whole Year before 
St. Salvador
 (because they had lost near three thousand Men, who on the Coast of 
Africa
 dy'd of several Distem∣pers, and therefore waited for a fresh Supply) set Sail on the ninteenth of 
November Anno
 1639. with eighty seven Sail, carrying sixteen thousand Men, of which thirty seven were great Gallions. 
Ferdinand Mascarenhas,
 Duke of 
Torre,
 being chief Ad∣miral, carry'd the Flag and sixty Brass Guns in the Ship 
Domingo;
 the 
Portuguese
 Admiral, 
Roderigo Lobo,
 carry'd fifty two Guns in the Gallion 
Bernardo;
 of all which, with the number of the Enemy's Forces, 
Grave Maurice
 was inform'd by a Letter taken out of a Pink laden with Sugar; and also that the 
Spaniards
 were in great hopes of the 
Portuguese
 deserting the 
West-India
 Company, with whom they were forc'd to joyn; that this great Fleet was order'd to Cruise two years before the Coast of 
Brasile,
 and to Land divers Men under the Command of 
Bagnola, Francisco de Moro, Antonio Roderigo, Nunno de Mello, Jacob Pirezio, Francisco Pezam,
 and 
Lopes Bar∣balio;
 all which made 
Maurice
 write continually for Aid, 
Which the 
West-India
 Company must send speedily, unless they were resolv'd to lose what they had gotten in 
Brasile,
 as also the People, who had hitherto defended the same with the loss of their Lives and Fortunes.


A 
Negro
 that serv'd a 
Spanish
 Captain, call'd 
Henrick Dias,
 being taken, inform'd the 
Hollanders,
 That the 
Spanish
 Fleet was much weakned by a poysonous Air on the Coast of 
Africa;
 and that they had left a considerable number of their Men in the Hospital at 
St. Salvador;
 that the Admiral was resolv'd with divided Forces to burn all Places he came at, and to receive the 
Negro's, Mamolucks, Mulatto's,
 and 
Bra∣silians,
 under his Jurisdiction. But 
Grave Maurice
 gave little credit to this Relation, because the 
Spaniard
 doubted not in the least, but that he should take 
Brasile
 from the 
Netherlanders
 with his fore-mention'd Forces, why then should he ruine what he hop'd to posses? None knew whither the 
Spanish
 Fleet intended to go; for setting Sail under the Command of 
Antonio Oquendo,
 under pretence of falling upon the 
Netherlands,
 they Steer'd their Course to 
Brasile,
 and at last from the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos
 to 
Goyana;
 but four days before they weigh'd Anchor, 
William Corneliszoon Loos,
 who had some time been Cruising before the said Inlet, came back to 
Reciffa
 with thirteen Sail of Ships, which wanted all manner of Necessaries.


The 
West-India
 Company had now been in a mean Condition, had there not happily arriv'd first eight, next two, and at last nine Ships from the 
Texel,
 the 
Maes,
 and 
Zealand,
 with Provisions, and a Supply of Men; which 
Maurice
 had no sooner taken out, and unladen the Ships, but he fitted them for an Engagement, and made up the number of forty one Sail, who yet were not to be compar'd to the 
Spaniards,
 whose smallest Vessels carry'd more Men and Guns than the biggest of the 
Hollan∣ders,
 which in all had but two thousand one hundred and ninety six Men, and one Ship with another under twenty Iron Guns:
 With this small Power the Admiral 
William Corneliszoon Loos
 went to meet the Enemy, and before the River 
Michael
 took four 
Spanish
 Ships, which carry'd Ammunition and Provisions for the Army, which 
Lopes Barbalio
 commanded ashore. On the twelfth of 
January,
 Anno 1640.

he descry'd the 
Spanish
 Fleet between 
Itamaraca
 and 
Goyana;
 not far from which 
Mas∣carenhas
 thought to Land seven thousand Men at 
Paomorello;
 and they were already gotten into little Vessels when the 
Hollanders
 Fleet made towards them, and about three a Clock in the Afternoon began a bloody Engagement for four hours, in which 
Loos
 Engaging with the 
Spanish
 Admiral and four Gallions,
 was kill'd in the middle of the Fight, which ended in the Evening. 
Jacob Huigens
 carrying the Flag the next day in sight of the Promontory 
Blanco,
 chearing up his Men,
 went to re∣new the Fight with 
Mascarenhas,
 and with a few small Ships Engag'd several great ones, of which they had an advantage onely in their nimble turning and wind∣ing. In this Engagement 
Huigens
 lost the Ship call'd 
The Sun,
 which sunk with Colonel 
Mortimer
 and forty four Men, thirty four being sav'd in the Boat. The 
Hollanders
 Loss was the less, because the 
Spanish
 great Gallions fir'd over 
Huigens
's Ships, which fir'd in the midst of the 
Spaniards
 Vessels. 
Huigens
 not being tir'd with two days Engagements, fell upon them a third time before 
Parayba,
 and firing at the 
Spanish
 and 
Portuguese
 Admirals, pursu'd their Fleet to the Northermost Coast of 
Brasile,
 where by a strong Current they were driven Westerly; and the 
Swan,
 Commanded by 
Jacob Alderick,
 losing her Main-mast, was cut off from the Fleet by twelve Gallions; and three hundred 
Spaniards
 were already Masters of the Deck, when 
Alderick
 breaking from the Enemy, drove towards the Shore,
 and either kill'd the 
Spaniards
 that were in his Ship, or forc'd them to leap overboard, whilest 
Anto∣nio Cunha de Andrada,
 not knowing that 
Alderick
 was aground, making up to him, ran also aground, which occasion'd a new Fight, and at last 
Andrada
 was made to surrender his Gallion, and with it three thousand Pound of coin'd and uncoin'd Silver, besides other rich Goods, and two hundred and thirty Men, who were all sent Prisoners to 
Pecissa.


January
 the seventeenth 
Huigens
 ventur'd a fourth Engagement between 
Rio Grande
 and 
Conyaou,
 where approaching the 
Spanish
 Fleet, a sudden Calm prevented him from coming within shot of them, till against the Evening the Wind began to rise, but the Night approaching, it was not judg'd worth while to Engage for so few hours, therefore they referr'd the bloody work till the next day; when about Day∣break 
Huigens
 ran through the midst of the Enemy's Fleet,
 and fir'd so fiercely on 
Mascarenhas,
 that he Tacking about, stood away right before the Wind, and not be∣ing able to get beyond the Shelves 
Baxios de Roachas,
 nor to get Water on the Coast, because the 
Hollanders
 Ketches guarded the same, he Sail'd into the Offin towards the 
Line
 with a South-East Wind. After which 
Huigens
 lay eight days before 
Rio Grande
 to refresh and rest himself, and on the first of 
February
 he arriv'd at 
Reciffa,
 where 
Maurice
 caus'd a Thanksgiving Day to be kept for this wonderful Victory, whilest the Enemy was exceedingly abash'd.


Several Disadvantages occurr'd towards the overthrow of the 
Spanish
 Fleet; for first it was much weakned by the Disease which rag'd in the same on the Coast of 
Africa,
 insomuch that it lay still a whole year in 
Todos los Sanctos
 to gather fresh For∣ces, whilest 
Maurice
 put himself in a posture of Defence: Secondly, they lay be∣calm'd, and met with contrary Winds for several Moneths, when as the Voyage be∣tween 
St. Salvador
 and 
Pemambuco
 is commonly not above twelve days; which tedi∣ous Passage occasion'd also a Distemper and faint-heartedness amongst the 
Spaniards,
 whilest divers Ships arriv'd at 
Reciffa
 from the 
Netherlands,
 without which it had been impossible to have Engag'd with the Enemy, in regard till then all manner of Ammunition and Provisions were wanting. 
Huigens
 also had continually the advantage or benefit of the Wind, and lost in the Engagement but two Ships, a hundred and twenty four Men, besides twelve wounded: Moreover, but twelve

Ships onely of the 
Dutch
 Engag'd with this great 
Spanish
 Fleet, the rest never coming within shot; wherefore the two Commanders, 
John Coopman Ryk,
 and 
Peter Jacob,
 were condemn'd to be Beheaded; 
Cornelis Johnszoon
 and 
Peter Dirkszoon
 had their Swords broke over their Heads by the common Hangman; 
Cornelis Lucifer, Dirk Eger,
 and 
Jacob Clavor,
 were banish'd; and others came off by paying great Fines: but the 
Spanish
 Fleet lost in the four Engagements twenty Ships, and some thousands of Men, the 
Joseph
 alone having four hundred slain in her. Lastly, anchoring near the Island 
Margareta,
 the 
Portuguese
 Admiral 
Cosmo de Couto,
 and the Captain-General 
Francisco Pimentello,
 falling out, the 
Spaniards
 Steer'd to 
Tercera,
 and from thence to 
Cales,
 where there Landed but few Men, most of them dying of Hunger and Thirst in their Return home: Four Gallions, with two Pinks, got into the 
Spanish
 Harbors, the rest being either stranded before 
New Spain,
 sunk, or return'd to the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos.


Before the foremention'd Fleet weigh'd Anchor from 
St. Salvador,
 two thousand 
Portugueses,
 besides 
Tapuyans
 and other 
Brasilians,
 march'd under the Command of 
Cameron, Vidal,
 and 
Barbalio,
 with divided Forces into the Countrey, partly to get Provision, and partly to do what mischief they could to the 
Hollanders,
 far and near: their Orders were to joyn in the Village 
St. Laurence,
 seven Leagues be∣yond 
Paomarello,
 that there they might make way for the Seamen to Land, if the 
Netherland
 Forces should chance to guard the Sea-Coast thereabouts, and to joyn with them as soon as they were Landed. But 
Grave Maurice
 encourag'd by his late Victory at Sea, immediately sent the Field-Marshal 
Coin
 against 
Cameron,
 who diviidng his Army into small Companies, had distributed them through the Woods;
 in which 
Coin
 follow'd his Example, and with divided Forces pursu'd 
Cameron
's Army, and overtook his Captain 
Tak
 and two hundred Men at 
Poyuca;
 (whereof 
Lopes Barbalio
 was Governor) who fled, notwithstanding he Commanded six hundred Men.) Soon after which the Muster-master 
Mansveld
 met him near the Village 
St. Laurence,
 Engag'd him, and putting him to flight, found several Papers of Concern that he had left behind,
 and amongst others a Letter, in which 
Barbalio
 was commanded to spare neither 
Brasilians
 nor 
Netherlanders
 alive, but to kill all, without regard either to their Age or Quality, except the 
Portuguese.
 Moreover, 
Andries Vidal
 urg'd the Owners of the Sugar-Mills in the 
Netherlanders Brasile,
 im∣mediately to take up Arms, to regain their ancient Freedom, as soon as 
Mascarenhas
 appear'd with the 
Spanish
 Fleet on the Coast of 
Brasile:
 Thus 
Vidal,
 by Letters and private Conferences, prevail'd so much, that most of the 
Portuguese
 were ready against their Oaths to root out the 
Netherlanders:
 The sign when they should be ready, was the burning of some Sugar-Mills, 
Vidal
 imagining thereby to have drawn the 
Netherlanders
 from the Sea-side, and so made the Sea-Coast free for the 
Spaniards
 to Land securely in. But the Garrison under 
Coin
 along the Sea-shore near 
Alexis,
 not ignorant of the Enemy's Plot, kept their Stations, and suf∣fer'd the Mills to burn. The like did 
Craey
 at the Promontory of St. 
Augustine, Picard
 at 
Paomarello,
 Captain 
Day
 at 
Cantolaria,
 and 
Donker
 on 
Goyana; Hoogstraet
 kept Guard up in the Countrey; 
Tourlon
 also sent out by 
Maurice
 against 
Francisco Sosa
 and 
Henrick Dias,
 who had pillag'd all the Countrey about the River 
Conajou,
 fell upon them in such a manner, that he destroy'd eighty seven of them, and wounded a considerable number more of them, made the rest flie to St. 
Salvador.


Two Moneths before the 
Spanish
 Fleet set Sail from 
Todos los Sanctos,
 three thou∣sand 
Tapuyans
 came to 
Rio Grande
 with their Wives and Children, from an unknown Countrey remote from the Sea. 
Grave Maurice
 requested their King 
John de Wy,
 that he would please to keep Watch along the Sea-Coast, and prevent the Landing of

the 
Spanish
 Seamen: Whereupon 
De Wy
 sent his Son to the Castle 
Ceulen,
 making solemn Protestations, that he was ready to lose his Life and Fortune for the 
Nether∣landers,
 in helping them to drive the 
Portuguese
 out of 
Brasile. Maurice
 also joyn'd two thousand 
Brasilians,
 and Colonel 
Garstman
 with sixty 
Netherlanders,
 to the 
Tapu∣yans,
 that so he might train them up in Martial Discipline, whilest the 
Tapuyans
 Wives and Children were plac'd on the Island 
Tamarica.


About the beginning of the Year 1640. 
Houte-been
 and 
Lichthart
 brought a considerable Fleet from the 
Netherlands
 to an Anchor at 
Reciffa,
 where a Consu∣tation was held, whither these Ships might be sent to do most Service: every one had an Eye on St. 
Salvador,
 not long since Storm'd in vain; but 
Maurice
 judg'd that they had not Forces enough to undertake so grand a Design, but thought it would be better to Land some fresh Forces near St. 
Salvador,
 that there they might burn the Sugar-Mills, and destroy all things they could find, in revenge of what the Enemy had done at 
Parayba.
 Whereupon 
Tourlon
 and 
Lichthart
 set Sail with twenty Ships, Mann'd with two thousand five hundred Men, to the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 where they burnt all the 
Portuguese
 Sugar-Mills, Houses and Villages; nei∣ther did their Swords spare any alive but Women and Infants: The Cattel which they found they carry'd aboard of their Ships, and burnt all other Provisions.


In the mean time 
Houte-been
 and 
Coin
 fell upon 
Porto Franco,
 where they ruin'd all things, to no other end, but that the Enemy might call home his Forces out of the 
Netherlanders Brasile,
 to defend the Province 
Todos los Sanctos.
 But Captain 
Brand
 going up too far into the Countrey with his Army, was suddenly set upon, had a hundred of his Men slain on the Spot, and was himself taken Prisoner, together with many more. Also the Storming of the Town 
Spirito Sancto
 by 
Coin
 prov'd un∣successful,
 because he led an undisciplin'd Company, and wanted little Vessels to Land in on a sudden; for the Enemy having had timely notice, immediately rais'd a Sconce about the Town, and with five Brass Guns fir'd stoutly on him, who en∣deavor'd to climb up the Hill, but was forc'd to sound a Retreat, his Men failing in their Courage; yet at last breaking into the Town, he set some of the Houses on fire, which being built of Stone, resisted the Flame; so burning onely four hun∣dred and fifty Chests of Sugar, he left sixty Men kill'd, and brought back eighty wounded. 
Lichthart
 in the mean time made great havock about St. 
Salvador.


In this Conjuncture the 
West-India
 Company suffer'd much by Robberies and Spoils committed up and down the Countrey, by the setting their Woods of 
Bra∣sile
 on fire by a company of 
Negro's,
 the chief Ring-leader of whom was one call'd 
Peter Vist,
 who from Caves and almost inaccessible Ways came forth in the Night, and set fire on whatsoever places he came to, notwithstanding a hundred 
Negro's
 of his crew were soon after caught, which he at several times had by force taken out of their Masters Sugars-Mills; which 
Grave Maurice
 prevented as much as pos∣sible, by keeping Soldiers up and down in Arms. He also us'd the 
Portuguese
 very civilly, who though they promis'd Obedience, because they liv'd under the Ju∣risdiction of the 
West-India
 Company, yet were ready on all occasions to shew the contrary; wherefore 
Grave Maurice
 sending for the chief of them to 
Reciffa
 from 
Pernambuco, Itamaraca,
 and 
Parayba,
 told them before the Privy Council, that they might easily see how vainly they expected that the 
Spanish
 Crown should take 
Brasile
 from the 
Netherlanders;
 that formerly they depended on the 
Spanish
 Fleet Commanded by 
Mascarenhas,
 but that being destroy'd by a small Force, that hope Was lost; therefore if henceforward they would Trade on their own Accounts, they might be assur'd they should not suffer in the least, either in their Goods, Religion, or Persons.




The 
Neopolitan
 Field-Marshal 
Hector de la Calce,
 setting Sail from the Haven 
Todos los Sanctos
 with an old Ship carrying six hundred Men, was forc'd to run aground in the Haven of 
Parayba,
 where he and the chief Commanders were taken Prisoners, whilest the Common Soldiers by reason of the scarcity of Provisions, were set at liberty.


Houte-been
 and 
Lichthart
 weigh'd Anchor with twenty Ships, carrying two thousand Soldiers and seven hundred Seamen to 
Havana,
 to Cruise for the Plate-Fleet, but the 
Spanish
 Ships keeping within their Harbors, and their own being dis∣pers'd and scatter'd by ill Weather, their Voyage prov'd in vain.


Not long after 
Grave Maurice
 sent some Ships under 
Lichtharts
 Command to Cruise before the River 
Januarius,
 and others for the same purpose to 
Angola;
 but he effected little, for he onely took two Ships, one whereof being laden with Wine, was sold for 9400 
l.
 
Sterl.


The news of the 
Portuguese
 Crowning the Duke of 
Bragancia,
 and casting off the 
Castilian
 Yoke, which very much chang'd the face of Affairs in 
Brasile,
 was about this time brought over by the Jesuit 
Francisco Vilhent,
 and the Under-Field-Marshal 
Peter Corera de Gama,
 who were by 
Bragancia
 sent to St. 
Salvador,
 not onely to bring the tidings of the 
Portugueses
 Revolt, but also to take the Oath of Allegiance from 
Montalvan
 to the new King, which he made no scruple of; so that from thence∣forth all but the 
Castilian
 and 
Neopolitan
 Soldiers, cast off their Obedience to the Crown of 
Spain.
 Whereupon 
Montalvan
 desir'd 
Grave Maurice
 to allow a Cessation of Arms, till such time as they might both receive information what 
Tristan Mendoza,
 in the new King of 
Portugal
's Name, had Treated with the 
States
 of the 
United Ne∣therlands
 about; and to make the Request seem the fairer, several 
Dutch
 Prisoners were set at liberty, and the Companies with which 
Paulo Acunhas
 was marching to 
Pernambuco,
 were call'd back.


Grave Maurice
 desiring in his Letters to be releas'd from his Employment in 
Brasile,
 receiv'd for Answer from the 
States,
That it would be very disadvanta∣geous for the 
States
 for him to come home, now he throughly understood the In∣treagues of the 
New World,
 in which he might do much good, especially since the 
Portuguese
 being revolted, would in all probability assist them in destroying the King of 
Castile
's Forces; therefore it was now the most proper time to prepare for Action.


To this Request of the 
States
 was added that of the 
West-India
 Company, who also sent earnest Letters to the same purpose; which made 
Maurice
 defer his Re∣turn, and prepare himself for some grand Undertaking: And first he joyn'd the Province of 
Seregippe Del Rey
 to the 
Netherland Brasile,
 built a Fort and Armory in the same, and built a Wall about the Town; which Work was the more follow'd, because 
Seregippe,
 which border'd upon the Province of 
Todos los Sanctos,
 fed abun∣dance of Cattel, and gave great hopes of Silver-Mines.


Grave Maurice
 likewise observing what great Profit proceeded from the 
Angolan Negro's,
 and that the 
Spanish
 Sugar-Mills could not work without them, undertook to ingross that Trade wholly into the 
West-India
 Companies hands; to which pur∣pose 
Loando St. Paulo
 being judg'd a fit Place for a Factory, 
Houte-been
 was sent thi∣ther wich twenty Ships, Mann'd with nine hundred Seamen, two thousand Land-Soldiers, and two hundred 
Brasilians:
 the Land-Men were Commanded by 
Hinder∣son,
 who arriving with the Fleet on the twenty fourth of 
August
 1640. before 
Loando St. Paulo,
 ran in between the Enemy's Castles, St. 
Crux, Bento, Sibylla, Vincent, Velho,
 and against five Batteries along the Water side, all full of Guns, and fir'd so vehe∣mently upon the Enemy, that being forc'd to leave his Works, he made room

for 
Hinderson
 to Land; who immediately march'd to the Town, which 
Peter Caesar Meneses
 defended with nine hundred 
Portugueses,
 and some thousands of 
Negro's,
 who stood the first Onset; but 
Hinderson
 falling upon them again, so affrighted them, that they fled; which 
Meneses
 perceiving, soon follow'd, and left him Master of the City, in which he found onely a few drunken Soldiers, decrepid old People, twenty nine Brass Guns, besides several Iron ones, and great plenty of Provisions and Am∣munition. Mean while 
Houte-been
 took thirty Ships hal'd near the Shore.


This City is built on a Hill, and hath several fair Buildings and Cloysters, amongst which the 
Jesuits
 and 
Capuchins
 are the best. Along the Sea-shore, at the foot of the Mountain, stands also a long Row of Houses, near which 
Hinderson
 im∣mediately cast up Bulwarks against any Assault, and likewise two Sconces, the big∣gest whereof is on the utmost Point of 
Loando,
 near the Fort 
Sibylla.


Twelve Companies being left here in Garrison, quite contrary to 
Meneses
 his ex∣pectation, who thinking that the 
Netherlander
 came onely for Booty, and not to take or keep the City by force of Arms, made his Complaints therefore by Letters to 
Houte-been,
 alledging, That there was Peace made between the King of 
Portugal
 and the 
United Netherlands,
 and that the former Acts of Hostility were chang'd to friendly Correspondencies. But 
Houte-been
 answer'd, 
That he knew not of any such Agreement between 
Portugal
 and the 
Netherlands;
 and if he had known it, how should he be sure whether 
Meneses
 held with the 
Castilians
 or 
Portugueses?
 If 
Meneses
 knew of this Agreement, and was of the 
Portuguese
 Party, why did he re∣ceive those as Enemies, whom he must acknowledge as Friends? His Complaints were now too late, since the 
Hollanders
 had obtain'd the Victory with the loss of their Blood.


Meneses
 therefore seeing no hopes to regain 
Loando,
 either by Complaints or Force, desir'd eight days Cessation of Arms, that in that time he might fit himself to go from thence to another Place; which the 
Netherlanders
 in Garrison would not hearken to, but commanded him to march away immediately sixteen Leagues from 
Loando.


Mean while the 
Angolan
 Princes joyning with the 
Netherlanders,
 fell upon the 
Por∣tuguese
 where-e're they met them. Moreover, several Citizens return'd to 
Loando,
 and proffer'd half their 
Negro's,
 if they might but have liberty to be Transported to St. 
Salvador
 with the other half; but it was judg'd more convenient to keep them, and by fair means also to invite the rest, because it appear'd by the 
Ango∣lan
 Accounts,
 that the profit of the 
Negro
-Trade amounted yearly to sixty six Tuns of Gold, the Charges of the Garrison, and fitting out of the Ships being deducted from it. The 
Spanish
 King had yearly above fifteen thousand 
Negro's
 from hence to employ in his 
American
 Mines.


Houte-been
 Sailing over from 
Loando
 to the Isle of St. 
Thomas,
 Landed some of his Men over against the Sugar-Mills of St. 
Juna,
 and ran with his Fleet to an Anchor near a square Castle, with intention to use no Hostility, unless provok'd; which the 
Portuguese
 did by firing their Guns, and were answer'd by 
Houte-been,
 one of whose Ships call'd the 
Enchuisen
 was blown up; those that Landed also met with some re∣sistance from divers 
Negro's;
 yet at last they gain'd the Fort, in which they found six Guns, and soon after march'd into the Town 
Pavaosa,
 where the Inhabitants had left nothing but empty Houses; the great Castle they were forc'd to let alone, be∣cause the Scaling-Ladders would not reach to the top of the Walls, which were twenty eight Foot high: But 
Houte-been
 coming ashore, rais'd a Battery behind the Church, from whence he fir'd with six Demi-Cannons, and threw sixty five Granado's amongst the Besieged, twenty whereof burst with such violence, that all 


which reach'd from 
Maragnan
 to the River 
Real;
 with the necessity of keeping the Soldiery undisbanded, in regard the 
Portuguese
 were ready to take all advantages, notwithstanding the Articles of Agreement; with the discontent of their own Men, and their readiness to mutiny upon the report that they were to be Dis∣banded; with the great Inconveniences of altering the Government of the 
West-India
 Company; with the number of Soldiers wherewith every Place belonging to the Company was at that present furnish'd, which amounted in all to near five-thousand Men; and with the impossibility of keeping those Places, unless a speedy Supply of Men and Provisions were sent.


Grave Maurice
 receiv'd a Letter from 
Mascarenhas,
 wherein he made great com∣plaint of the 
Netherlanders
 Actions on 
Loando,
 St. 
Thomas,
 and 
Maragnan,
 during the time of the Treaty, and us'd many Arguments for the delivering back of the Pla∣ces then taken; but 
Maurice
 took little notice of the said Letter, being busie about setling all Affairs in this quiet Juncture of time: He freed all new Planters from the paying of Tenths for seven years, sold several Fields to be Cultivated, repair'd all decay'd Forts, kept the 
Catholicks
 in strict awe, ordain'd good Orders for Schools, Alms-houses, and payment of Money, and gave particularly Liberty to the 
Portu∣guese
 both in Spiritual and Temporal Affairs.


In the mean time sad news was brought, 
viz.
 That the 
Maragnans,
 assisted by the 
Portugueses
 and 
Brasilians,
 had taken the Fort of 
Calvaria
 near the River 
Tapicuru,
 destroy'd all those that were in Garrison, and Storm'd the City 
Lodowick:
 Where∣upon 
Hinderson
 was dispatch'd thither immediately with three hundred 
Netherlan∣ders,
 and two hundred 
Brasilians
 from 
Siara;
 which the Enemy hearing, though there were seven hundred 
Portugueses,
 and three thousand 
Brasilians,
 left the Island 
Maragnan,
 and went over to the Main Continent.


The occasion of this Plot was imputed to the fault of the sottish Governor of St. 
Lodowick,
 and his Secretary 
William Negenton,
 who by their Folly and Misgovern∣ment provok'd the Natives to Rebellion.


In the interim 
Grave Maurice
 had a Design upon the City 
Buenos Aires
 in the Sou∣thern parts of 
Brasile,
 near the River 
La Plata,
 where a Way leads by Land to 
Peru;
 and whither the Silver and 
Negro's
 were often brought, especially when any Ships were suspected to block up the Channel of 
Panama.


Whilest 
Maurice
 was preparing for this Expedition, news was brought that two Ships had Landed their Men on the Island St. 
Thomas,
 under the Command of 
Lau∣rence Pirez,
 who had driven the 
Netherland
 Garrison out of 
Pavaosa,
 and Besieg'd the Fort, out of which many for want of Water ran to the Enemy; and it was fear'd that the same Misfortune would suddenly befall the City 
Loando
 and 
Seregippe del Rey;
 which prevented 
Henrick Bower
's Expedition to 
Chili,
 and 
Lichthart
's to 
Buenos Aires,
 and so alarm'd 
Grave Maurice,
 that he thought it expedient to give speedy no∣tice thereof, to warn the 
Netherlanders
 on 
Angola,
 that they should keep strict Watches, and beware of the treacherous 
Portuguese,
 who affirm'd, That it was lawful for them during the ten years Peace, to re-take those Places which had been taken from them during the Treaty of Peace in the 
Hague.


These Proceedings forc'd 
Grave Maurice
 to Disarm most of them; and because the 
Negro's
 did much mischief from the 
Palmares,
 especially to the Husbandmen in the 
Alagoas, Maurice
 gave order to destroy their Habitations. The 
Palmares
 were two Villages, built along the River 
Gungohuby
 under close Woods, six Leagues North∣wardly from 
Parayba:
 The Inhabitants of them, being then about six thousand in number, were most of them fled 
Negro's,
 who gathering together in a Head, de∣stroy'd all the Countrey thereabouts: They dwelt in Huts of Boughs and Straw

interwoven; behind which were Gardens and Orchards of Palm-Trees, and con∣form'd to the Religion and Government of the 
Portuguese.


Whilest three hundred Musquetteers, a hundred 
Mameluks,
 and seven hundred 
Brasilians
 were fitting to go to the 
Palmares,
 there arriv'd 
Agents
 at 
Reciffa
 from the King of 
Congo,
 who brought as a Present to 
Grave Maurice,
 two hundred 
Neno's,
 a Golden Collar and Pot, besides many 
Negro's
 for the 
West-India
 Company. These Agents desir'd Aid against the Duke of 
Sonho,
 who treacherously Plotted to drive the King out of 
Congo;
 which Plot was discover'd by scatter'd Letters, Sign'd by the Governors and Bishop at 
Loando,
 a little before 
Loando
 was taken by the 
Hollan∣ders. Maurice
 courteously Entertaining the Agents, proffer'd himself to be a Media∣tor to decide the Difference, and gave them a long Velvet Coat Lac'd with Gold and Silver Lace, a Silk Coat and Scarf, and a Beaver Hat with a Golden Edging.


Not long after there came Agents from 
Sonho,
 to beseech 
Grave Maurice
 that he would not assist the King of 
Congo;
 one of whom went to the 
Hague,
 and was fol∣low'd by two from the King of 
Congo,
 who open'd their Letters before the Prince of 
Orange.


The two Agents from 
Congo
 were strong and black Men, very active, and having grim Countenances; they Danc'd after a strange manner; and showing the Picture of their King sitting in great State, acted the Postures in which his Nobles and other Subjects shew'd him Reverence: their Strength was such, that they were able with ease to carry each of them two hundred thirty five Pound weight: their Ornamentals consisted of 
Elephants
 Tails.


In 
Loando
 the Governor for the 
Dutch,
 nam'd 
Cornelis Niewland,
 and the 
Portuguese
 Governor 
Peter Caesar de Meneses,
 came to this Agreement, That since the ten years Peace was concluded on between the 
Portuguese
 and 
Netherlanders, Meneses
 should possess the Countrey wash'd by the River 
Bengo,
 and call in the ancient Natives to live and Trade as formerly; all which was faithfully perform'd: nay, 
Meneses
 fur∣nish'd 
Niewland
 with as much Meal as he requir'd, towards the maintaining of a thousand 
Negro's,
 whom he had bought; and the 
Hollanders
 and 
Portugueses
 began now to be every day more and more friendly and familiar with each other, when on a sudden 
Niewland
 not onely remembring what was done lately on the Islands 
Maragnan
 and St. 
Thomas,
 but also stirr'd up by other later Actions, which gave him occasion of jealousie, sent two hundred Musquetteers in the Night from 
Loando,
 to take the Governor 
Meneses,
 with some others, who he fear'd might make an In∣surrection. The Soldiers accordingly about Day-break fell unawares upon the sleeping 
Portugueses,
 kill'd forty of them, and carry'd 
Meneses
 and many other Per∣sons of Quality away Prisoners, together with a Booty valu'd at above ten thou∣sand 
Ducats,
 and sent a hundred and sixty 
Portugueses
 in an old leaky Vessel to St. 
Sal∣vador;
 but they being toss'd to and again at Sea for a considerable time, eight of them dy'd, the rest almost starv'd, Landed on 
Permambuco;
 where 
Simon Alvares de la Benho
 being amaz'd to see his Countrey-men thus hardly dealt with, complain'd of 
Niewland, Mols,
 and 
Cross,
 who were the chief of 
Loando,
 that they had broke the Laws, and the sworn Articles of Peace; urging that it would be very unjust that the poor 
Portugueses
 should not have Satisfaction for the Wrong which they had sustain'd, as also for the loss of their Goods. To which 
Grave Maurice
 answer'd, 
That 
Loando
 belong'd to the 
West-India
 Company, and that for his part he had no∣thing to do with that City, but that if the 
States
 were accquainted therewith, they would without doubt be highly concern'd at it.


Christopher Santches,
 a free 
Negro,
 gave information of the sad Condition of the Island 
St. Thomas, viz.
 That the greatest part of the 
Hollanders
 that had been left

upon that Island being dead, 
Pirez
 hereupon with the King's Consent fitted out two Ships, and setting Sail from 
Lisbon
 about the beginning of 
July
 1642. first re∣fus'd to pay the usual Custom at the Island St. 
Thomas,
 afterwards fell upon the 
Hollanders,
 whom he Besieg'd in the Castle, and against the Law of Arms poyson'd all the Waters.


To prevent the future Inconveniences that were likely to arise from a Famine which about this time afflicted the whole Countrey of 
Brasile, Grave Maurice
 judg'd it convenient to sell the Lands in the 
Alagoas
 to new Planters; to which purpose 
Henrick Moucheron
 was chosen Overseer, to take care that all the Fields about 
Porto Calvo,
 and along the River 
Francisco,
 as also in the 
Alagoas,
 should be Sow'n with Bread-Corn.


Grave Maurice
 obtaining leave at last to go home, took Leave by Letters of the Governors of 
Serinhain, Porto Calvo, Iguarazua, Itamaraca, Parayba, Rio Grande,
 and in Person of the Council at 
Reciffa,
 who all thank'd him for his prudent Government, manifesting their hearty sorrow for his departure, 
Which without doubt would produce many Inconveniences.
 But though the Council of the 
West-India
 Company had order'd him to return home about the beginning of 
March
 1643. yet he went not so soon, because he was to reduce the number of 
Militia
 to eighteen Companies, and also to the settle Revenues, and dispose of Offices, in which be found much trou∣ble; wherefore before his departure he wrote to the 
States
 of the 
United Netherlands,
 assuring them how impossible it was to defend 
Brasile,
 which extended some hun∣dreds of Leagues, with so small a number of Men, since the 
Portuguese
 cover'd in∣ward malice under a feigned shew of kindness, and at the same time watch'd all opportunities to drive the 
Netherlanders
 from their Plantations, being very much ex∣asperated by the priviledge of Religion granted to the 
Jews,
 whilest their Monks and Jesuits were banish'd. Moreover, in regard they ow'd the 
West-India
 Company above fifty nine Tuns of Gold, they sought to cancel that Obligation, by making themselves Masters of whatsoever their Creditors had in 
Brasile,
 so that there was no way but to keep them under by force of Arms.


After 
Grave Maurice
 had sent this Letter to 
Holland,
 he left the Government of 
Brasile
 to the chief Council, the 
Militia
 to 
Henrick Hoes,
 Captain of his Life-guard, with Directions for Governing after his departure. Having setled all things in good order, he went from 
Maurice-stadt
 through 
Paratibi
 and 
Iguarazu
 to 
Parayba;
 where 
Janduy
 sent him three of his Sons, with twenty 
Tapuyans,
 desiring him not to go away; two of them with several 
Carapates
 and 
Waypebarans,
 (a People who made themselves Masters of the great 
Palmares
) and five other 
Brasilians
 went aboard with him on the twentieth of 
May
 1644.


The Fleet, consisting of thirteen Ships, and Mann'd with fourteen hundred Men of all sorts, was laden with so many Merchandizes as were valu'd at twenty six Tuns of Gold; with which 
Grave Maurice
 arriving at the 
Texel,
 Landed at the 
Helder,
 and gave an Account of his Government in 
Brasile,
 and of the then present state of that part of it which belong'd to the 
West-India
 Company.


After 
Grave Maurice
's departure, 
Hamel, Bassi,
 and 
Bullestraet,
 bore the chief Com∣mand in 
Brasile:
 The Charges made by the War were mitigated, and the number of the Soldiers in Garrison reduc'd to sixteen hundred; some Forts lay without a Man in them, whilest the King of 
Portugal
 watch'd for such an opportunity; for he seem'd to be as much concern'd for that Countrey, as for his Kingdom of 
Portu∣gal,
 and the rather, because his Predecessor 
Sebastian
 receiv'd above forty hundred thousand 
Ducats
 yearly out of the same, besides the Presents and other Gains made by the 
Portuguese;
 wherefore he gave order to the Governor of St. 
Salvador,
 to be

very vigilant, and assur'd him, that in a short time he would send him both Men and Provisions. A 
Mulatto
 call'd 
John Fernandes Viera,
 did not a little assist the 
Portu∣guese
 in their Design; for he having liv'd a considerable time in a Councellors Housech in 
Reciffa,
 had narrowly observ'd all 
Passages,
 and insinuated himself into several Statesmens Affairs, by Presenting them now and then with some Rarities, inso∣much that he came in time to Farm the Rents which the 
Weft-India
 Company re∣ceiv'd from the Sugar-Mills; but at length being discontented because the Coun∣cil would not make any abatement upon the same, when he complain'd that he lost by Farming the fore-mention'd Tax, he held private Correspondence with 
Andreas Vidal,
 that when a convenient opportunity presented it self for the 
Portuguese
 to fall on the 
Hollanders,
 he might be assisting; to which end he had gotten several Arms and Ammunition together.


In this Plot a 
Jew
 nam'd 
Moses Accoignes,
 living in 
Viera
's House, a League from 
Reciffa,
 to keep him from Arrests, was perswaded to joyn, which he seemingly pro∣mis'd to do; but went away by Day-break, and discover'd the Design to the Privy-Council, who being rock'd asleep by the 
Portugueses
 fair Pretences, gave no credit to the Relation.


For the better carrying on of this Design, 
Cavalcantelca,
 Provost-Marshal in 
Maurice-stadt
 made a great Wedding for his Daughter in 
Viera
's House, to which the chiefest Persons of Quality, both of the 
Portuguese,
 and also all the Privy-Coun∣cellors and Military Officers belonging to the 
West-India
 Company were invited: and the Plot was so contriv'd, that whilest they were all at Dinner, the 
Portuguese
 were suddenly to fall upon the 
Netherlanders
 and kill them, both Servants and Ma∣sters; this done, some were to go to 
Reciffa
 or 
Maurice-stadt,
 with news that the Wedding People were coming; whereupon part were to press into the City, others to keep the Gates, till all their Forces were come thither, which then might easily secure and seize upon the Magazine: some Barques also under pretence of loading Sugar, were in the mean time to set upon the Haven and Fort near the Shore. All things were accordingly prepar'd for the Wedding, nothing being wanting that could be purchas'd with Money; and near the Forts of 
Rio Grande
 and 
Parayba
 were Stage-plays to be Acted in publick, it being concluded that the Soldiers in Garri∣son would certainly be there to see them; the Actors being privately Arm'd with Pistols and Ponyards. And to oblige one another the more for the carrying on of this bloody Design, 
Viera
 had caus'd the chief Conspirators to take an Oath before the high Altar. The twenty fourth of 
June
 1645. was the Day on which this Tra∣gedy was to be acted; but a few days before two 
Portugueses
 and five 
Jews,
 who had been sworn Confederates, their Consciences checking them for so villanous an Undertaking, made an ingenuous Discovery of the Plot. The Councellor 
Moucheron
 was also inform'd, that the 
Portuguese
 Colonel 
Camaron
 and 
Diez
 were coming with great Forces from St. 
Salvador.


The Council when they might easily have apprehended 
Viera,
 sent for him by a 
Jew
 call'd 
Abraham Coing,
 under pretence of Treating about some Business concern∣ing the 
West-India
 Company; he promis'd to come in the Evening,
 but suspecting he was betray'd, fled into the Woods, and gave speedy notice to all his Accom∣plices, who follow'd him in great numbers. The Soldiers sent to search 
Viera
's House, found none but old Men and Children.


The Councellor 
Van Houten
 went immediately with seven Sugar-Vessels to 
Pa∣rayba,
 fortifi'd the Forts 
Margareta, Pestringa,
 and 
Antonio,
 and made room for the 
Brasilians
 that had remov'd thither from their Villages, in the Houses deserted by the 
Portuguese
 in 
Frederick-stadt.
 On the other side, 
Amador da Rouge,
 one of the Con∣spi rators,

spirators, went with a Company from 
Poiouca
 through the Countrey, kill'd seven 
Dutch
 Seamen, with three 
Jews,
 and erected Gibbets, on which he threatned to hang all those who did not take up Arms for the King of 
Portugal.
 Colonel 
Hous
 in∣form'd hereof march'd with five hundred Men to 
Poiuca
 to meet the 
Portuguese,
 who were scatter'd up and down the neighboring Woods. He also publish'd an Edict, in which every one was Licens'd to return to their Habitations, with pro∣mise of pardon for their Rebellion, if they would take the Oath of Allegiance anew, onelv 
Viera, Cavalcantelca,
 and 
Da Rouge,
 were excluded, and nine thousand 
Guilders
 promis'd to those that brought them dead or alive, which made two hundred Inha∣bitants in 
Reciffa
 march into the Countrey under the Command of Captain 
Blar,
 to find the fore-mention'd Traitors; and at last joyning with 
Hous,
 they pursu'd the fled 
Portuguese.


In the mean time the Council sent the Captains 
Vander Voort
 and 
Hoogenstraet,
 to 
Antonio Silva,
 Governor of St. 
Salvador,
 to acquaint him with the treacherous In sur∣rection of the 
Portuguese,
 and of 
Camaron
 and 
Diez
 coming from St. 
Salvador
 to their assistance, urging, that these treacherous Proceedings and breach of Oath, could not but redound to the dishonor of the Crown of 
Portugal.
 Whereto 
Silva
 an∣swer'd, 
That 
Camaron
 and 
Diez
 were not under any Obligation of Oath, but that he would check the Insurrection in 
Pernambuco,
 and take care that the Au∣thors thereof should make Satisfaction to the 
West-India
 Company.
 Notwith∣standing which fair Pretences, he so wrought with 
Hoogenstraet,
 that after a private Conference between them it was agreed, that for a certain sum of Money he should surrender him the Promontory of St. 
Augustine,
 of which he was Governor; but at his Return to 
Reciffa
 being made chief Commander of the Castle there, and being jealous what might follow his private Treating with 
Silva,
 he declar'd to the Council, that 
Silva
 had desir'd him to surrender the Fort St. 
Augustine,
 which he had granted, for no other end, but to catch the false 
Portuguese
 in their own Nets, and to trapan all such as should be sent to take possession of it; and that if the Council had any suspicion of him, they might make use of his Service in some other place.


About this time a hundred and fifty 
Tapuyans,
 led by a 
German
 Soldier call 
Jacob Rabbi,
 Sallying out of their Woods, fell upon the great Village 
Conyahou,
 under the Jurisdiction of 
Rio Grande,
 broke into the Church, murder'd all the 
Portuguese,
 and eating their raw Flesh, demolish'd the Place.


Hous
 also unfortunately Storm'd the Mountain 
Santantan,
 where the Enemy lay Intrench'd, being forc'd to Retreat with the loss of above a hundred Men, amongst whom was Captain 
Lo.


The Privy Council caus'd a part of 
Maurice-stadt
 to be pull'd down, as also the stately Palace 
Freyburgh,
 for which the 
Jews
 proffer'd 
Grave-Maurice
 6000 
l.
 together with the stately Garden, which were thought to exceed the famous Gardens in 
Thessalia;
 but on the other side they kept Men at work Night and Day in repairing the decay'd Castle at 
Reciffa.


About the same time the Admiral 
Salvador Correo de Bonavides,
 brought thirty four great Sail of Ships to an Anchor before 
Reciffa,
 the Gallion which he Com∣manded carrying sixty Brass Guns. The Admiral 
Lichthart
 ran to meet him with five Vessels, and sent him word, that if he fell down to Leeward, since he was got to the Windward, he should soon find, that five Ships durst Engage with a Fleet six times as strong. Whereupon 
Bonavides
 sent two Messengers to 
Lichthart
 to tell him, that he came as a Friend to damp the 
Portuguese
 Insurrection in 
Pernamhuco;
 to which purpose he had already Landed some Companies at 
Tamandera. Lichthart
 send∣ing the two Messengers to the Council at 
Reciffa,
 they sent two of their own Mem∣bers







view of Suriname


SERINHAIM










PONTA TAMANDEI




The Names of the Ships both of the
 Dutch 
and
 Portuguese 
Fleet.


A.
 The 
Portuguese
 Amiral.


B.
 Their Vice-Admiral.


C.
 The rest of their Ships.


D.
 Three of their Barques.


E.
 Three Carvels, which lay to watch in the Bay.


F.
 The Enemy's Battery.


G.
 The 
Utrecht,
 being the 
Dutch
 Admiral.


H.
 The 
Ter Veer.


I.
 The 
Zealand
 Vice-Admiral.


K.
 The 
Over-Ysel.


L. Salt Land
 Pink.


M.
 The 
Folden Deer
 Faigat.


N 0.
 The 
Leyden
 Pink, and 
Unicorn
 Frigat.


P Q.
 A Dogger and three 
Netherland
 Barques.





bers to 
Bonavides,
 desiring to know of him what call'd him thither with so great a Fleet, and without giving the least notice, contrary to the concluded Peace of ten years?


Whilest the two Commissioners went with the fore-mention'd Orders to the 
Portuguese
 Fleet, a 
Netherland
 Vessel endeavor'd, notwithstanding the Wind was con∣trary, to get out to 
Lichthart
's assistance; which 
Banavides
 observing, stood away Northerly before the Wind: but 
Lichthart
 overtook a Ketch belonging to the 
Por∣tuguese
 Fleet.


Mean while the 
Portuguese
 upon Land being two thousand strong, under the Command of 
Vidal, Diez, Camaron,
 and 
Acoignes,
 Storm'd the Fort 
Serinhain,
 where the 
French
 Captain 
Montagne
 could make but little resistance, not having above forty Men, and being unprovided of Ammunition and Provision; yet he refisted nine days, and at last got two Barques to convey him to 
Reciffa.


Soon after this the 
Portuguese
 Fleet falling out amongst themselves, 
Bonavides
 Steer'd back for 
Lisbon
 with a few Ships, the rest coming to an Anchor again near 
Reciffa;
 where the Seamen whom 
Lichthart
 had taken inform'd him, that their Fleet came the first time to 
Reciffa
 for no other end, but to stir up the 
Portuguese
 by

their Presence to take up Arms, according to a private Contract, having to that purpose Landed twelve hundred Men at 
Tamandera,
 besides the Army led by 
Cama∣ron
 and 
Diez
 from St. 
Salvador
 to 
Pernambuco.


Colonel 
Hous
 about this time being sent for back to 
Reciffa,
 and staying with five hundred Men for Captain 
Blaek
's coming, who was sent to fetch all the 
Portu∣guese
 Women within three Leagues about 
Reciffa,
 was set upon in the Night by 
Vidal
 with two thousand 
Portugueses;
 the 
Brasilians,
 who were above half his Forces, flying into the Woods, leaving onely two hundred 
Netherlanders
 to fight with 
Vidal,
 by whom being so much over-power'd, they were forc'd to submit to his mercy, and suffer themselves to be all carry'd Prisoners to St. 
Salvador.


By this time at 
Reciffa
 all things were in a confusion, the Pits digg'd about 
Maurice-stadt
 afforded nothing but brackish Water, which occasion'd Sickness.


Vidal
 encourag' d by his Victory, march'd to St. 
Augustine,
 where without doubt he had stopt, if 
Hoogenstraet,
 who had the chief Command of the Fort, had not been Disloyal; for this Traitor thought it not enough to surrender this invincible Fort to the Enemy, but also bereav'd 
Reciffa
 of Provisions and Ammunition, which he did very subtilly, sending earnestly thither for Souldiers, Bullets, Powder and Shot, in lieu whereof he sent thither two Barques full of old Men, Women and Chil∣dren, that so he might deprive 
Reciffa
 of stout Men, and supply their room with un∣able People. For this treacherous and villanous Act the 
Portuguese
 were to give him 1800 
l.
 and make him a Colonel: Moreover, all the Soldiers in Garrison, con∣sisting of three hundred Men, receiv'd 3 
l.
 a Man, and were sent to joyn with a Regiment of six hundred and fifty Men, over which 
Hoogenstraet
 was made chief Commander.


The day before this eminent Castle was to be deliver'd up to the Enemy, Ad∣miral 
Lichthart
 obtain'd a brave Victory at Sea; for the 
Portuguese
 Fleet (consisting of seventeen Sail, the rest being gone with 
Bonavides
 to 
Portugal
) anchoring before 
Tamandera,
 were valiantly set upon by 
Lichthart,
 who Engag'd with them on the ninth of 
September
 1645. with the 
Utrecht,
 being the Admiral Ship, the 
Zealand, Ter Veer, Over-Ysel,
 the Pinks 
Salt-Land
 and 
Leyden,
 a Dogger and three Barques. In the Hole of the Haven 
Tamandera
 three 
Portuguese
 Carvels kept Watch, and near a Bat∣tery full of Guns lay three Barques, and the other Ships a little farther nigh the Shore. The Enemy at first shot very fiercely from the Battery, whilest the Ships drove to the Shore, and the Men leaping overboard swam ashore, onely the Admiral 
Jeronymo Serao de Payva
 made some resistance, but at last surrendred up his Ship, the 
Netherlanders
 in their Barques killing above seven hundred 
Portugueses
 in the Water. 
Lichthart
 burnt the whole Fleet, except the Admiral and Vice-Admiral, which he carry'd to 
Reciffa.


But this Victory was not comparable to the Loss which the 
East-India
 Company sustain'd by the selling of the Promontory of St. 
Augustine,
 and the taking of the Forts 
Porto Calvo
 and 
Rio Francisco;
 to the last whereof the Barques coming too late to carry the Soldiers off, they were all made Prisoners by the 
Portuguese,
 as also the Planters, in all to the number of five hundred.


Vidal
 marching to 
Tamarica,
 Storm'd 
Schuppen-stadt,
 but found such resistance from 
George Garstman
 (who supply'd the Prisoner 
Hous
 his Place) that he lost three hun∣dred Men:
 After which he endeavor'd by means of 
Fernandes Bouilloux,
 to purchase the Fort 
Margareta
 for 1500 
l.
 
Sterl.
 of the Governor of 
Parayba,
 who immediately without any farther Examination, caus'd 
Bouilloux
 that proffer'd the Money to be put to death.


A 
Dutch
 Sergeant in 
Olinda
 dealt very treacherously; for he sold the Fort to a

Portuguese
 Ensign for 100 
l.
 and also most basely betray'd all his Soldiers Lives to the merciliess Enemy.


By these means 
Reciffa
 was round about in jeopardy, as also within; for the great Thirst of the Inhabitants under a scorching Climate, augmented by the 
Hollanders
 salt Meat, could not be quench'd with brackish Water, for fresh was not to be had; Famine also increas'd daily, insomuch that the Poor threatned to fall upon the Rich, which made the Magistrates go Arm'd from House to House, to enquire what Store every one had, which being writ down was carry'd away and put into the Store-houses, where each receiv'd alike share, without respect of Persons. Fewel also grew very scarce, which made many eat their Meat raw, or half dress'd. In the interim every one that was able, was forc'd to work at the Forts of 
Reciffa,
 which were beaten down by the Rains; and the Soldiers continually alarm'd by the Enemy, were forc'd to be Night and Day up in Arms. The People dy'd more and more daily, when two Fly-Boats arriv'd there with Provisions, and News, that a Fleet was coming to their assistance.


The Captains 
Rhynbag
 and 
Montagne
 went in the Night, each with a Company, to fall upon the Enemy, who being two thousand five hundred strong, drove them back, and pursu'd them within shot of the 
Afogados,
 where forty 
Portugueses
 were kill'd.


About the same time a 
Terra Neuf
 Sailor, laden with the dry'd Fish 
Bocraillo,
 came to 
Reciffa.


In 
Parayba
 three hundred 
Netherlanders
 Sallying out of the Forts, fell so valiantly upon nine hundred 
Portugueses,
 that they forc'd them to flye, not without a consi∣derable loss. After which a Party of 
Brasilians
 surpris'd eighty 
Portugueses,
 as they were at 
Mass
 in 
Andreas Diez de la Figuereda
's Sugar-Mills, where they spar'd none but 
Figuereda
's Daughter, whose Beauty so charm'd them, that they comforted her mourning for her Father's Death, and deliver'd her undefil'd to the Governor of 
Parayba.


Vidal
 raging for madness because now and then some of his Prisoners escap'd, caus'd several of them to be cruelly murder'd, tying some of them Back to Back, and then cutting them in pieces; others he threw with Stones ty'd about their Necks into the Rivers; others he ty'd by their Privities, and hung them upon Trees; and also knock'd out the Brains of others.


In 
Reciffa
 the Soldiers, consisting of divers Nations, began likewise to mutiny crying, 
They should be all starv'd;
 and saying, 
They had better be slain in the Field fighting against the Enemy, than die of Hunger in the City.
 They also complain'd, 
The Commis∣sioners themselves betray
 Brasile; and threatned by force to fetch the Provisions out of the publick Stores, saying, 
They had long enough endur'd Thirst and Hunger.


These Transactions in 
Brasile
 were very ill resented in 
Holland,
 the common People in the 
Hague
 being ready to pull down the 
Portuguese
 Ambassador's House, in revenge of the Cruelties exercis'd upon the 
Netherlanders
 in 
Brasile,
 had they not been hindred by the Prudence of Prince 
Henrick.
 The Ambassador pretending to be ignorant of the fore-mention'd Passages, proffer'd to make what Satisfaction the 
West-India
 Company should require. But the 
States
 not satisfi'd with Excuses, when the Actions plainly manifested what their Intentions were, Complain'd to the 
French
 King of the unthankful and malicious Dealings of the 
Portuguese
 Crown; and meeting but with small Redress,
 they prepar'd to right themselves by force of Arms, and to that end rais'd several Regiments of Land-Soldiers, besides Seamen, to send to 
Brasile.
 The Fleet design'd thither, consisting of twenty two Sail, after it had been frozen up before 
Flushing
 three Moneths, set Sail at last in the beginning

of 
February,
 Anno 1646. with the Lord 
Schonenburgh,
 a Member of the 
States,
 the Councellor 
Goch,
 Treasurer 
Beaumond,
 Men very well experienc'd in Governing of Countreys: To these were added the eminent Merchants of 
Amsterdam, Haeks
 and 
Trovire,
 to keep the 
West-India
 Companies Accounts, and 
Le Heremiet
 for their Secretary. 
Sigismond Schuppe
 bore the chief Command over the 
Militia,
 and the Admiral 
Bankert
 over the Fleet, which suffer'd the greatest hardship imaginable; for being driven by tempestuous Winds into the 
Downs,
 two of them driving from their Anchors were call away on the 
Flats.
 The Fleet getting out again, was once more forc'd by a Storm to put in at the 
Isle of Wight;
 from whence by reason of con∣tinual Gusts they could not stir in nine Weeks time. During this tedious waiting for a fair Wind, the 
Brasile
 Frigat, valu'd at 20000 
l.
 was split in pieces against a Rock of the Island, and of three hundred Men thirty onely were sav'd. A Pink, which came in two Moneths from 
Reciffa,
 brought also sad tydings to the Fleet, 
viz.
 That the Town was in such a Condition, that without doubt the Fleet would come too late to their assistance: whereupon they making the more haste, endea∣vor'd, not without great trouble, to weigh Anchor again, whilest the Wind rose higher and higher, and the Waves going very hollow, drove the Ships down towards 
Portland
 Coast, full of Rocks, to which they were so near, that they saw a 
Scotch∣man
 split in pieces against them; and had not the Wind come about, and abated of its fury, the Fleet had undoubtedly perish'd. No sooner was this Danger past, but another succeeded; for the Soldiers in the Admirals Ship complaining of the small allowance they had of Cheese, Brandy, and Tobacco, had made themselves Masters of the Store-room, and threatned to kill the Lords 
Goch
 and 
Beaumond;
 but they, assisted with Men from the other Ships, who came in at the Cabbin Windows, so order'd the Mutineers, that they ask'd forgiveness, which for many Reasons was granted, onely they were distributed by seven in a Ship throughout the whole Fleet. After a great Contest between 
Goch
 and 
Beaumond
 about carrying the Flag, which could not be decided, 
Goch
 was left by the rest of the Fleet, who Steer'd an∣other Course, and getting near the 
Line,
 lay becalm'd six days; in which time he lost very many of his Men by a strange kind of 
Scorbute
 which rag'd amongst them; at last Sailing along the Promontory of St. 
Augustine,
 he came to an Anchor before 
Reciffa,
 which he found in the greatest Exigency imaginable, insomuch that it was resolv'd upon, the next day to surrender the Place up to the 
Portuguese,
 on promise of Quarter onely: which Resolution none oppos'd more than the 
Jews;
 for the 
Portuguese
 swore that they would burn them alive, if ever they became Masters of 
Reciffa,
 which made them resolve to die with the Sword in their Hands, and sell their Lives at a dear rate. Six Weeks after 
Gochs
 Arrival, the remaining part of the Fleet, escaping many dreadful Storms, in which, besides the two that were lost in the 
Downs,
 they lost five Ships and five hundred Men, arriv'd also at 
Reciffa;
 where the Commissioners appointed Officers to distribute to every one their certain allow∣ance of Victuals. The prime Councellor 
Schonenburgh
 also decided the Difference between 
Beaumond
 and 
Goch,
 as also between 
Haeks
 and 
Trovire,
 about their Places in the Assembly, 
viz.
 that they should sit above one another by Turns. The old Governors, 
Hamel, Bassi,
 and 
Bullestraet,
 were blam'd by every one for the decay of 
Brasile;
 and being sent to 
Holland,
 were receiv'd with frowning Looks, and rail'd against in Pamphlets as faithless Persons, who sought nothing but their own ad∣vantage, and were threatned to be call'd to an Account. It was also laid to their charge, that they had not given a true Account of the State and Condition of 
Brasile;
 that the State was much more decay'd than they had made known, by which means the present Power prov'd too weak to do any thing to the Enemy.




Amongst other Misfortunes which befell the 
West-India
 Company, the Revolt of the 
Tapuyans
 and other 
Brasilians
 was not the least, which hapned upon the occasion of 
Garstman
's putting to Death of 
Jacob Rabbi,
 a 
German,
 and indeed their chief Ringleader in all Robberies and Villanies; but 
Dary
 their then King alledging that 
Rabbi
 was wrongfully Executed by 
Garstman,
 and that his Tryal belong'd to him as King, prosecuted 
Garstman
 so vigorously, that he and his Ensign 
Jacob Boulan,
 his Accessory in the Fact, had their Goods and Salary confiscated, and they them∣selves were sent home in disgrace.


Mean while the Council seeing that there was not much good to be done by force of Arms, endeavor'd by mild ways to invite the revolted 
Portugueses,
 who were all promis'd Pardon for their Insurrection in an Edict which was publish'd in all places, onely 
Viera, Almado, De Rouche, Antonio Calvantelca,
 and 
Hoogenstraet,
 for whom great sums of Money were offer'd, were excepted. The 
Portuguese
 on the contrary publish'd, That they would receive all those 
Netherlanders
 into favor that would come over to them, and pay the Debts which they ow'd to the 
West-India
 Company, and also Transport them whither they pleas'd. These Promises, writ∣ten in 
English, Dutch, French,
 and 
Portuguese,
 and hung every where on the Boughs of Trees, and other publick Places, operated much more than the Privy-Councils Edicts; for in stead of one 
Portuguese
 that came to them, several ran to the 
Portu∣guese
 from 
Reciffa,
 notwithstanding a strict Guard was kept to prevent them, besides the great mortality amongst the Soldiers and Inhabitants through several raging Distempers, and want of fresh Provisions: Which general Calamity, it seems, very much cow'd the Spirits of those that were left; for in a Sally meeting with five hundred 
Portugueses,
 notwithstanding they were equal in number, yet they made a shameful Retreat; yea, though 
Schuppe
 came with eight hundred Men to their assi∣stance, yet he could not prevail with them to face about either by fair means or foul, for with his own hand he Ran-through an Ensign, Sergeant, and two Soldier, who ran away first. Yet notwithstanding this base and cowardly Retreat, it was resolv'd on to set upon 
Olinda
 and the Promontory St. 
Augustine;
 and at the same time 
Hinderson
 was sent to make himself Master of 
Rio Francisco
 with fifteen hun∣dred Men, and to harrase all the Countrey thereabouts with Fire and Sword, that so he might force the 
Portuguese
 to leave 
Reciffa.


Though 
John Dary,
 King of the 
Tapuyans,
 seem'd well enough contented with the punishment of 
Garstman,
 yet a great Party of his Subjects were not satisfi'd, but went and joyn'd with the 
Portuguese,
 because 
Garstman
 had not been deliver'd to them in 
Siara,
 where they kill'd all the 
Netherlanders
 they could meet with, and sent Presents to their King 
Dary,
 if possible, to oblige him to joyn with the 
Portuguese:
 But he reply'd, 
That he had more reason to punish them for their ill usage of the Inhabitants in
 Siara, 
than to have any thing to do with the
 Portuguese.


The Council inform'd hereof, sent the Interpreter 
Ralph Baron,
 who had a long time Convers'd with the 
Tapuyans,
 with a Present of Axes, Knives, Looking-glasses, Shirts, Combs, and the like Trifles, to King 
Dary,
 desiring him to continue his for∣mer kindness towards the 
Hollanders;
 which 
Dary
 promis'd, provided he might re∣ceive Assistance from 
Reciffa
 against those whom he had made his Enemies for the 
Netherlanders
 sake; which 
Baron
 promis'd should be done as soon as the fresh Forces which were daily expected from the 
Texel, Maes,
 and 
Zealand,
 came to 
Brasile.


Hinderson
 Landing at 
Rio Grande,
 took the Fort without firing a Gun, the 
Portu∣guese
 at his first coming flying into the Woods. He found here abundance of Cattel; for no place in the World breeds more than this, several Husbandmen having fifteen thousand Head of Beasts, of which many were taken to supply the want of Provi∣sions.

at 
Reciffa.
 As soon as he had taken the Fort, he caus'd it to be pull'd down to the Ground, because it stood in an inconvenient place, and immediately rais'd another, which was much better to be defended, by reason of the rising Ground; but he could neither bring that Work, nor any other Design to any perfection, be∣cause of the treachery of his Soldiers, who being most of them 
Roman-Catholicks,
 were so inclin'd to the 
Portuguese
 Interest, that they daily more and more deserted the Companies Service, and gave Intelligence to the Enemy of their Transactions. Amongst others, an 
Antwerper
 was apprehended for an Intelligencer, and being Hang'd on a Gibbet, fell three times one after another on his Feet, the Halter break∣ing like a burnt Thred, which gave him so many times of respit and opportunity of supplicating for Life; but his Crime was too hainous to admit of Pardon. Mean while the fled 
Portugueses
 being supply'd with fresh Supplies from all Places, especially from St. 
Salvador,
 to the number of twelve hundred Men, they kiil'd the Out-watches, consisting of twenty Men: The next Sentinel being warn'd by the noise, alarm'd the new Fort, which was scarce finish'd, because a mighty Shower of Rain had wash'd away the Walls.
 
Hinderson
 being wounded in the Leg, sent Cap∣tain 
Montagne
 against the Enemy, of whose Power he was sensible; yet going to the place where the Watch that was kill'd had kept their Station, he met with two hundred 
Portugueses,
 divided into three Companies, and drawn out for Battel, who running away were pursu'd by 
Montagne,
 till coming up to their Regimeat, which consisted in all of a thousand Men, divided into five Companies, they fell on all sides upon 
Montagne,
 who fighting valiantly, was overpower'd and kill'd, with three hundred of his Men, and almost as many more taken Prisoners; amongst whom was the Minister 
Astette,
 four hundred onely escaping into the Fort, where 
Hinderson
 stay'd expecting the event of 
Montagne
's Exploits.


This Defeat spoil'd 
Schuppe
's Design, who by his marching to 
Rio Francisco
 thought to draw the Enemy from 
Reciffa;
 but now being forc'd to think of some other way, he thought it convenient to invade St. 
Salvador
 by Sea, as the Enemy had done 
Reciffa
 by Land. Wherefore 
Hinderson
 receiv'd order to stay with six hun∣dred Men (being all that were left of fifteen hundred,) on 
Rio Grande,
 whither a Barque with Provisions being sent, was taken, and the Men in cool Blood kiil'd by the 
Portuguese.


At the same time it was given out, that 
Schuppe
 was going with the Admiral 
Bankert
 to 
Hinderson
's assistance; and to delude the 
Portuguese
 the more, 
Schuppe
 went with two thousand five hundred Men to 
Rio Francisco,
 where he lay some days at an Anchor, upon which the Governor of St. 
Salvador
 sending several Com∣panies thither,
 
Schuppe
 Sail'd with all speed to St. 
Salvador,
 and Landing on the Island 
Taperica,
 four Leagues in circumference, he got a rich Booty, and spar'd none whome're he met with, insomuch that two thousand were destroy'd, some by the Sword upon the place, others by their haste to get over to St. 
Salvador;
 for most of the Vessels being too full, sunk with them. Amongst the Prisoners that were taken and sent to 
Reciffa,
 were two Monks, who were design'd the same Entertainment as the Minister 
Astette
 should receive in St. 
Salvador;
 whereupon they immediately wrote to their Fraternity, to take care that 
Astette
 should not be burnt alive, as the 
Portuguese
 had threatned, because they were to expect the same usage: whereupon 
Astette
 was set at liberty, and had leave to walk up and down the Streets of St. 
Sal∣vador. Schuppe
 fortifi'd himself on 
Taperica,
 near an Inlet under the new Works, and together with 
Lichthart
 watch'd for all 
Portuguese
 Vessels:
 But 
Lichthart
 dying here, was carry'd to 
Reciffa,
 and there bury'd. On the other side, the Governor of St. 
Salvador
 sent fifteen hundred Men in the Night to the other side of 
Taperica,






 where with all speed they Intrench'd themselves, and Sally'd daily out of their Works upon 
Schuppe,
 so that many Men were lost on both sides; but 
Schuppe
 was in the worst Condition, in regard his Soldiers ran over in great numbers to St. 
Salva∣dor,
 where they were well Entertain'd; of which he advertis'd the Privy-Council, who were the less able to give him Redress, as having the same cause of Com∣plaint.


Amongst others there hapned a sad Accident of a young Soldier, scarce sixteen years old, and born at 
Roan,
 who having robb'd his Father's Cash, went in a Ship to 
Holland;
 where he lavishly spending the Money, was forc'd at last to List him∣self in the 
West-India
 Companies Service, and coming with the fore-mention'd Fleet to 
Reciffa,
 endeavor'd with two Companies to run to the 
Portuguese;
 but overtaken, was Try'd for the Fact, and Condemn'd to be Hang'd, for none of his Excuses which he made, of going over the River onely to fetch some Oranges and Lem∣mons to refresh himself, would save him, nor his protesting that he had no inten∣tion of going to the Enemy, nor the Promise that his Father should release him for ten thousand Crowns, nor his Minority, which ought chiefly to have been consi∣der'd, but that Necessity stopt the Ears of the Compassionate; so that his Execution drew pity from the Beholders a few Weeks after.


A very astonishing Passage hapned at 
Reciffa
 upon another Sentence of Death pronounc'd against a 
Portuguese,
 who after the publication of the Act of Pardon came to 
Reciffa,
 and there hir'd a Seaman for two hundred Crowns, to carry a Letter, made up in a Leaden Box, to the Governor of the Promontory of St. 
Au∣gustine,
 with order that if he was set upon any where, he should throw the Box in∣to the Water. The Letter written in strange Characters, contain'd a Declaration of the small number of Men in 
Reciffa,
 most of the 
Netherlanders
 Forces lying on the Island 
Taperica,
 so that if 
Reciffa
 were Storm'd along the Bank, and from 
Maurice∣stadt,
 it might easily be taken. This Letter being intercepted, the 
Portuguese
 was taken and Condemn'd, and as he was carrying to the Place of Execution cry'd aloud, 
You People take delight in my Death, but you shall be interrupted;
 and indeed it hapned ac∣cordingly:

for when the Executioner began to scorch the half-strangled Criminal with Straw, there sprung up a strange Spirit of Contention amongst the Specta∣tors, who began to justle and strike one another; and soon after a Whirlwind rose in the midst of the Market-place, which in a moment caus'd them all to stagger like drunken People, their Hats and Caps were blown up into the Air, the whole multitude tumbling confusedly on the Ground, the Arm'd Soldiers flying to the next Houses, and the Executioner falling down in a Trance from the Scaffold: A full quarter of an hour this Confusion had lasted, when the People came to them∣selves again, and the Hangman return'd to his Business, cutting off the 
Portuguese
's Nose, Ears, Privy-Members, and tearing out his Heart, which he threw to two Dogs, who devour'd the same; then dividing the Body into Quarters, which were set up at the four Corners of the City for an Example.


The same Punishment receiv'd a 
Mulatto,
 who endeavor'd to fire two of the 
Hol∣landers
 best Ships in the Haven.


Notwithstanding these Punishments, the Soldiers ran away daily; the blame whereof might justly be laid on the Magistrates, who took no notice of the Soldiers just Complaints of their Officers, cheating them of a third part of their Pro∣vision, and inflicting severe Punishments upon them as Mutineers, when they had real cause of Complaint.


Schuppe
 was at the same time shrewdly put to it for want of Men, who either dy'd of the then reigning Disease, or ran away to the Enemy; so that he was for∣ced to leave the Island 
Taperica,
 and inclose himself within his new rais'd Sconce.


The Admiral 
Bankert
 had better success; for Cruising up and down before the Inlet 
Todos los Sanctos,
 after the taking and sinking of several Ships as they came in his way, he at last set upon the 
Portuguese
 Fleet, consisting of seven great Ships, of which one got to St. 
Salvador,
 another was sunk, and the other five were taken, be∣ing valu'd at twenty Tuns of Gold, or 200000 
l.
 
Sterl.
 In this Engagement were kill'd above four hundred 
Portugueses,
 besides two hundred and fifty who were ta∣ken Prisoners, and sent Shackled to 
Reciffa.
 Amongst them was the new Vice-Roy of 
Brasile,
 the Admiral, Vice-Admiral, three Monks, and several other Per∣sons of note.


This Victory began to give some Breath to 
Reciffa,
 when at the same time Mar∣shal 
Hous
 arriv'd there with seven Ships, Mann'd with five hundred Soldiers. This 
Hous
 on the seventeenth of 
August,
 Anno 1645. had been taken Prisoner at the 
En∣genho,
 having fought so long till all his Powder was spent, so that he was forc'd to surrender himself upon promise of Quarter to 
Vidal,
 who after he had taken an Oath upon the 
Bible,
 to spare the Lives of all the 
Hollanders
 and 
Brasilians,
 fell upon the 
Brasilians
 and slew them, being a hundred in all, in Cold-blood, who yet sold their Lives at no easie rate. Being carry'd Prisoner, together with Captain 
Bristow, Listry, Wildschut, Blar,
 and two hundred more, by 
Viera
 to 
Casa
 de 
Prugar,
 he was thence sent to 
Portugal,
 where being releas'd, be brought News to the 
States
 of the mean Condition of the 
West-India
 Company, and that all things must needs be lost, if they did not speedily take the Business into Consideration: Whereupon he was fur∣nish'd with a Supply of Ships and Men, with which he set Sail for 
Brasile;
 where being arriv'd, most part of the Soldiers he brought with him were Transported to 
Taperica,
 to assist 
Schuppe;
 who as soon as they came to him, march'd into the Coun∣trey; where being set upon by a thousand 
Portugueses,
 he lost sixty Men.


Soon after 
Hoogenstraet
 receiving Orders from the Governor of St. 
Salvador,
 who was inform'd by some Prisoners, that 
Schuppe
 had not above twelve hundred fight∣ing Men, to fall upon him with three thousand, made a furious Assault upon the

Sconce in two places, and Storming the same for two hours together, lost four hundred Men, which made him draw off a little before Day-break.


In the interim nine Privateers, fitted out by several Merchants of 
Holland
 and 
Zealand,
 came to Cruise up and down before the Coast of 
Brasile;
 which the 
States
 the rather allow'd of, because the 
West-India
 Company was not able to send any more Supplies thither: Nor was it long ere they took five 
Portuguese
 Prizes, and afterwards (joyning with 
Bankert
) four more laden full of Sugar, in the Haven 
To∣dos los Sanctos,
 where they threw a hundred and twenty 
Portuguese,
 and fifty revolted 
Hollanders
 overboard.


Reciffa
 being at that time reduc'd to very great straits, earnestly implor'd Aid from the 
States,
 but to little purpose, by reason of the Differences amongst them∣selves, which hapned upon this occasion: The 
Spanish
 King by his Agent in the 
Hague
 made Overtures of Peace, and proffer'd to fall upon the 
Portuguese
 in 
Brasile:
 to which Proposition, when as the rest of the 
States
 seem'd inclinable, those of 
Zea∣land
 would no ways hearken, being resolv'd to have nothing to do with 
Spain.
 The news of this Dissention exceedingly perplex'd the Council at 
Reciffa,
 especially when to that news was added, that 
Bankert,
 the onely terror to the Enemy at Sea, was Commanded home by the 
States
 of 
Zealand,
 which yet the 
General States
 strictly forbad. Whereupon they thought fit to send one of their Assembly to the 
Hague,
 to make the 
States
 acquainted with the miserable Condition of 
Brasile,
 and to Expo∣stulate with them for their insensibility of their Condition, and to let them under∣stand, that ten thousand Men would not restore 
Brasile
 to its former Condition: Every one strove to be the Messenger of these sad tydings, but especially their Pre∣sident 
Schonenbergh
 wish'd it might be his lot to leave the unhappy Countrey of 
Brasile;
 but because his departure would not have been without great murmuring of the People, 
Haeks
 was sent in his stead. Together with him went 
Hinderson
 (who was in no esteem since the Destruction on 
Rio Grande;
) they both Embarqu'd on 
Bankert
's Ship and five others, which in stead of being laden with rich Commodi∣ties, and ballasted with Sugar, as heretofore, were fraught with discontented Sea∣men, decrepid and sick Soldiers, unserviceable 
Jews,
 poor Travellers, 
Portuguese,
 Prisoners, and onely ten Weeks Provisions, whereas all other Vessels at their Re∣turn from 
Brasile
 us'd to have Provision for three Moneths, which at this time could not be spar'd. The Council also made Orders what Persons should go with the fore-mention'd Ships, 
viz.
 None but those whose Names were written in the Lists which had stuck six Weeks at every Church Door, that by that means no Cre∣ditor might suffer by his Debtors going away, nor any Criminal escape his deser∣ved punishament. 
Bankert
 had scarce been a Week at Sea, when he dy'd of the Palsie:
 he was a Man, who for his valiant Exploits was from a Fore-mast Man preferr'd to be Captain; which Office he perform'd with great Prudence and Valor: but that which first made him most eminently taken notice of, was his Engaging with thirteen 
Dunkirkers,
 of which he sunk three, and being boarded by three more, and fir'd at by the rest, he refus'd to surrrender his Ship on promise of Quarter, but plac'd his eldest Son with a lighted Match in the Powder-room, commanding him on pain of Death to blow up the Ship with the three 
Dunkirkers
 as soon as he gave the Word; which valorous Resolution so amaz'd the Enemy, that they let him go. He also behav'd himself bravely in the 
Downs
 against the 
Spanish
 Admiral 
Oquendo.
 His two Sons that were present when he gave up the Ghost, would not have his Body thrown overboard, notwithstanding it stunk so intolerably, that all the Pro∣visions in the Ship were tainted by it; therefore taking out his Entrails, they Salted the Body, wrapt it up in four Sail-cloths, and nailing the same up in a pitchy

Chest, bury'd it under the Ballast. Mean while the Fleet approaching the 
Flemmish
 Isles, was surpris'd by a terrible Storm, in which the Vice-Admiral's old Ship split asunder, but most of the People were sav'd. Between 
Calice
 and 
Dover
 they met with eight 
Ostenders,
 against whom they made themselves ready to Fight; but they, according to the King of 
Spain
's Order, instead of Hostility shew'd them Friendship. All their Provisions were spent, when they happily Anchor'd before 
Flushing,
 where 
Bankert
's Body was Interr'd with great Solemnity.


In the interim the 
United Netherlands
 had fitted out another Fleet to assist 
Reciffa,
 the 
West-India
 Company having first demanded of the King of 
Portugal
 two hundred and eighty Tuns of Gold, to the value of which they affirm'd themselves to have been damag'd by the Insurrection of the 
Portuguese.
 On the other side, the King of 
Portugal
 was in a quandary about the Business of 
Brasile;
 for first, he had no other thoughts but that 
Brasile
 would have fall'n into his hands within the space of three Moneths, because the Plot there was so subtilly laid; neither did he think the 
States
 would have concern'd themselves with the 
West-India
 Companies Business, which now it was manifest they did. Besides this, there was a third Inconvenience, 
viz.
 that the 
Spanish
 Crown endeavor'd to conclude a Peace with the 
United Netherlands;
 wherefore that he might put a stop to the sending of the Fleet to 
Brasile,
 he dealt with the 
French
 Ambassador to make very advantageous Proffers in his behalf, 
viz.
 That he would surrender all the conquer'd Places, and make good all the Damages that had been sustain'd thereby. The Fleet appointed to go to 
Brasile
 was hereupon stopt, till the 
States
 had Consulted about an Answer on the fore-mention'd Propositions; but when 
Haeks
 brought news of the falshood of the 
Portuguese,
 the Scale was im∣mediately turn'd, insomuch that the 
Portuguese
 Ambassador went in danger of his Life, till the Mutineers were put into Custody. Moreover the Fleet was order'd to Sail with all speed possible to 
Reciffa,
 with promise that another Fleet should soon follow with six thousand Men; but the many disconsolate tydings that had been brought of late, of the hardships and sufferings of those that went before, through the unwholsomness of the Climate, the want of Provisions, the Strength and Cruelty of the Enemy, made the Seamen and Soldiers very unwilling to go so fatal a Voyage, insomuch that as many as could, made their escape: yet at last, on the last day of 
December,
 Anno 1647. the Fleet set Sail under the Command of 
Corneliszoon de Wit;
 some Weeks before which 
Schuppe
 was forc'd to desert the Island 
Taperica,
 to go and aid 
Reciffa,
 which the 
Portuguese
 from a rais'd Battery on the other side of the River 
Biberibi
 shot at so incessantly, that none were safe either in their Houses or in the Streets.


Mean while the 
Portuguese
 Agent, 
Francisco de Sousa Continho,
 proffer'd the 
States
 to go to 
Brasile
 himself, and cause to be restor'd all those Places which had been ta∣ken from the 
West-India
 Company, particularly the City St. 
Salvador
 and 
Tercera,
 be∣sides Reparation for all other Damages.


At the same time 
Grave Maurice
 was Treated with to go to 
Brasile
 again, but his Demands were so high, that it came to nothing; for he requir'd 4000 
l.
 yearly to spend at his Table, and 5000 
l.
 besides during his Life; also 2000 
l.
 to set him out, and twelve thousand Men to Besiege St. 
Salvador,
 which was always guarded by four thousand, and thirty Carvels lay ready before 
Lisbon
 to carry four thousand more thither.


All things went very ill on the 
Hollanders
 side at this present; for besides that the fore-mention'd Fleet had not its wish'd success, most of the Men being destroy'd by the immoderate Heat of the Climate, 
Angola
 and 
Loando
 were also taken by the 
Portuguese.




These Misfortunes made the 
West-India
 Company begin to be very forward to come to a Treaty with the 
Portuguese
 Agent, who before seem'd rather to court them, having offer'd to Engage for the restoration of whatever they possess'd at that time, when the ten years Peace was concluded; but when they came to insist upon that Point, he answer'd, That he must expect new Orders from 
Lisbon
 con∣cerning 
Loando,
 because the taking of that Place caus'd an alteration in the state of Affairs. But the 
States
 no way satisfi'd with Delays, that were like to prove both hurtful and disgraceful, resolv'd to put into Execution what they had before agreed upon, 
viz.
 The 
East-India
 Company was impower'd to make Prize of all 
Portuguese
 Ships towards the payment of the fifteen Tuns of Gold ordain'd for the 
West-India
 Company, to help them against the 
Portuguese
 Oppression. The 
West-India
 Com∣pany also receiv'd Commissions to Cruise for 
Portuguese
 Vessels before 
Brasile.


On the seventeenth of 
February,
 Anno 1649. three thousand Soldiers that came over in the fore-mention'd Fleet, besides two hundred 
Negro's,
 and as many Sea∣men, marching to Besiege 
Gararapes
 under the Command of 
Schuppe
 and 
Coche,
 were so furiously set upon by the Sallying Enemy, that they were forc'd to break up the Siege in great disorder, whilest the 
Portuguese
 being in number two thousand five hundred, fell upon the Rere; and though the 
Dutch
 Officers us'd all the care they could possible to bring their Men to face about, yet they were not able to keep them from running away; in which flight great slaughter of them was made by the 
Portuguese
 Horse, consisting of a hundred and thirty, Arm'd with Lances, inso∣much that in the flight and the pursuit, a thousand 
Netherlanders
 were slain, and nineteen Ensigns or Colours were left behind as Trophies for the 
Portuguese;
 the chief of the Slain were Colonel 
Brink
 and 
Houteryve.


The 
Zealanders
 were much concern'd at the improsperous Affairs of 
Brasile,
 in re∣gard a fifth part of the 
West-India
 Companies Stock belong'd to 
Middleburg, Flushing,
 and 
Veer,
 insomuch that the Complaints of Widows and Orphans that shar'd in the common loss, mov'd the 
States
 to fit out six great Ships, and as many Ketches, Mann'd with two thousand eight hundred Men, for 
Brasile,
 where all things ran to ruine, the Grandees both of the Council, Army, and Fleet, being at variance, and impeaching one another.


The rest of the Provinces, especially 
Friesland,
 being less inclin'd to the 
West-India
 Company, were somewhat colder in the pursuit of this Business; nevertheless, up∣on a fresh Letter of Complaint from 
Walter Schonenbergh,
 President of the 
Brasilian
 Council, they held a Consultation together, how to raise Moneys for the fitting out of twenty Ships and five Ketches for the Relief of 
Brasile.


The Admiral 
De Wit
 returning home, was, upon the accusation of the Council in 
Brasile,
 and the General, 
Sigismond Schuppe,
 made Prisoner in the 
Hague;
 and to∣gether with him the other five Captains that went with him were Committed by the Admiralty, for returning without the Consent of the Council; but they were soon releas'd by the Magistrates of 
Amsterdam,
 who upon the Admiralties refusing to deliver them, commanded their Provost-Marshal to break open their Prison Doors.
 
De Wit
 after his Releasement justifi'd what he had done before a full As∣sembly of the 
States,
 and alledg'd that it was according to the Orders he receiv'd when he undertook this Expedition.


The 
Portuguese
 Agent, 
Sousa Macede,
 obtaining Audience of the 
States,
 told them how ready the King his Master had been to come to a perfect Agreement of Peace with them, but that their own Acts of Hostility had been the occasion of the breach of that Treaty of Peace that had been concluded on; that the Robberies and Inso∣lencies committed by those 
Portugueses
 under their Jurisdiction, was not any way

authoris'd or countenanc'd by him; lastly, he offer'd them free Trade to 
Brasile,
 eighty Tun of Gold to the 
West-India Company,
 800000 
l.
 to the Orphans and Wi∣dows in 
Zealand,
 and payment of all private Debts. But making no mention of restoring the Places in 
Brasile,
 he seem'd to mock the 
States;
 who resented it so much, that they would admit of no farther Conference with him.


Mean while the 
West-India
 Companies Business in 
Brasile
 went daily more and more to ruine, insomuch that in the Year 1654. they lost all their Forts and Places of Strength and Habitation, and amongst them 
Reciffa,
 the chief Residence of the Council of 
Brasile,
 who returning home, brought nothing but a doleful Relation of their unfortunate Proceedings. 
Schuppe, Haeks,
 and 
Schonenbergh,
 made each of them a long Oration, setting forth the sad Condition of the Place, and the Miseries they had endur'd a long time before they left it; also excusing their total quitting thereof to the Enemy by the great want of Provisions and other Supplies, which they so often had written for in vain, at least receiv'd short of what their Necessities requir'd, and by the Clamours of the Soldiers, who were ready upon all occasions to Mutiny or Revolt, as appear'd by their crying out upon the discovery of a Fleet of 
Portuguese
 upon the Coast, 
Behold our Deliverers from the
 Netherlanders 
Tyranny;
 lastly, by the growing Power of their Enemies, which they could not have resisted, though they themselves had been much stronger than they were.


But the 
West-India
 Company sensibly touch'd at the thoughts of their Losses, were not satisfi'd with the Relation of 
Schonenbergh, Haeks,
 and 
Schuppe,
 but requir'd a Journal of every days Transactions, or Testimonies to confirm the truth of their Relation: They also demanded an Account of the Condition of the Store-houses when 
Reciffa
 was surrendred, and fell upon them with several Interrogatories, 
viz.
 Why the Fort 
Afogados
 was forsaken? Why the Garrisons were not drawn in from the North to 
Reciffa?
 Why they did not keep footing on the Land, and guard those Places they had left when 
Reciffa
 was lost? Why they made such ado for want of Provisions and Ammunition to dishearten the People? Why the Money proffer'd by several Citizens was not taken? Why they did not burn the Enemy's Fleet, since, according to the opinion of several, it might easily have been done? How they could testifie the Sedition of the Soldiers, since none of their Comman∣ders complain'd of it? Whether they us'd any Means to encourage the Besieged? Who did, and who did not consent to the Surrender? Whether no better Terms could have been made?
 In fine, they prevail'd with the 
States
 to secure 
Schonenbergh, Haeks,
 and 
Schuppe,
 in their Houses, and on the ninth of 
September,
 Anno 1654. brought them before a Council of War in the 
Hague,
 where the chief things objected against them were, That the 
Portuguese
 had gotten by the Conquest of 
Reciffa,
 above two hundred Brass Guns, most of them Demi-Culverins, and four hundred Iron Guns, valu'd together at ten hundred thousand 
Rixdollars;
 That the Store-houses were sufficiently stock'd with Provision and Ammunition; That they took care to se∣cure their own Goods, but left what belong'd to the 
West-India
 Company as a Prey to the Enemy.


Schuppe
 on his part alledg'd, that he could do nothing of himself, as being under the Command of the 
Brasilian
 Council. 
Haeks
 and 
Schonenbergh
 pleaded the want of Men, by reason of the many that daily dropt from them, either by Death or Defection, to the Enemy, and those that remain'd, unsafe to be trusted, as consist∣ing of so many different Nations; also their being block'd up at the Sea by the 
Portuguese
 Fleet, the great want of Ammunition, especially Instruments of Fortifi∣cation; lastly, the head-strong Resolutions of the Soldiers, to deliver up the Place, whatever their Officers should determine to the contrary; notwithstanding which,

to shew that it was not quitted upon disadvantageous terms, they produc'd the Articles of Agreement upon which it was surrendred to 
Francisco,
 Governor of 
Pernambuco.
 In conclusion, the Council of War pass'd their Sentence on 
Schuppe,
 
viz.
 That he should lose all the Sallary that was due to him from the 
West-India
 Company since the twenty sixth of 
January
 1654. when he Sign'd the Agreement with 
Baretto
 for the delivering up of 
Reciffa.


Thus the 
Portuguese
 recover'd full and absolute possession of 
Brasile,
 yet notwith∣out fear of an afterclap of War; wherefore the 
Portuguese
 Agent, upon condition of an absolute Peace to be concluded, proffer'd the 
States General
 in the 
Hague,
 Satisfa∣ction for the Damages which the 
West-India
 Company had sustain'd in 
Brasile,
 eighty Tun of Gold, a free Trade to 
Brasile,
 and payment of the Debts due to them from several 
Portugueses
 in 
Brasile;
 but told them, that to surrender them any Places there, was not in the power of the 
Portuguese
 Crown. On the other side, the 
Spa∣niard
 proffer'd to assist them in the total Conquest of 
Brasile,
 and to restore them those Places they formerly possess'd, as soon as they had subdu'd the 
Portuguese;
 to which the 
Zealanders
 began to hearken, who being great Losers by the 
Portugueses
 Treachery, wish'd for nothing more than Revenge; but 
Holland
 having a great Trade to 
Portugal,
 was more inclin'd to Peace: Whereupon His Majesty of great 
Britain
 proffer'd himself to be Mediator between the 
Portuguese
 Crown and the 
United Netherlands;
 and accordingly on the sixth of 
August,
 Anno 1661. a Peace was concluded with 
Portugal
 on these Terms:




I. 
That
 Portugal 
was to pay to the
 United Netherlands 
eighty Tun of Gold, either in ready Money, Sugar, Tobacco, or Salt, or deduct the same out of the Customs payable in the
 Portuguese 
Harbors.


II. 
That the Guns on
 Reciffa 
were to be restor'd to the
 West-India 
Company.


III. 
That the Salt-Trade at
 St. Uves 
and other Places under the
 Portuguese 
Jurisdiction, whether in
 Africa 
or
 Brasile, 
should be granted to the
 Netherlands, 
paying the Customs as the
 Portuguese 
do themselves.


IV. 
That the conquer'd Places gotten on both sides, should remain in the hands of the pre∣sent Possessors.


V. 
That the King of
 Portugal 
should not lay an Embargo on any
 Netherland 
Vessel, on any pretence whatsoever, though they should carry all manner of Ammunition to his Enemies, pro∣vided it were not out of any of the
 Portuguese 
Havens.


VI. 
That no
 Netherlander 
should ever be call'd before any Judge about any Difference in Religion, but should have freedom thereof granted him, either in his House or Ship, and also a convenient Burying-place.


VII. 
That if any Difference should chance to arise between
 Portugal 
and the
 Netherlands, 
they should not extend it to prejudice the Trade, but every Merchant should be free to call in his Debts, and send Ships without hinderance.


VIII. 
That this present Agreement should not be broken by any Misdemeanors acted by any Subjects, either in the
 East 
or
 West-Indies, 
Who were to be punish'd by their lawful Judges.


IX. 
That the Havens belonging to both Parties were to be free for either Men of War or Merchant-Men.


X. 
That the
 Netherlanders 
Trading in
 Portugal, 
might go Arm'd, take Houses and Store-houses.


XI. 
That the Goods laden in an Enemy's Ship might he declar'd free Prize.


XII 
That the
 Portuguese 
in
 Brasile 
should pay their Debts which they ow'd to the
 West-India 
Company, or any other Person or Persons; to which purpose three appointed Commissioners were to Sit at
 Lisbon, 
to hear and determine the Causes that should be brought before them, and

without the usual Circumstances, pass their Sentence, which was to be Executed by a higher Power.




A few days after this Agreement was concluded, the 
Portuguese
 Ambassador, 
Henrico Sousa Tovares,
 went for 
Lisbon,
 where he arriv'd on the last day of 
September.


Not onely 
Guelderland
 and 
Zealand,
 were much dissatisfi'd with this Agreement, but also 
Groningen
 accus'd their Deputy 
Schulenbergh,
 that contrary to Orders he had been too forward in concluding the Peace with 
Portugal,
 and that he had con∣sented to that which the 
States
 of 
Groningen
 had not permitted him; for they re∣solv'd to make Peace on no other account, but that 
Portugal
 should pay the eighty Tun of Gold in ready Money, and that in a short time; whenas on the contrary, he had allow'd of the payment in Merchandise, and that in a long time. Where∣fore the 
States
 of 
Groningen
 (who for this Fact and several Accusations brought against 
Schulenbergh,
 condemn'd him to be Beheaded, which Sentence had been Exe∣cuted upon him, had he not made his Escape) together with those of 
Omeland,
 and others, who disapprov'd of the Peace concluded with 
Portugal,
 drew up many Rea∣sons why they dissented, and look'd upon it as both dishonorable and disadvanta∣geous; however, the Articles being Sign'd, and the 
States General,
 taking into con∣sideration how impossible a Work it would have been to have gone about to re∣new a War with the 
Portuguese
 in 
Brasile,
 being at that time in firm possession of all, and that for the Interest of a few, in respect of the whole Common-wealth, they were forc'd to rest satisfi'd, and together with the 
West-India
 Company, to sit down with the loss of those Places in 
Brasile,
 which had cost so much Blood and Treasure to gain.


Nevertheless the 
West-India
 Company put in a Memorial at the 
Hague,
 of all that had been done by them from time to time, wherein they themselves had been great Sufferers, and the Common-wealth very much advantag'd, as namely, That at first they put in a Stock of seventy four Tun of Gold, sent out divers Fleets under the Admirals 
Willekens, John Dirkszoon Lam, Boudewyn, Henrickszoon, Peter Hein, Adrian Pater, Henrick Lonk, Dirk Uitgeest, Peter Ita, Loos, Cornelis Houte-been, Lichthart, Bankert,
 and others, at several times, which had much weakned the 
Spanish
 Power, to the great advantage of the 
United Netherlands,
 because the 
Spaniard
 was not onely forc'd to disperce his Power to defend 
America,
 but also lost great Riches on the Coast thereof, which being the Sinews of his War, prevented him from oppressing that 
State;
 That to their loss they suffer'd their Forces to stop the Enemy, when he broke into the 
Veluwe,
 at that time when the 
United Netherlands
 seem'd to hang by a silken Thred; That it would probably have been the ruine of 
Holland,
 if the mighty 
Spa∣nish
 Fleet which Engag'd with 
Martin Tromp
 in the 
Downs,
 had been assisted by sixty six Sail, which 
La Torre
 was forc'd to send to the Coast of 
Brasile,
 against the 
West-India
 Company; That this Companies Concern was so great a Nursery of Mari∣ners in the Year 1629. that they had above a hundred Ships at Sea, and fifteen thou∣sand Men in their Service; which the 
United Netherlands
 considering, and judging that Charge too great for the Company to maintain, had resolv'd to contribute a certain Sum towards it yearly, which had not yet been paid; which made them take up Money upon Interest, and put in a Supply of thirty Tun of Gold for the payment of the same; That the Expedition of 
Henrick Brewer
 to 
Chili
 had put them very much behind-hand, because the Enemy having notice of it, secur'd himself, yet was often terrifi'd with it; for 
Brewer
 having found out a Way to go from 
Re∣ciffa
 to the Province of 
Chili
 in two Moneths, and accordingly to do great mischief to the 
Spanish
 Power, whose Riches lay bare all along the South Sea; this and

many other things forc'd to make that honorable Peace with the 
Netherlands,
 con∣cluded on in 
Munster,
 Anno 1648; That their Losses, computed and deliver'd in to the 
States General,
 amounted to sixty six Tun of Gold, and forty three thou∣sand two hundred and ninety 
Guilders,
 which forc'd them to take up Money to pay Interest for what they had before, yet that they still kept fifty great. Ships at Sea, and were resolv'd to prosecute their Trade with fresh vigor, as soon as Satis∣faction should be given from the 
Portuguese
 Crown, as was promis'd them in the Articles of Agreement, and they could obtain of their Lordships, to have their Patent prolong'd for a considerable time; That they were still indebted to those Orphans and Widows who furnish'd them with Money to set out their Forces, which in the first twelve years did the 
Spaniard
 so much hurt, that the Damage is reckon'd to amount to one thousand one hundred and eighty Tun of Gold.


These things being taken into consideration by the 
States General,
 they granted the Company their Request, and gave them a new Patent, by virtue of which they now Trade to 
Africa
 and the 
Caribbee-Islands,
 since they were forc'd to quit all they had possess'd in 
Brasile.








SECT. XII.
 The Journey of 
Rodulphus Baron,
 with the Description of the Customs and Manners of the 
Tapuyans.


ROdulphus Baron,
 to make a Discovery of the Countrey, upon the Encourage∣ment of 
Grave Maurice,
 who allow'd him to that purpose a yearly Reve∣nue, undertook a remarkable Journey, accompany'd with three 
Tapuyans;
 who goings out of the Village 
Caneri
 without any store of Provisions, left the Moun∣tains 
Cupaeva
 on the right-hand, and went seventy Leagues into the Countrey, without meeting with any People, onely he found one Mountain of 
Fossile
 Glass; from whence he went Southward to the Villages of the 
Waripebares
 and 
Caripati,
 who having courteously Entertain'd him, appointed certain Persons to accompany him from one Village to another, with Orders to Complement 
Grave Maurice,
 who sent them home with several Gifts.


The 
Waripebares
 and 
Caripati
 inhabit fourteen Villages on the Mountains which Bound 
Brasile
 Westward, live by Hunting and Fishing, eat wild Honey and all manner of Fruit, and maintain continual Wars against a mighty People which in∣habit the Western Plains.


As for the 
Tapuyans,
 they range up and down between the Rivers 
Grande, Quoau∣guho, Ocioro, Upameoma,
 and 
Voiroguo,
 without having any setled Abodes; they are a strong People, stern of Countenance, and black Hair'd: In stead of Circumcising their Children, they cut them, which is done after this manner: The Priests stand on a row, Dancing and Singing, whilest one of them swings the Child round about his Head before all the Multitude, and then runs away with it; at last returning, sets it in his Lap, whilest another Priest cutting a Hole in the Ears and Lips thereof, puts little Bones into the same, and the Mother cries and howls after a terrible manner. At these Ceremonies, which end with Dancing and Singing, their King is always present.


The Virgins are kept by their Parents till the Mothers perceive them to have their. Monethly Courses, which they immediately reveal to the Priests, who ac∣quaint the King therewith, before whom the Maid, being Painted red, is brought; whom having smoak'd with Tobacco, he throws an Arrow at a Garland, which





 she wears on her Head, and if he chances to hit it, he gives her his Benediction, by licking certain parts of her Body, from which she hopes to receire long Life.


So soon as a Woman is gotten with Child by her Husband, she lies no more with him, but he is permitted to enjoy his other Wives, whose number is either more or less, according to every ones pleasure. The Women after Delivery eat their After-birth.


Adultery is free for Men, but if Women be taken in the Act, they are immedi∣ately put to Death.


After they have done Soweing and Planting, the King calls all his People and Subjects together, and appears to them hung round with Garlands; and all of them have their Bodies Painted and stuck full of divers colour'd Feathers.


The Priests when they go about to foretel future Events, either Sing or Pipe, and at the same time hold up their Heads towards the Skie, and stand gazing, as if they saw some strange Vision in the Air; on some of their Backs hangs a Bundle of Ostriches Feathers; some throw Feathers in the Air, to see which way the Wind blows. When the Waters overflowing 
Brasile
 did much harm, 
Anno
 1641. the Priests being Consulted, brought forth the King's 
Calabash,
 in which lay their sa∣cred Stones call'd 
Cohuterak
 and 
Titscheyouh,
 and began to Dance and Sing; next six Priests were plac'd in a row, which were to Prognosticate: whereupon the first taking up a Stone, said, 
The
 Netherlanders 
have given Battel to those in
 St. Salva∣dor, 
but are now about an Agreement:
 The second held up a Blossom of 
Indian
 Wheat, and foretold that there would be plenty of that Grain: The third holding a white Pebble-stone, promis'd store of Milk: The fourth grasp'd a Stone like Bread, telling them that the Countrey should produce much Bread: The fifth holding up a Bowe and Arrow hung full of Feathers, cry'd aloud, 
This is a Gift of the Angels, Birds shall flie thicker than these Feathers hang together:
 The sixth, having a lump of Wax, foretold that there would be plenty of Honey made by the Bees that year.


They worship the Constellation 
Ursa Minor.




They observe a very strange way of Purging; for with a Stick they thrust sharp Leaves down their Throats into their Stomach, which they turn so long till they vomit Blood.


In the Summer they have a general Meeting for Wrestling, and other Exercises, which lasts three days. The Wrestlers are strangely attir'd; for they are all over their Bodies beset with divers sorts of Feathers, and in stead of Boots or Buskins, wear the Barks of Trees about their Legs; their Hair besmear'd with Honey, and ty'd in a Tuft, hangs down behind; on their Crowns they wear a Plume of Fea∣thers, about their Necks a Band or Gorget of Feathers; at their Arms they tie the Wings of the Birds 
Kohitub,
 and on their Backs a green Bough; their whole Bo∣dies Painted with divers Colours, and their Hair all Red: Thus accoutred, they Engage one with another, and if there be an old Grudge between them, then they Fight in earnest, and often kill one another: The Victor with strange Actions upbraids, the Vanquish'd with Cowardise, and ever after enjoys his Wife and Children.


They eat the Serpent 
Manuab,
 being four Yards long, and on the Tail having a Horn, which with a push it thrusts into Man or Beast, as it lights, then winds it self about the Body, and sucks till it hath suck'd the last drop of Blood.


Here are also Serpents which are so poysonous, that the least Wound receiv'd by them is mortal, unless the part bitten be either immediately cut out, or off.


The Priests cut the deceased Bodies into pieces, which are roasted by old Wo∣men; the Bones are taken out, and at the next publick Feast are stamp'd, mix'd with Water, and Drank: But the Bodies of Noblemen are to be eaten by none but Persons of that Rank.


They also Crown their Kings after a strange manner, 
viz.
 The Priests, who are best with Feathers, anoint him with sweet-smelling Oyl, or Balsam, and put a Crown of divers colour'd Feathers on his Head, after which they all fall a Singing and Dancing; but if any one happen to speak a word of the deceased King, they all begin to howl and cry. The Kings Authority consists more in Advising than Commanding.


They believe that the Souls of those who die a natural Death are immor∣tal; but those that are kill'd by their Enemies, devour'd by ravenous Beasts, or poyson'd, are totally extinguish'd both Soul and Body for ever. They say like∣wise that Hell is Westward near a dark Pool, where the Devil Examines every Soul how they liv'd on Earth, and what Death they dy'd; the Good are Ferry'd over to a delightful Valley, where there is plenty of Fish, Honey, and Flesh; but the Wicked are miserably tormented.


The Natives live peaceably amongst themselves, their Law being for those that have not, to ask, and for those that have, to give.


They never Travel in the Night for fear of Serpents and other ravenous Beasts, neither do they go any whither till the Sun has dry'd up the Dew.


King 
Janduy
 before-mention'd, being above a hundred years of age, desir'd the Prince of 
Juckers
 fair Daughter to Wife, but being deny'd, contriv'd a subtil Plot, 
viz.
 he invited 
Jucker,
 with his Courtiers, to a Wrestling; whither he coming with his whole Train, was earnestly minding the Sport, when a considerable number of 
Janduy
's Women falling upon 
Jucker
's Men, destroy'd a great many of them, and got the desir'd Maid for 
Janduy,
 who at that time had fourteen Wives and sixty Chil∣dren, but had formerly enjoy'd fifty Wives and Concubines.


Not onely amongst the 
Tapuyans,
 but generally amongst the rest of the 
Brasilians,
 their Arms are great Clubs call'd 
Tacapes;
 also sharp Darts, and strong Bowes





 call'd 
Orapares,
 with Shields, which are made of the Skin of a Beast call'd 
Tapi∣roussous.


The Women wear long Chains of Snail-shells, which hang down over their Shoulders; their Faces are Painted with divers colour'd Rings, surrounded with Specks; their Necks and Arms they adorn with Necklaces and Armlets of little Bones: They carry their Husbands Provisions in time of War.


Their Army they order by blowing on the Horn 
Inubia;
 others play on Mens Bones kill'd a little before: for going by Water they use Boats made of the Barks of Trees, each whereof being able to carry fifty Men, go exceeding swift: The strongest Men always march before, and as many as they take, whether Men, Wo∣men, or Children, they are all kill'd and roasted in their 
Boucans.


Their Villages consist of Houses of eighty, ninety, or a hundred Paces long; those that lie near the Enemy are fenc'd with Walls and Pallisado's against any Attempt.
 Their Field-Battels are very terrible; for as soon as they get sight of one another, they howl like Wolves; which Tone they raise as they approach nearer and nearer, and with their Horns and Pipes make also a mighty sound; then sha∣king their former Enemies Teeth (which they wear about their Necks) at one ano∣ther, they cry, 
That they shall immediately fall into each others hands for Food:
 whereupon they throw their Darts at one another, which are adorn'd with all sorts of Feathers, and if any one be wounded, he pulls out the Dart, and bites the same like a mad Dog; next falling to their Clubs, they knock one anothers Brains out: which manner of Fighting lasts commonly some hours before the one or other Party leave the Field. All their Prisoners they fatten, and eat them at a Merry-meeting; at which when they have Danc'd seven hours together, three Men lead the Prisoner, ty'd with a Rope made of the Bark of a Tree call'd 
Juira,
 through their Village, whilest the Prisoner looking to and again, saith in a scornful manner thus unto them, 
You, do ye hear? I have eaten your Fathers:
 and to others, 
I have roasted your Bro∣ther; your Nephew also tasted very well; my Death will be sufficiently reveng'd:
 Having carry'd him about for some time, they put the Rope so strait about his Middle,

that he can neither stir one way nor other; then they give him Stones in his Hands, and lay others at his Feet, saying, 
Now take Revenge for your Death before you die:
 then he immediately throws at those who are nearest him; and when Stones are want∣ing, he throws with Earth: at last comes the Executioner, adorn'd with Feathers, with a black Club in his Hand, and asks, 
Have not you at several times eaten of our Re∣lations?
 to which the Prisoner undauntedly answers, 
Pache tan tan, ajouca, atoupave,
 that is, 
Yes, I am he that have eaten several of your Peole,
 and laying his Hands upon his Head, cries out, 
O how valiantly did I behave my self therein!
 Executioner re∣plies, 
And therefore shall you be kill'd by me, and serve for Food for these Spectators:
 Then the Prisoner answers again, 
What care I, since I know my Death will be reveng'd:
 which said, his Brains are dash'd out, and falling on the Ground, he is carry'd away by his Wife (for the Conqueror commonly betroths his Sister or Daughter to the Pri∣soner,) who seemingly bemoans the Body, of which she hath the first Cut when it is Dress'd; then the old Women put the Corps into scalding Water, in which they let it lie till the Skin comes off; then the Owner of the Prisoner quartering the Body, distributes it amongst the Guests; the pieces laid on their Gridirons call'd 
Boucans,
 are turn'd by the old Women, who lick up the Dripping, desiring the By-standers to bring more such Food, and with the Blood anoint the Childrens Faces; the Meat being broyl'd every one takes a piece, and eats it up to the Bones, which are kept as Trophies.


The 
Brasilians
 do not onely thus plague one another, but they are likewise tor∣mented by an evil Spirit, which they call 
Aygnan
 and 
Caagerrel,
 if credit may be gi∣ven to 
John Leerius
 a 
Burgundian,
 who relates, that he hath often seen them sweat out of fear, and striking their Hands upon their Thighs, cry out, 
Mair autourassap, acequerey, Aygnan atoupave,
 that is, 
O my Fool, my Companion, I fear the Devil above all Evils.


Amongst several Diseases to which 
Brasile
 is subject, there is one call'd 
Pians,
 being as malignant as the 
French POX,
 proceeding from libinousness, the whole Body being full of Carbuncles, each about the bigness of a Man's Thumb.


Strangers in 
Brasile
 are also much troubled with a Giddiness, occasion'd by the extream Cold in the Night; as also with with sore Eyes, which they get by going abroad before Sun-rising, or after Sun-setting.


The Palsie is also very common there, taking People so suddenly, that falling down stiff on the Ground, they are often in danger of losing their Breath.


Besides these there are several other Distempers that very much infest 
Brasile,
 as the Bloody-flux, Dropsie, Rising of the Gall, Worms, Meazles, and St. 
Anthony
's Fire.


The aged 
Brasilians
 have for the most part great skill in Herbs, which they ga∣ther in the Woods, and apply them to the Sick both inwardly and outwardly; and chiefly they know how to expel Poyson. None can perswade them against the Medicines which they have learn'd from their Predecessors; nay, they will rather chuse to lose their Lives than use any other: and indeed they do not always succeed amiss, but often manifest that they understand the Vertue of Herbs better than our 
European
 Physicians. The Learned 
Guilielmus Piso
 relates, That he hath seen several times in the Army which 
Grave Maurice
 sent against the 
Portuguese
 in 
Brasile,
 that the 
Brasilians
 in a short time cur'd those Wounds with fresh Gums and healing Herbs, which the 
Netherland
 Chirurgeons judging past Cure, presently advis'd the cutting off either the Arm or Leg of the wounded Person, 
Piso
 adds moreover, That he himself us'd some of 
Hippocrates
's and 
Galen's
 Prescriptions in Wine, for the curing of Cancers and Swellings, which the 
Brasilians
 have made well onely with the Juice of Tobacco. They also in a moment recover'd a Person given over by all 
European


Physicians, with the Juice of the Root call'd 
Jaborandi:
 wherefore he always de∣sir'd their Company when he went to visit sick or wounded Men.


The Distempers in 
America
 differ much from the 
European,
 not onely in the Signs of any Distemper, but also in the Cure; for when a Distemper cannot be cur'd by the prescribed Medicines, a Father or Mother sends for the Neighbors, to know if they can find any means to cure the Disease: which Custom was anciently ob∣serv'd amongst the 
Greeks.
 They also strictly observe a Rule in their Diet, and take care to keep the Patient out of the Sun in the Day, and cold Winds in the Night: however, if their Fathers and Mothers be sick, nevertheless they leave not off their usual Dancing and Singing; but if the sick Person die, especially a Father, they lament and cry over the Corps like Wolves, calling to one another with a quavering Voice, and uttering these Expressions, 
The strong Man is deceas'd, who carry'd so many Prisoners for a brave Dinner to his House. Oh what a quick Hunter and subtil Fisher hath Death bereav'd us of! we shall see him no more till our Souls are carry'd be∣yond the high Mountains, where our valiant Predecessors Dance in Rings.
 The Women make the greatest noise, and in the midst of their howling embrace one another, which lasts six hours, and then they put the Body upright into a Grave made like a Hogshead, hanging about it divers colour'd Feathers, and other things in which the Deceased delighted most when living; upon the Grave the nearest Relations place Dishes of Meat, both Flesh and Fish, and the Liquor 
Cauou-in,
 that their evil Spirit call'd 
Aygnan,
 may be reconcil'd by these Offerings, and not carry away the Body; but when they remove from thence they cover the Grave with the Herb 
Pindo.
 This Custom is not observ'd by all 
Brasilians,
 for some eat up their de∣ceased Relations.






Sect. XIII. Grave Maurice
 his Account of 
Brasile,
 so far as it concern'd the 
West-India
 Company.


BRasile,
 so far as it concerns the 
West-India
 Company, extends from the River 
Real,
 which divides 
Seregippa
 and the Lordship of St. 
Salvador,
 to 
Maragnan: Seregippa
 it self reaches along the Sea-Coast thirty two Leagues, and was first brought under the King of 
Spain
's Jurisdiction by 
Christovan de Barros Cardoso,
 who being order'd by the King of 
Spain
 to Plant this new Countrey, invited many People from St. 
Salvador,
 who built four Sugar-Mills, and a Town consisting of a hundred Houses, and four hundred Sheds for Cattel; but the Town being de∣stroy'd, hath nothing left but Heaps of Rubbish; and the Cattel either fell into the 
Netherlanders
 hands, or were devour'd by Tygers; the Inhabitants fled back to St. 
Salvador:
 Many troubles have prevented the re-building of it.


Pernambuco
 may for its fruitfulness stand in competition with any Place in the World, except in those parts where the Soil is sandy and stonie. The Fields feed abundance of excellent Cattel; the Woods, Deer and Fowl; the Ocean and Rivers, all manner of good Fish. It is inhabited but eight Leagues into the Coun∣trey, because the nearer the Sea, the more convenient it is for Importing and Exporting of Goods; neither could the 
Portuguese,
 by reason of their small number, spread themselves farther, as also in regard they found great resistance from the 
Brasilians.
 The 
Negro's
 that work in the Sugar-Mills between the River 
Grande
 and 
Francisco,
 amount to four thousand. The Cape 
Verde, Mina, Angola, Ardra,
 and 
Calabaria,
 generally provide three thousand in a year, to supply the number of the Sick, or those that run away.








SECT. XIV.
 The Councellor 
Dussen
's Relation of so much of 
Brasile
 as concerns the 
West-India
 Company.


THat part of 
Brasile
 which the 
West-India
 Company have subdu'd by force of Arms on the Continent of 
America,
 is divided into six Counties, 
viz. Sere∣gippa, Pernambuco, Itamarica, Parayba, Rio Grande,
 and 
Siara.


The Expedition undertaken by 
Gysseling
 and 
Schuppe
 made 
Seregippa
 desolate, the Inhabitants wheof remov'd to the Coast 
Todos los Sanctos.


Also 
Siara,
 which the 
Portuguese
 formerly possess'd, was thinly inhabited, and had a mean Fortress there, whither some few 
Brasilians
 came now and then to the 
Netherlanders
 assistance.


Pernambuco,
 lying between the Rivers 
Francisco
 and 
Tamarica,
 excells the other Countrey in fruitfulness and pleasantness. The 
Brasilians
 compare it to a hollow Rock, under which fresh Water flows.


Moreover, 
Pernambuco
 hath several Havens, 
viz.
 the outermost Road before 
Re∣ciffa,
 which being in the open Sea, is somewhat dangerous, but the innermost is secure against all Storms; also at the Promontory St. 
Augustine,
 where the Mouth of the Haven is narrow and dangerous, by reason of the Rocks and shallow Grounds; the Island 
Alexio
 is very fit to Crain Ships in; 
Barra Grande
 hath a large and safe Inlet, convenient for all manner of Vessels, yet it is inferior to 
Cororipa;
 lastly, the Havens 
Jaragoa
 and 
Franco
 are very eminent.


Amongst the Rivers, the chief are 
Jangades, Serinhain, Formosa, Porto Calvo,
 
Cama∣rigibi, Antonio, Michael,
 and 
Francisco.


Pernambuco
 also is divided into six Jurisdictions; the first and most ancient is 
Igarazu;
 the second and biggest, 
Olinda;
 the third, 
Serinbain;
 the fourth, 
Porto Calvo;
 the fifth, the 
Alagoas;
 and the sixth, 
Rio Francisco,
 which is the Boundary of 
Pernambuco
 on the South.


Pernambuco
 also boasts five Towns, 
viz. Garasu, Olinda, Maurice-stadt,
 to which also belongs 
Reciffa, Bella Pojuca,
 and 
Formosa.
 The Villages 
Moribeca, St. Laurence, Antonio, Amaro,
 and others are also not inferior to little Towns.


The Countrey is for the most part Hilly, but is exceeding fruitful in the Val∣leys, and near the Rivers, especially in Sugar-Canes.


Here are also a hundred and twenty Sugar-Mills, of which a great number stand still for want of 
Negro's.


Next 
Pernambuco
 lies 
Tamarica,
 which hath onely one Haven, one City, and twenty three Sugar-Mills, of which thirty are onely employ'd. This Island pro∣duces excellent Grapes and Melons, yet is for the most part barren, by reason of the Pismires.


The Countrey 
Parayba
 hath its Denomination from the River which washeth it, being deep, and without any Rocks or Sands; on the Banks thereof stand twenty Sugar-Mills, two of which are still standing.


In the Lordship of 
Rio Grande
 stands the Town 
Puntael,
 whose Buildings were ruin'd in the Wars; after which the Inhabitants had leave to build them another City on a fruitful Soil.


The Countrey hereabouts us'd formerly to be very full of Cattel, but was not onely bereav'd thereof by the 
Hollanders
 and 
Portuguese,
 but also for the most part made desolate.




The River which washes the Castle 
Ceulen,
 affords a convenient and safe Harbor for all sorts of Vessels.


This Lordship of 
Rio Grande
 boasts onely two Sugar-Mills, of which one is de∣cay'd; so that in all those Parts in 
Brasile
 which belong to the 
West-India
 Company, are a hundred and sixty Sugar-Mills constantly employ'd, besides forty six which are about repairing. It is scarce to be reckon'd how much Sugar they make yearly, in regard, through the alterations of the annual Seasons, as also the more or less fruitful Fields, they produce one year, and in one place, more than in another.


The Inhabitants are of two sorts, 
viz.
 free People, and Slaves; the Slaves are 
African Negro's,
 and the others, 
Netherlanders, Portugueses,
 or 
Brasilians;
 which last came in of their own accords, or else were absolv'd from their Oaths, and ac∣quitted from their Martial Offices; yet are ready to venture their Lives and Estates, and to Serve either on Foot or Horseback for their Freedom against their Enemies. Those that went from the 
Netherlands
 to 
Brasile
 on their own Accounts, drive a Trade, or Serve the Traders, or else keep Inns, and follow Handicraft Faculties; some of which, when grown rich, buy Parts in Sugar-Mills; others live on Tilling: by all which several sorts of People 
Reciffa
 is very well inhabited, and full of Hou∣ses, which yield great Rents, and are held at high Prices: wherefore 
Grave Maurice
 thought good to mark out pieces of Ground on the Isle 
Antonio Vaes,
 which were sold for a considerable Sum of Money, insomuch that in a short time a new Ci∣ty call'd 
Maurice-stadt
 was built on the same, and inclos'd within strong Bulwarks; yea, notwithstanding the Rumor of a great 
Spanish
 Fleet in some measure abated the Courage of the Builders, yet the City was extended down to the Fort 
Frederick Henrich,
 and a brave Bridge laid over the Stream 
Biberibi,
 cross which they go from 
Reciffa
 to 
Antonio Vaes,
 where no People were in greater esteem than Handicrafts∣men, who could get their ten or twelve Shillings a day. The Labor which is re∣quir'd in the Sugar-Mills, no Men are able to undergo but the 
Negro's.
 Of the 
Portuguese
 some have liv'd here a considerable time; others lately came hither, being most of them 
Jews,
 of whom there live a great many at 
Reciffa,
 and are very dili∣gent in promoting of Trade: They possess several Sugar-Mills, and are kept very much under; their whole study and contrivance is for Gain; they conceal their Hatred against the 
Christians,
 as also their Covetousness, yet are mortal Enemies to the 
Hollanders.
 The 
Brasilians,
 who are the ancient Inhabitants, live apart from other People in their Villages, consisting of long Straw Huts, forty or fifty of them under one Roof sleeping on woven Hammocks; they esteem no Houshold-stuff but Nets and 
Calabashes,
 using the first to fish with, and the other to drink out of; about their Huts they plant 
Mandihoka
 and 
Brasile
 Trees; when they are not employ'd in the Wars, they spend most of their time in Hunting, but many in Idleness; they esteem wild Fruits better than those which are Planted; they Drink night and day, making their Liquor of the chew'd Root 
Mandihoka,
 or the Apples 
Tajovis;
 they esteem nothing so much as strong Drink, and to wear Linnen next their Skins; they would not value Money, could they but get Brandy and 
Spanish
 Wine with∣out it; if they are not promis'd a Reward, they will not work. Each Village, nay House, hath its peculiar Governor; but besides him there is a 
Hollander,
 who stirs up the Idle to work, and takes care that the Owners of the Sugar-Mills do them no injury: They never suffer themselves to be Hir'd for above twenty days, at the end whereof they demand their Wages; they are commonly employ'd to chop Wood to boyl the Sugar with; but by reason of the scarcity of 
Negros,
 they are often made use of for other Business, which to avoid they hide themselves; as also when they are to go to Fight; they are hard to be kept in Ranks, for they will

run out of their own Fyle into another on the least occasion; but if they put their Enemy to flight, they pursue him, and spare none alive. They little regard the 
Christian
 Religion, yet some of them have learn'd the 
Lord's-Prayer
 and the 
Creed
 of the 
Roman
 Priests. The Minister 
Davil
 having learn'd the 
Brasilian
 Tongue, Con∣verted very many of them, and Baptiz'd them in their Villages.


The 
Brasilian
 Women and Children usually go to Wars with their Husbands and Fathers.


The 
Brasilian
 Slaves were some years since bought of the 
Tapuyans,
 or made Slaves, because they assisted 
Boudewyn Henrickszoon,
 when he Landed in the Inlet 
Tra∣luson;
 but they have since obtain'd their Freedom of the 
Portuguese.
 The 
Angolan
 Slaves can undergo greater Labor than any other.


The 
Brasile
 Wood grows generally ten or twelve Leagues up in the Countrey from the Sea, not in particular Woods, but amongst other Trees.


The 
Negro's,
 when the Sugar-Mills work not, are employ'd in pulling off the white Bark, three Fingers thick, from the Tree, which bears dark-green Leaves, small and prickly at the ends, and hanging on thin Stalks, but bearing neither Blos∣soms nor Fruit.


Osnabrig
 Linnen is highly esteem'd amongst the 
Brasilians,
 as also colour'd Wax, Copper, Tin, Wine, Beer, Butter, Cheese, Meal, Stock-fish, Pork, Hung-beef, and Gammons of Bacon.


The 
Papists
 Teach and observe their Religion in publick, their Spiritual Men being divided into Priests and Monks; the Monks consist of 
Franciscans, Carmelites,
 and 
Benedictines;
 the 
Franciscans
 being the most eminent, possess six fair Cloysters, besides which they have neither Land nor other Revenues, but live on what is gi∣ven them daily; their Cloysters stand in 
Frederick-stadt, Iguaraca, Olinda, Pojuca, Serin∣hain,
 and 
Antonio Vaes.
 But the 
Carmelites
 have three Structures at 
Parayba,
 and as many more in 
Frederick-stadt
 and 
Olinda,
 where they live plentifully on what they reap from Tillage, Rents of Houses, and Legacies of deceased Persons. The 
Bene∣dictins,
 though they possess onely two Cloysters, one in 
Frederick-stadt,
 and the other at 
Olinda,
 yet they have the greatest Income from the Sugar-Mills of 
Muserapa,
 and the Countrey about 
Parayba,
 as also Cattel and Cane-Fields.


Reciffa,
 the Seat of War, hath two Horn-works towards 
Olinda;
 the first rais'd with Stone, defends the Haven with seven Brass Demi-Culverins; the other lies opposite to the River 
Biberi,
 and hath five Brass and two Iron Guns. 
Reciffa
 also hath a strong Rail about it, and many Guns plac'd in good order. Near the Pow∣der-house stand two Batteries with Guns.


On the Shore towards 
Olinda,
 lies the Stone Castle 
St. Joris,
 on a Hill opposite to the Haven, fortifi'd with a Bulwark and thirteen Iron Guns.


The Water-Castle, built round, rises out of the Sea, and stands at the end of the Stone Cliff, which makes an Inlet, through which the Ships Sail that come to, and go from 
Reciffa.


The Fort 
Bruine
 hath four Points, seven Brass Guns, and Pallisados round about.


Somewhat farther is the Redoubt call'd 
The Lady Bruine,
 which hath two Brass Guns.


The Castle 
Waerdenbergh,
 built before the Mouth of the River 
Capivaribi,
 in the Bay made by the River 
Biberibi,
 hath three Points, each rais'd square, because the fourth Bulwark towards 
Antonio Vaes,
 cannot be finish'd, by reason the Earth is sunk away.


The Fort 
Ernestus
 stands on the North-side of 
Maurice-stadt,
 on the Island 
An∣tonio

Vaez.
 That part of the City which respects the Fort, lies open, with five Points and a double Horn-work; it is the more secure from any Invasion, because the Countrey round about is overflow'd at High-water. On the Horn-work stand eight Brass Guns; but the four Redoubts along the River 
Capivaribi
 are decay'd.


The square Fort 
Prince William,
 standing in a low Ground not far from the River 
Afogados,
 hath four Bulwarks, and is inclos'd with a high Wall and strong Pallisa∣do's: the Church appearing above all other Houses in the Castle, may be seen at 
Olinda.


Maurice-stadt
 lies pleasantly along the River 
Biberibi,
 and is wash'd behind by the River 
Capivaribi;
 It hath a large Wharf, a brave Magazine, a 
French
 Church, and a Guild-hall: The Buildings are not altogether so high as those in 
Reciffa,
 where they are commonly three Stories, because the Ground is very dear.


Grave Maurice
's Court lying opposite to 
Reciffa,
 on the Shore of 
Biberibi,
 rises from the middle of a Garden with two high Towers.


Not far from the Castle 
Ernestus
 is a Potters Kiln, and on the other side, near the Fort 
Frederick Henrick
 seven Wells, and some Morasses, and towards the Water∣side, a Stone Battery.


The Fort 
Orange
 at the Southern Mouth of the Haven, hath, by reason of its dry Moats, a strong Pallisado, four Bulwarks, and twelve Guns. The Bulwarks about the Church, and the Battery before the Haven, also secures 
Schuppen-stadt
 against the 
Portuguese.
 On the Battery stand nine Iron and two Brass Guns. At the Northern Entrance of the Haven appears a Tower with three Guns.


The Fort 
Margareta
 hath two Brass and forty Iron Guns.


Restringa,
 surrounded with Pallisado's, rises near a sandy Point in the middle of the River.


The Castle 
Antonio,
 wash'd by the Sea, hath onely one Tower, but that suffici∣ently strong to defend it against an Enemy.


The 
Franciscan
 Cloyster, strengthned by a Wall and Earthen Works, serve in stead of a Castle to 
Frederick-stadt,
 and is the more secure by reason of a Half-Moon, Moats, Rails, and a Battery at the Mouth of the Haven.


The stonie Fortification of 
Ceulen
 lies near the Sea. All these are the Fortresses of the Northern 
Brasile,


To the: Southward of 
Reciffa
 appears the Promontory 
St. Augustine,
 where the Haven is secur'd by the Forts 
Vander Dussen, Domburgh,
 and a Stone Battery.


Porto Calvo
 is fortifi'd by a Castle, built on a steep Hill forty Foot high.


The Fort 
Maurice
 Commands the Ferry of 
Rio Francisco,
 and is built on a high and steep Hill, with five Bulwarks; the lowermost Plain is overflow'd by the River in the Summer Season. The Store-houses hereabouts are ill furnish'd, and if not suddenly supply'd, 'tis to be fear'd, that a great Famine will follow, as al∣ready it is begun, and we may thank the faint-heartedness of the Enemy that it hath increas'd no more.


The 
Militia
 is distributed into all the Forts or Villages, that so they may the bet∣ter procure their Provisions, watch the approach of the 
Spaniards,
 and prevent all Incroach-ments of the Enemy. In 
Maurice
 Castle are five hundred and forty Men in Garrison; in the 
Afogados,
 two hundred ninety three; in 
Camarigibi
 and 
Porto Calvo,
 fourhundred and eighty; in 
Serinhain,
 seven hundred and eighty; in 
Pojuca,
 twenty five; in the Mills 
Panterra,
 ninety seven; at the Promontory 
Antonio,
 two hundred and forty; in the Castle 
Vander Dussen,
 a hundred and seventy; the like number is in 
Amaro
 and 
Moribeca;
 in the Village 
St. Laurence,
 four hundred and twenty two; in the Fort 
Prince William,
 two hundred and sixty three; in 
Frederick








CASTRUM MAURITIJ AD RIPAM FLUMINIS S. FRANCISCUM








ARX PRINCIPIS GUIL
IMI




A. 
Fluvius affgodorum.


B. 
Castrum.


C. 
Civitas olinda à long
.








Henrick,
 hath two hundred and thirty; in 
Ernestus,
 two hundred and eighty; in 
Reciffa,
 two hundred and seventy seven; in the Castle 
Bruine,
 a hundred and twenty five; in 
Olinda,
 a hundred and ninety three; in 
Iguaraza,
 ninety three; in 
Orange,
 a hundred and eighty two; in 
Goyana,
 a hundred and sixty five; in 
Frederick-stadt,
 a hundred and one; in the Fort 
Margareta,
 three hundred and sixty; in the Castle 
Ceulen,
 eighty eight; in 
Antonio Vaes
 lies 
Grave Maurice
's Guard; 
Siara
 is defended by forty; so that the whole Power consists of six thousand one hundred and eighty Men, too weak a number to resist the Enemy both by Land and Sea; nay, had he had Courage, the 
West-India
 Companies Concerns in 
Brasile
 would long since have been in a low Condition; for the 
Spanish
 Fleet which came lately from 
Cadis,
 car∣ry'd three thousand Men, besides seven hundred which they brought from 
St. Sal∣vador;
 the Duke of 
Bagnola
 was also ready with two thousand 
Portugueses,
 and a thousand 
Brasilians,
 to joyn with the Seamen, and expected also as great a number from 
Parayba, Pernambuco, Seregippa, Itamarica, Rio Grande, and Siara,
 contrary to the Oath taken in 
Reciffa:
 But the 
Spanish
 Fleet keeping close to the Bay 
Todos los Sanctos,
 hath hitherto done nothing, except the sending of several Companies into the Countrey, to rob and pillage the 
Brasilian
 Villages. Moreover, the 
Mulatto's
 and 
Negro's
 do great mischief up and down, and so much the more, because they go and come along private Ways, through which none can follow them. Most of the Ships being badly fitted, are scarce able to keep the Sea; and the Soldiers want Clothes exceedingly. The City 
St. Salvador
 keeps the Countrey in a continual Alarm, so that five thousand Men are requir'd to conquer it: Eighteen great Ships, and as many Ketches, besides lesser Vessels, ought to be sent thither, the Sea being full of Pyrats. The common Treasury is so much behind-hand, that none can receive any Pay. The Owners of the Sugar-Mills will not deliver any Sugar without ready Money, because of the 
Netherlanders
 removal from thence.


This Relation of the Affairs of the 
Netherland West-India
 Company 
in Brasile,
 was deliver'd to them in Writing by 
Vander Dussen.




A Description of the Palace 
Freyburgh,
 two Bridges, and a Ban∣quetting-house, all built by 
Grave Maurice.


GRave Maurice
 before his coming away from 
Brasile,
 built a pleasant Palace along the River 
Biberibi,
 before the Fort 
Ernestus
 on 
Antonio Vaes;
 the out∣most Work whereof was shaded by a double Row of 
Coco
-Trees, and had a Pond full of all sorts of Fish; and not far from thence, on one side, a second en∣compass'd a Coney-Warren, which respected a Pell-mell; near it a Garden, curi∣ously divided into round 
Parterres,
 which led into a long Park of 
Bakkoven
-Trees; and at the end a great Dove-house. Next the River stood a large Stable, on one side whereof was a Field to whiten Linnen in, and a Kitchin-Garden, wherein was a large Spot full of Orange-Trees, a row of Vines, which bore Grapes every three Moneths, and a delightful Walk, beset on each side with Lime-Trees. On the other side of this Palace stood a Banquetting-house, near a row of Pome-granate-Trees, and another of Fig and Cittron-Trees. Behind the Palace was a Fish-pond with two Iles, for the Swans. A Dove-house also appear'd near the Fort 
Ernestus,
 where the 
Negro's
 watch'd the Horses, and led them to Water in a Fishpond in a large Wood. Before the Palace appear'd a Stone Pallisado, which like a Half-Moon ran into the River. The Palace it self rose with two Towers, one of which serv'd for a Sea-mark.




Moreover, 
Grave Maurice
 extended his new City to the Fort 
Frederick Henrick,
 di∣vided the Morassie Grounds by several Moats, and laid a Bridge cross the River 
Biberibi,
 between 
Reciffa
 and the City 
Maurice,
 and another cross the Stream 
Capiva∣ribi,
 between the said City 
Maurice
 and the Main Land.


In the time when 
Albuquerque
 Govern'd 
Brasile
 for the King of 
Spain,
 it was Dis∣puted among the 
Portuguese,
 whether it were not requisite to desert the City 
Olinda,
 and causing the Inhabitants to remove to 
Reciffa,
 joyn the same with a Bridge to the Isle 
Antonio Vaes,
 because those Places are almost invincible, and much more con∣venient for Ships than 
Olinda?
 But the 
Hollanders
 surpris'd them on a sudden, before they could bring the Business to pass, and after a while prosecuted the same Design themselves.


Grave Maurice
 spent twenty four thousand 
Guilders
 in laying a Bridge over the River 
Biberibi,
 between 
Reciffa
 and 
Antonio Vaes.
 Having rais'd just fifteen Stone Columns from the Ground, they came to the deepest part of the River 
Antonio Vaes,
 when the Architect began to despair of accomplishing the same, because the Ground lay deep under Water, and the Stream ran very swift: Those which dwelt at 
Reciffa
 cry'd, 
That they had undertaken a Business which was not in the power of Man to effect, and that there was above ten thousand Pound already spent in vain on fifteen Pillars:
 in this sort they began to clamor against 
Grave Maurice,
 especially the Owners of Houses in 
Reciffa,
 who foresaw that many would remove from thence to the plea∣sant Isle 
Antonio Vaes,
 as soon as the Bridge was finish'd; after which the Houses in 
Reciffa
 would be at low Rates. But 
Grave Maurice
 judging that the Disgrace would fall upon him, if the Bridge should be left half finish'd, caus'd at his own proper Charge, huge pieces of lasting Timber to be cut, forty and fifty Foot long, and so ramm'd into the Ground, some streight, others sloaping, to support the rest, and in two Moneths finish'd the same. On the first day after this new Bridge was compleated, there went so many People over it, that the Toll which they paid, amounted to above 60 
l.
 
Sterl.
 and was after that Farm'd for twenty eight thou∣sand 
Guilders
 yearly, a Citizen that pass'd over the same being to pay 2 
d.
 and a 
Negro
 or Soldier 1 
d.
 but a Horseman paid 4 
d.
 and a Cart or Wayn 7 
d.


Since this 
Grave Maurice
 built a second Bridge cross the River 
Capivaribi,
 which joyn'd 
Antonio Vaez
 to the Main Continent. This Bridge being eighty six Rods long of durable Timber, was finish'd in seven Weeks.


Moreover 
Grave Maurice
 built a pleasant Banquetting-house, call'd 
Bonavista,
 at his own Charge before the said Bridge, from whence he could see the Palace 
Frey∣burgh, Olinda,
 the Fort 
Ernestus, Maurice-stadt, Reciffa,
 the 
French
 Church, the Ships in the Harbors, and also the Castle 
Frederick Henrick.
 This Banquetting-house hath at each corner a Turret, and in the middle thereof a spacious Room, crown'd with a fair Terrace.








view of Boa Vista


BOAVISTA.




A. 
Fluvius Capibaribi


B. 
Domus Boavista, sivi boni visus.


C. 
Pons.


D. 
Palatium Friburgum.


E. 
Mauritiopolis.


F. 
Templum Gallicum.


G. 
Castrum Ernesti.


H. 
Castrum Fred. Henrici.


I. 
Reciffa.


K. 
Reciffa lapidosa.


L. 
Naves portu contentae


M. 
Olinda eminus visa.










map of northern South America
















CHAP. VIII. Guiana.


NOrthward of 
Brasile,
 over against 
Maragnan,
 lieth the Countrey of 
Guiana,
 not improbably suppos'd to be so call'd from the River 
Wia,
 one of the principal Rivers of the Province, which yet is said to have more and fairer than any other part of 
America
 besides: It is by some call'd 
The Wild Coast,
 for what reason is uncertain, it being found to be a very fruitful and pleasant Countrey: It is Bounded on the East, with the 
Atlantick
 Ocean, or 
Mare del Nordt;
 on the West, with some undiscover'd mountainous Countreys, which lie on that side of the 
Andes;
 on the North it hath the great River 
Orenoque;
 and on the South, that of the 
Amazons,
 or 
Orellana;
 which last Name, as we have said before, it de∣rives from 
Francisco Orellana,
 who is said to have first discover'd it in the Year 1543. It was anciently call'd 
Tobo, Topoi,
 and 
Tapera.


This Countrey lieth on both sides of the 
Aequator,
 extended from the fourth Degree of Southern Latitude, to the eighth Degree of Northern, yet enjoyeth a temperate and good Air, not oppressed with any excessive Heat; which is chiefly attributed to the Breezes, or Easterly Winds, almost perpetually about Noon blowing upon it. Towards the Sea-side it is for the most part a flat and level Countrey, in the more Inland parts mountainous and swell'd with Hills, but in all it is generally of such a rich and fertile Soil, that for Fruits, or any outward Com∣modities of the Earth, it yields not to any other Province of the 
New World,
 but ra∣ther far excelleth the most, having as it were a continual Summer, without Win∣ter or Autumn, the Trees never uncloth'd or made bare, Fruits always ripe, or growing to maturity, the Meadows and Pastures always verdant and green, and, as we said, so excellently well water'd with Rivers, that no Countrey in the World seems comparable to it in this respect. But since the several Occurrences of 
Orella∣na
's Expedition will give much light to the more particular knowledge of these Parts, we thought good to insert this following Relation thereof.




SECT. II.
 A Relation of the Journey of 
Francisco Orellana.


Francisco Orellana
 travelling with 
Gonsalvo Pizarro
 from 
Quito,
 to find out the Countrey 
Cundirumarca
 (where the Natives, according to the information of a strange 
American,
 went Arm'd with Golden Plates) he came after a great deal of hardship to the River 
Maranon,
 where 
Pizarro
 building a Brigantine, put all his sick and maimed Men into the same, as also all his Baggage under the Com∣mand of 
Orellana,
 whom he commanded to forage for some Provisions, of which the Army, that was to follow along the Shore, had great want; but 
Orellana
 was in few days driven down so far, that he saw no hopes of getting up again in a years time, and Engag'd daily with the 
Indians,
 which came aboard of him in little Boats; at last he went ashore and conquer'd a Village, in which he found Provisions, some Gold, and Gems of great value: not long after which he was in great danger, by reason of a River, which with great force fell into the Channel in which he Sail'd,

and for the space of two hundred Leagues saw neither Man nor House: Next Land∣ing at a Village, he was by the Governor thereof Presented with Turtles, Par∣tridpes, Fish, and other Provisions, and also forewarn'd of the valiant Women, the 
Amazones,
 which they call'd 
Camapuyara.
 Going from hence, he met for eighty Leagues together, nothing but steep and craggy Mountains on each side of the Shore, insomuch that he could not Land any where for Provisions. Next coming to the inhabited Province 
Machiparo,
 he was fiercely assaulted for two days and two nights, by the Casique 
Aomagua,
 who pursu'd him with several Boats: Not long after having conquer'd a Village, out of which ran several trodden Paths into the Countrey, he came to a River, in the Mouth whereof there lying three Isles, he gave it the Denomination of 
La Trinidad,
 which washeth a fruitful Coast, along which Sail'd divers small Vessels. Somewhat farther in the River 
Trinidad
 stood a Village and Banquetting-house, where 
Orellana
 took abundance of Provisions, Sil∣ver, Gold, and Earthen Ware curiously Glaz'd and Painted, but judg'd it very ha∣zardous to travel far into the Countrey by the common High-ways, in regard of the multitudes of People that frequented them, to whose Civility he durst not trust; therefore Sailing from hence a hundred Leagues farther, he came to the Countrey belonging to the Lord of 
Paguana,
 who civilly Entertain'd him, and Presented him with Sheep, not unlike the 
Peruvians,
 and all manner of good Fruit, which the Countrey affords in great abundance. After this on his Lar-board side he disco∣ver'd a River, whose being black like Ink, and disemboguing into another, disco∣lour'd the Water thereof for the space of twenty Leagues; he also saw several Vil∣lages, and at last found the Stream to be so broad, that he could not see from one Shore to the other: he took one of the Villages without any resistance, there being none but Women in the Huts, whither the Men came towards the Evening. Near another Village he espy'd seven Heads sticking upon Poles, from whence the Pro∣vince receiv'd the Denomination 
De las Picotas,
 from whence ran several pav'd Ways, on each side planted with Trees, into the Countrey; where Landing, he furnish'd himself with 
Maiz,
 Turtles, Geese, and Parrots, and at 
Can
 Island took an 
American
 Prisoner, who inform'd him, that he was in the 
Amazones
 Jurisdiction, and that up in the Countrey liv'd a People not unlike the 
Spaniards,
 amongst whom were two white Women, brought thither up the River by a Lord. Going farther he saw divers Villages on each side of him, and at last Landing in a little Town, he found plenty of Oats, Liquor made of Oats, Cotton, Linnen, a Temple hung round about with Arms, and two Episcopal Miters of divers colours. Near a Pro∣montory jutting out into the River, the Tide went so strong, that he was not able to Land; upon the Point stood several fair Buildings, where were also white Women, of a big stature, with long Hair, who animated the Men to fight. This Countrey, which extends it self a hundred and fifty Leagues along the Shore, with Hills, Pasture-Grounds, and Champain, and well inhabited, being discover'd on 
St. John
's Day, was call'd 
The Province De San Juan;
 which leaving, he came to seve∣ral Isles, the biggest whereof extended fifty Leagues in length, all of them stand∣ing on high Ground, pleasant, and full of People, who in Boats, by them call'd 
Periagues,
 valiantly Engag'd with the 
Spaniards;
 but one of them not long after be∣ing taken Prisoner, inform'd them, that the 
Amazones
 dwelt in Stone Houses, Wall'd Towns, had plenty of Silver and Gold, and four stately Temples enrich'd with Plates, Dedicated to the Sun. But 
Orellana
 Sailing a hundred Leagues farther, along a Coast belonging to the Lord of 
Caripuna,
 according to the Prisoners Relation, the Inhabitants hereabouts shot abundance of poyson'd Arrows at the 
Spaniards,
 but they made a shift to escape them, and Sailing within sight of Land into the Bay







view


ARX NASSOVII.






of 
Paria,
 they came to an Anchor before the Island 
Cubugua,
 Anno 1541. after they had been eight hundred Leagues.


Orellana
 informing the 
Spanish
 Court of his Adventures, desir'd the chief Com∣mand of the Province of the 
Amazones,
 which after earnest Sollicitations he ob∣tain'd, and accordingly setting Sail from 
St. Lucar,
 he went to the Island 
Teneriff
 with three Ships and five hundred Men, where he stay'd three Moneths, and two on 
Cape de Verd.
 On 
Teneriff
 several of his Men ran from him, and on 
Cape de Verd
 he bury'd ninety eight, and left fifty sick behind him; yet he Steer'd to 
Brasile,
 where, meeting with contrary Winds, he had undoubtedly perish'd for lack of Water, if the great Showers of Rain had not supply'd his Wants, one of his Ships carrying seventy Men and eleven Horses, was never heard of, with the other two he Sail'd by 
Baxos de San Roque,
 and from thence a hundred Leagues Northwardly be∣yond 
Maragnan,
 where a great way off at Sea they found fresh Water, in which 
Orellano
 Steering, got between the Isles into the River 
De las Amazones,
 where he Barter'd for Provisions, Sail'd two Leagues up the River, and came to an Anchor before a few Huts, but slenderly stor'd with Provisions, where he spent three Moneths in breaking up one of his Ships, and building a Ketch. In the mean time fifty seven of his Seamen dy'd. Sailing twenty Leagues farther, he lost his best Ship; whereupon he gave order to build a Barque of the Wreck. Thus he spent thirty days in vain to find the fore mention'd Arm of the River 
Amazones:
 the Barque being finish'd in ten Weeks, and going beyond the Isles 
Maribique
 and 
Con∣tan,
 found the three great Rivers to disembogue into the River 
Amazones,
 which there was twelve Leagues broad; but wanting Provisions, and the Men being too weak to go farther, they came back to the fruitful Island 
Comao,
 where a hundred 
Spani∣ards
 setled themselves, the rest going down with the Barque to find out 
Orellana,
 who, as his Wife inform'd them, dy'd with Grief.


The 
English
 and 
Netherlanders,
 who Sail'd hither after the 
Spaniards
 left off, ascribe a Breadth of fifty or sixty Leagues to the Mouth of the 
Amazone
 River, which dis∣charges its Water with such force into the Northern Ocean, that it keeps its colour and taste above thirty Leagues, according to the ocular testimony of Captain 
Har∣court.
 The Western Point, by the 
Netherlanders
 call'd 
The North Cape,
 runs with a long Slip of low Land into the Sea, into which more North-Westerly fall the Streams 
Taponnowyny, Arowary, Arykary, Cassepouri,
 and 
Wiapoca;
 some of them wash great Wildernesses full of Trees; others glide between pleasant Meadows.


Eighty Leagues up the 
Amazone
 River the 
Vlussingers
 have built a Fort call'd 
Nassaw,
 on the narrow Island 
Cogemines,
 which is twenty Leagues long, and separa∣ted from the Shore by a Creek, and seven Leagues farther, on another Isle, the Fort 
Orange;
 from which two Forts they Trade with the Natives, 
Arowaccas
 and 
Apehous,
 bartering 
European
 Trifles for Tobacco, Cotton, Sugar, Gums, and several Tinctures.


 Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 Anno 1595. sending Captain 
Fisher
 from 
Wiapoco
 to 
Leonard Ragapo,
 some years before Baptiz'd in 
England,
 and then Governor of the Province 
Cooshebery,
 lying between the 
Amazone
 River and 
Wapoco,
 he receiv'd 
Fisher
 very ci∣villy, and conducted him fifty Leagues up into the Countrey, to the Mountain 
Cowob,
 on whose top is a deep Pool, full of well tasted Fish, and surrounded with the glittering Stones 
Topaz;
 which 
Raleigh
 took the more notice of, because the same Ground in the 
East-Indies
 where these Stones are found, incloses also Dia∣monds. Moreover, the Province 
Cooshebery
 rises with pleasant Hills, but consists most in delightful Fields and Woods.


The River 
Arocawo,
 falling into the Inlet 
Wiapoco,
 disembogues also with the

same between the Capes 
Orange
 and 
Comariboo,
 into the Northern Ocean.


Most of the Rivers in 
Guiana
 lie full of Isles, and cannot be Navigated far, by reason of the great Water-falls.


The 
Yayos,
 who inhabit on the Banks of the fore-mention'd River, are People of a good Disposition, and go naked: they catch Fish after a strange manner; for they onely throw the strong smelling Wood 
Ayaw
 in the Water, which works so upon the Fish, that they suffer themselves to be caught with the Hand. The well-known 
American
 Root 
Cassavi
 serves them for Bread, being bak'd in round Cakes on hot Stones: of the Cakes they also make the Liquor 
Perrinoe,
 which tastes al∣most like stale Beer, and is prepar'd by old Women and little Children, which chew the 
Cassavi,
 and spit the same into a Pot full of Water, which having stood a while, they strain the same through a Cloth, and set it a working with Potato-Roots.


They are troubled with no Vermine, not so much as the little Fleas 
Niquas,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Chigos,
 which creep in between the Nails.


On the Sea-Coast are many Tortoises, whose Flesh is of a delicious taste, but heavy to digest.


Sheep and Oxen will not thrive here, but Swine would thrive exceedingly, if their Dugs were not bit off in the Night by the Bats.


The River 
Wiapoco
 hath many dangerous Water-falls, the one much higher than the other; a little way beyond the first of them the Stream 
Army
 falls into 
Wiapoco.


Three days Journey Westerly dwell the 
Marashewaccas,
 whose Ears hang down on their Shoulders; they worship for their Deity, an Image representing a Man, who sitting flat on the Ground, with his Legs stretch'd out, leans with his Elbows on his Knees, and holding up his Hands, gapes and stares up towards Heaven.


North-West from 
Wiapoco
 rises the Mountain 
Gomeribo,
 which produces 
Maiz,
 Tobacco, Cotton-Trees, and Vines.


In the same place the Creek 
Wainary
 runs Westwardly with fresh Water a days Journey into the Countrey; and from the said Creek a high Mountain, fit for the production of Sugar and Tobacco, extends it self to the River 
Apurwaca,
 where the 
Wiopocaries
 inhabit a great Tract of Land.


North-West from 
Wiapoco
 flows the River 
Aperwacque,
 whose mountainous Shores bear 
Brasile
 Wood and wild Cinamon. The Stream it self takes its original out of a large Lake, in the middle whereof lies a three-corner'd Isle. South-East from the Lake dwell the 
Harrithiahans,
 beyond whose Countrey are the Rivers 
Cauwo, Wia,
 and 
Cajani.
 On the Banks of the first dwelt, 
Anno
 1596. according to the Relation of 
Laurence Keymis,
 a People call'd 
Jaos,
 driven by the 
Spaniards
 from 
Moruga,
 and who formerly possess'd the greatest part of 
Guiana;
 they distinguish themselves from other People, by pricking their Faces full of Holes with the Tooth of a Beast not unlike a Rat: But at present, the 
Jaos
 being departed from hence, the Countrey lies desolate.


The 
Wia,
 which springs a great way up in the Countrey, hath a wide Mouth, and near several Islands convenient Harbors: The biggest of the Isles, inhabited by the 
Shebaios,
 is full of Provisions, 
viz.
 Fowl, Fish, excellent Fruit, wild Hogs, and other Beasts.


The triangular Isles, lying more Westerly, are also very fruitful, but not com∣parable to 
Gowatery.
 So far as the Coast extends it self with high Mountains, it is overgrown with 
Brasile
 Wood, but the lower Grounds produce Cotton, Pepper, Silk, Balsam, and the Root 
Wiapassa,
 tasting like Ginger, and exceeding good against a Lask, or the Head-ache.




Before the Mouth of 
Cajani
 appears the high Island 
Mattoory,
 surrounded by the lesser Isles 
Sannawony, Epenesari,
 and 
Eponeregemerae.


Between the Rivers 
Cajani
 and 
Maccaria,
 lies the low Island 
Muccumbro,
 out of whose Center rise two Mountains, and which is inhabited, as the Main Coast by 
Caribbeeans,
 whose General 
Arrawicary
 shew'd great friendship to the 
Netherlanders:
 They observe no certain Laws for Government; Adultery and Murder they punish with Death; they are very tyrannical towards their Wives, who for the least act of incivility have their Brains beat out; they esteem one another according to the number of their Wives, the eldest of which performs all Houshold-Offices.


The 
Caribbeeans
 are accounted to have been the first Inhabitants of this Coun∣trey, for the 
Jaos, Sappaios, Arowaccas,
 and 
Paragotos,
 were driven hither by the 
Spa∣niards
 from 
Trinidad
 or 
Oronoque.


The wild 
Caribbeeans
 live farther up into the Countrey, and often fall with great rage upon the other; but since the 
Netherlanders
 have furnish'd them with Arms, they have not been so much molested by them.


Beyond 
Macavia
 lies the River 
Caurora,
 which is very narrow and deep;
 and next in order the Rivers 
Manamonary, Sinamary, Cunanama, Juraca, Mawary, Amana,
 and 
Ma∣rawyny,
 full of Isles, and four Leagues broad at the Mouth; along the Shore grow little Trees, whose Leaves wither as soon as touch'd by Mankind, but revives again within half an hour.


Next follow the Rivers 
Sorrenam, Sorrenamme, Copanama, Marateca,
 and 
Curetiny,
 where the 
Netherlanders,
 by virtue of a Patent granted by the 
States General,
 drove a Trade for several years.


Somewhat farther the 
Berbice, Apari, Maycawini, Mabeyca, Mirara
 and 
Essekebe,
 dis∣charge their Waters into the Ocean, twenty days Journey from their Spring-Head, where a great Lake (by the 
Jaos
 call'd 
The Roponowini,
 and by the 
Caribbeeans, Parime
) spreads it self a great way; and on its Northern Shore hath the Town 
Manoa.


Along the River 
Essebeke
 is an excellent sort of Wood, the Dye call'd 
Orellano,
 and abundance of 
Cassavi:
 In the Mouth of the River also lies the Isle 
Ottoma.


Lastly, between 
Essebeke
 and the great River 
Orinoque,
 glide the lesser Streams 
Iwapoi, Pauroma, Gayni, Moruga, Ammacoura,
 and 
Parima,
 before which lie several nameless Isles.


Christopher Columbus,
 in his third Voyage to the 
West-Indies,
 discover'd the great Island 
Trinidad,
 where before the Mouth of the Bay 
Vallena
 he was in great danger, as also the Ship Commanded by 
Alonso de Ojeda,
 by reason of the Waves, with which the great River 
Yuyapar,
 otherwise call'd 
Orinoque,
 coming out of the High-lands of 
Paria,
 falls into the Sea, which made him call the said Mouth 
Bocca del Drago;
 so that 
Columbus,
 Anno 1599. discover'd the Main Coast of 
America
 to the Northward of 
Guiana,
 as far as the Promontory 
De la Vela,
 before 
Americus Vesputius;
 whither 
Diego de Ordas
 Steer'd with three Ships, Mann'd with four hundred 
Castilians,
 in the Year 1231. and before 
Guiana
 took four 
Caribbeeans
 Prisoners in a 
Canoo,
 and finding an Emerauld about them as big as a Man's Hand, they inform'd him, that up the River was a Rock all of such Stones, and a Mountain on which grew high Trees, yielding store of Myrrh; but the strong contrary Tides and Water-falls prevented 
Ordas
 from going thither; and being troubled at the loss of one of his Ships, he ran along the Shore to 
Paria,
 and took the Fort which 
Antonio Sedenno,
 Governor of 
Trinidad,
 had cast up there, and left the Command thereof to 
Juan Gonsalvez, Ordas
 pretending that 
Sedenno
 had built it contrary to the Emperor's Order, and that he had made Slaves of the Natives. 
Martin Jannez Tafur
 stay'd in the conquer'd Fort according to 
Ordas
 his appointment, who went up the River 
Orinoque
 not

without great hardship; for his Provisions were not onely short, but he was tor∣mented in the Day by the 
Muschitoes,
 and in the Night by the Bats; at last coming to a Village Commanded by 
Viapari,
 he was kindly Entertain'd, which made 
Ordas
 contrary to the will of his Men, who would willingly have gone farther into the Countrey, stay there all the Winter; but as soon as the rainy Moneths were over, 
Ordas
 went farther up the River 
Orinoque,
 where his Ship was stav'd against a sandy Shelf, which forc'd him with two hundred Foot and forty Horse, to travel along the Shore, where he was much scanted of Provisions, and for forty days together met none but a few poor wild Fishermen, and at last stopt at an unknown River, which fell into the 
Orinoque.
 The 
Guianian
 Guide which 
Viapari
 had given 
Ordas,
 advis'd him to go along the Shore of the new River, because it would lead them to a well Cloth'd and rich People: But 
Ordas
 went along by the River 
Oronoque
 till he came where the Water falling from the Mountains makes it so terrible rough, that 
Ordas
 his Vessels, which were Toed along, were not able to be got any farther, so that after two hundred Leagues advance, he was necessitated, by reason of the fore-mention'd Water-falls, to go aboard and Sail down the Stream: His Men be∣ing weary'd with so troublesom a Journey, forsook him on the Island 
Cubagua,
 which made him return over 
Hispaniola
 to 
Spain,
 where not long after he dy'd with Grief.


This unsuccessful Expedition of 
Ordas
 no way daunted 
Hieronimo Ortall
 from pro∣secuting the same Design; for setting Sail from 
St. Lucas,
 Anno 1533. to the Fort which 
Ordas
 had taken from 
Juan Gonsalves,
 he Steer'd from thence over to 
Cubagua,
 to fetch some Men, and sent the Lieutenant 
Alonso Herrera
 with five Ketches, carry∣ing two hundred Men, the same way which 
Ordas
 had been. 
Herrera
 coming to the fore-mention'd Water-falls where 
Ordas
 return'd, caus'd his Vessels to be unladen, then Toed them by meer force over the Water-falls, where he discover'd plain Fields without any Inhabitants, extending themselves to the Mouth of the River 
Meta,
 where he quitted his Vessels, and with no small trouble got over Morasses and Pools to the fruitful Countrey of the 
Xaguas,
 a People both cruel and valiant; whom after a sharp Conflict vanquishing, he became Master of their Village, in which he found plenty of Provisions, as also in another neighboring Town, where his tir'd, and almost starv'd Army began to take Breath, being exceedingly re∣fresh'd with the delicious Meat of a sort of wild Dogs, which were here in great abundance. Having spent the Winter Season here, they were often set upon by the 
Caribbeeans,
 by whose poyson'd Arrows several of them being shot, dy'd Di∣stracted, and amongst the rest 
Herrera
 himself; after which his Successor 
Alvaro Or∣das
 return'd to the Vessels, which were left at the Mouth of the River 
Meta,
 from whence he Sail'd back without any other success, the Design being to find out the Golden City 
Manoa,
 on the Banks of the great Lake 
Parime.


Not long after 
Peter Hermandez de Serpa
 undertook the same Work with three hundred 
Spaniards,
 several 
Brasilians
 and 
Negro's;
 but before he could reach the Ri∣ver 
Orinoque,
 he was destroy'd by the salvage People 
Wikiri,
 eighteen of his Men onely escaping to bring the news of this sad Disaster.


Peter de Orsua
 following the footsteps of 
Gonsalvo Pizarro,
 went to seek for Gold in 
Guiana;
 but being kill'd by 
Lopes Agira
 near the 
Amazone
 River, that Expedition also prov'd fruitless.


With the same desire of finding Gold in 
Guiana, Antonio Berreo
 went from 
New Granada
 thither; but being taken by Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 was interrupted in his Design; however, he gave him an Account of his Adventures, so far as he had gone, 
viz.
 That he went to find out a Way along the River 
Cassanor,
 between 
New Granada


and 
New Guiana,
 went from 
Cassanor
 to the Stream 
Meta,
 and from thence to 
Ori∣noque,
 where he was in great danger, by reason of sharp Rocks, over which the Stream flowing, washes several Isles; That he spent a whole year before he came to the utmost Borders of 
Amapaia;
 near which he lost several of his Barques, and on the Shore, not onely divers Horses, but also many of his Men, who either dy'd of hardship, or were kill'd by the Natives with poysonous Arrows, so that sixty of his Men were kill'd in the Countrey of 
Amapaia,
 which extends along the River 
Orinoque,
 besides a great many that dy'd there by drinking the Water, which was full of poysonous Animals, and glided over a slimy and muddy Ground, which made it thick and troubled: Six Moneths he stay'd in the Countrey 
Amapaia,
 where he made Peace with the Inhabitants of 
Anebas,
 who gave him ten curious Images of massie Gold. The River 
Orinoque
 is about four Leagues broad here, and about seven hundred Miles long, before it fall into the Ocean, and is every where en∣rich'd with the Waters of many Rivers which fall into it from the North and South: He added moreover, that he endeavor'd to go down Southerly to 
Guiana,
 but was prevented by steep Mountains, and therefore went on Easterly till he came to the Countrey 
Emeria,
 where he found a courteous People, and plenty of Provisions; that the Governor of 
Caripana,
 being about a hundred years of age, had a long time Convers'd with the 
Christians
 on the Islands 
Trinidad
 and 
Margareta,
 and learn'd a Form of Civil Government; that Sailing down the River 
Orinoque
 between many Isles lying at the Mouth of the River to 
Trinidad,
 and from thence to 
Margareta,
 he took sixty Men into his Service; but that he himself, being tir'd with so great a Journey, and staying to refresh himself at 
Trinidad,
 fell into the hands of another Party of the 
English;
 that before he was taken he sent several of his Men to 
Caripana,
 to find the King of 
Morequito,
 who three years before had been with abundance of Gold at 
Cumana
 and 
Margareta,
 and inform'd a 
Spaniard
 call'd 
Vides
 so much concerning the Golden Countrey 
Guiana,
 that he obtain'd a Patent at the 
Spanish
 Court to discover 
Guiana;
 but that 
Vides,
 jealous that he might be there before him, had not onely incens'd 
Morequito
 against him, but so instructed him, that he suffer'd his Men to pass through the Countrey to fetch Gold from the City 
Manoa,
 and as they return'd, set upon them and slew them on the Borders of 
Aro∣maia,
 together with a Monk that was in their Company, one Man onely escaping; by whom being inform'd of the Murder, he immediately sent divers Soldiers to take Revenge of 
Morequito,
 who flying to the Governor 
Vides,
 was nevertheless, up∣on his demanding him in the King's Name, deliver'd, to him; and notwithstand∣ing he proffer'd a great Sum of Money for his Ransom, was cruelly put to Death; but not satisfi'd with that Revenge, he over-run all the Countrey of 
Aromaia,
 took 
Morequito
's Uncle, call'd 
Topiawari,
 Prisoner, who bought his Life for a hundred Plates of Gold, and some Precious Stones; That Listing many Men in 
Spain
 for the Gold which he sent thither, he Row'd with Barques up the Rivers 
Barema, Pat∣troma,
 and 
Dessequebe,
 where he barter'd Trifles for Men, Women, and Children, of whom he made great Sums of Money on the Island 
Margareta.


This Information which Sir 
Walter Raleigh
 got from his Prisoner 
Berreo,
 made him desirous to make an Expedition to 
Guiana;
 to which purpose he sent Captain 
George Gifford
 with a Ketch and a Barque to the River 
Capuri,
 where the Water fell before the Vessels could get beyond the Sands in the Mouth of the River.


John Douglas
 had better success, being likewise sent out by Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 for he with his Boats found that 
Orinoque
 had nine Arms to the North Sea, and seven to the South, which embrace divers Isles, of which those on the right side are call'd 
Pallamos,
 and those on the left, 
Horotomaca.
 The Mouth of the River gapes a hun∣dred

Leagues. On the fore-mention'd-Isles dwell the 
Titiriras,
 a modest People, who speak a bald Language; in the Summer they live under the open Skie upon the bare Earth, and in the Winter (being there between 
May
 and 
September
) on the tops of the Trees, because during that time the River 
Orinoque
 rising thirty Foot higher, overflows all the Isles thereabouts, which are very high and mountainous. But 
Raleigh
 himself Rowing up the River 
Amana,
 endur'd great hardship, his Men being most of them sweltred with the Heat, and great want of Provisions; and had not their 
Indian
 Pilot shew'd them another Stream much easier to Navigate, he would have been forc'd to return successless; but being stor'd with Provision out of a Village built along the Shore, he chased four 
Canoos,
 of which he took one, and also an 
Arwaccas,
 which in fifteen days time brought him into the River 
Orinoque,
 where he saw the high Mountains of 
Guiana;
 afterwards Anchoring before a fair sandy Bank, which lay near the Mouth of three Rivers, he took abundance of Tortoises, and was furnish'd with plenty of all sorts of Provisions, sent him from the Governor 
Toparimaca,
 who inhabited the pleasant Village 
Arowocay,
 built on a little Hill, surrounded with delightful Gardens, and Fields till'd by the 
Negro's;
 who accommodating 
Raleigh
 with an experienc'd Pilot, he set Sail with a fresh Easterly Wind, and Westward saw the Isles 
Assapana,
 twenty five Leagues long, and six broad, and 
Iwana,
 of the same bigness. The River 
Orinoque
 hath here thirty Leagues in breadth, and receives the Rivers 
Arrawopana
 and 
Europa:
 He Sail'd next by the Isles 
Ocaywita
 and 
Putayma,
 opposite to which on the Main Land appears the Mountain 
Oecope,
 whose top reacheth the Clouds; on the right side a Plain Coun∣trey discover'd it self a vast way, which the Pilot said was call'd 
The Plain of Sayma,
 extending Northerly a hundred and twenty Leagues to 
Cumana
 and 
Caracas,
 inha∣bited by four sorts of People, 
viz.
 the 
Saymas, Assaways, Wikeries,
 and 
Aroras;
 which last, being a Coal-black People, us'd poyson'd Arrows. 
Raleigh
 passing between the two Mountains 
Aroami
 and 
Aio,
 came to an Anchor near the Island 
Murscolima,
 and from thence into the Haven 
Morequito,
 where the King 
Topiawari,
 a hundred and ten years of age, brought all sorts of Fruit, Poultrey, Fish and Flesh, and gave him an Account of the Condition of 
Guiana, viz.
 That the whole Countrey from the Moun∣tains 
Waccarima
 to 
Emeria,
 bore the Name of 
Guiana,
 the Inhabitants calling themselves 
Orinoque Poni;
 on the other side of the said Mountains lies the spacious Valley 
Amariocapana;
 where the 
Guianiatas
 reside. Southerly the 
Oreiones
 and 
Epuremei,
 who coming out of a strange Countrey, have destroy'd the ancient Inhabitants, lea∣ving onely the 
Awaaawaqueri
 and 
Cassipagoios.
 The 
Epuremei
 built the stately City 
Ma∣curewarai
 there. But 
Raleigh
 going on his Journey saw the Island 
Caiama,
 and came to the Mouth of the River 
Caroli,
 whose strong Current he was not able to stem, wherefore he desir'd Aid from 
Wanuretona,
 Governor of 
Canuria,
 who furnish'd him with Provisions, and Men to Toe him up the fore-mention'd Stream; and inform'd him that the River 
Caroli,
 which sprung out of the Lake 
Cassipa,
 was inhabited on one side by the 
Iwarawakeri,
 and the Lake 
Cassipa
 by three powerful People, 
viz.
 the 
Cassiapagotos, Eparagotos
 and 
Arawogotos,
 all mortal Enemies to the 
Spaniards:
 where∣upon 
Raleigh
 sent some of his Men thither, who return'd with great hopes of find∣ing rich Gold-Mines. The fore-mention'd Lake also produces the Rivers 
Aroi, Atoica,
 and 
Caora,
 near which dwell the 
Ewaipanoma,
 who have neither Necks nor Chins, but their Mouthes just upon their Shoulders. Towards the North the Ri∣ver 
Cari
 falls into the 
Orinoque,
 and on the West the Stream 
Limo;
 between both which the 
Cannibals
 reside, whose Metropolis call'd 
Acamacari
 is very famous for their strange way of Trading, for there the Women are brought to Market, and bought by the 
Arwaccas:
 But because great Showers of Rain fell daily, and the

Stream 
Caroli
 glided down wards with extraordinary force, 
Raleigh
 return'd to 
More∣quito;
 from whence 
Putima,
 King of 
Warapana,
 conducted him to a rich Golden Mountain in his Countrey, and along the Rivers 
Mana, Oiana,
 and 
Cumaca,
 to the place where the 
Orinoque
 divides it self into three excellent Streams, the chiefest whereof, call'd 
Cararoopana,
 washes the Province 
Emeria,
 out of whose Mountains the Rivers 
Waracayari, Coirama, Akaniri,
 and 
Iparoma,
 glide to the Northern Ocean; as also the 
Araturi, Amacura, Barima, Wana, Morooca, Paroma,
 and 
Wyni,
 all Branches of the River 
Orinoque:
 from whence 
Raleigh
 return'd home to 
England.


Not long after he sent 
Laurence Keymes
 and 
Thomas Masham
 back to 
Guiana: Keymes
 found out all the Rivers between the 
Amazones
 and the 
Orinoque,
 and 
Masham
 the Stream 
Wiapoco;
 from whence both return'd without any farther success.


After this the Business lay still for a while, in regard Sir 
Walter Raleigh
 being (to∣gether with 
Grey, Cobham,
 and the 
Romish
 Priests, 
Watson
 and 
Clark
) found guilty of High Treason, was Condemn'd to die; but being Repriev'd by the King, was kept a Prisoner in the 
Tower
 for the space of fourteen years; during which time he wrote a Description of 
Guiana;
 which the King perusing, was so well pleas'd with it, espe∣cially since he undertook to make out by several Reasons, that 
England
 might make it self Master of divers Gold-Mines there, to which 
Spain
 could lay no manner of Claim, that he discharg'd him out of Prison,
 and permitted him to make a second Expedition: Whereupon with ten Ships, 
Anno
 1617. he set Sail for 
Guiana
 again; being toss'd with divers Storms, he at last came with five Sail to the River 
Calliana,
 where he fell dangerously sick, and therefore sent Captain 
Keymes
 with five Sail to the River 
Orinoque,
 to conduct the Men to the Gold-Mines; each Ship carrying fifty Men, and the other Captains being 
Parker, North, Thornap,
 and Sir 
Walter Ra∣leigh
's Son. The 
Spaniards
 having a Garrison at 
Orinoque,
 fir'd very fiercely at the 
English,
 who suffer'd great damage, and amongst divers others, Captain 
Raleigh
 him∣self was slain, whilest the other five Sail lay near the Island 
Trinidad,
 under 
John Pennington
's Command, who daily fear'd the 
Spanish
 Fleet. But 
Keymes
 found it very difficult to Land in 
Orinoque,
 by reason of the Banks along the Shore, which 
Diego de Palameque
 from 
Puerto Rico
 kept strongly guarded; therefore going to an even Shore with intention to Land, he was so sharply receiv'd by a Body of 
Spanish
 Musquetteers, that divers of his Men were mortally wounded; yet breaking in amongst them, he went towards the Gold-Mines, to which the Way led through a Wood where the 
Spaniards
 lay in Ambuscade; but he judg'd himself too weak to do any good upon the Mines, one of which belong'd to 
Peter Rodrigo de Parama,
 a second to 
Herviano Frontino,
 and the third to 
Francisco Fashardo:
 The 
English
 also were fearful, by reason of the 
Spaniards
 Cruelties, who not long before had flay'd several Merchants alive;
 so that 
Keymes
 contented himself with pillaging and burn∣ing the Town 
St. Thomas,
 which the 
Spaniards
 had deserted. Soon after which Captain 
Whitby
 ran away with a Ship from the Fleet, whilest 
Keymes
 return'd back to 
Raleigh,
 who laid several things to his Charge concerning the unnecessary Ex∣pence and shame of such an unsuccessful Voyage; which so wrought upon 
Keymes,
 that he offer'd to lay violent hands on himself in his Cabbin. At length 
Raleigh
 returning to 
London,
 was accus'd by the 
Spanish
 Ambassador 
Gundamor
 for the burn∣ing 
St. Thomas,
 urging that his Master resented it so ill, that he threatned to wage a War with 
England
 if 
Raleigh
 was not Executed; who notwithstanding he alledg'd, That the 
Spaniards
 shew'd the first Acts of Hostility against the 
English,
 who onely defended themselves; and that 
St. Thomas
 was burnt without his knowledge or Order; and that 
Keymes
 had not observ'd his Command in the discovering of the Gold-Mines, (which Apologies were generally look'd upon as real Truths) yet

the King esteeming the Peace with 
Spain
 of more value than one Man's Life, without taking notice of 
Gundemor
's Accusations, commanded that the Sentence formerly pass'd on him for Treason should be Executed, and accordingly in the six∣tieth year of his Age he was Beheaded, discovering himself, by his Christian Beha∣vior and Profession at his Death, to be a far other kind of Person than what the World had censur'd him to be.


Since this last Expedition of Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 we find not that there hath been any great Resort or Trade unto this Countrey, except by a few 
Netherland
 Mer∣chants, who have yearly sent eight or nine Ships to the River 
Orinoque
 for To∣bacco.


As for the Air or Climate of 
Guiana,
 it is very differing, for about the 
Amazone
 River, dry Weather begins about 
August,
 and the windy and rainy Season about 
February;
 but Westward towards 
Orinoque,
 the Summer takes beginning in 
October,
 and the Winter in 
April;
 the Days and Nights are almost of an equal length, and the difference of Heat and Cold is but little.


Burning-Feavers, Dropsie, and the 
Jawnes,
 destroy many People here; which last is not unlike the 
POX,
 and proceeds from carnal Copulation with the 
Guianian
 Women, who are naturally subject to this Disease.


The Inhabitants are divided into several sorts, the chiefest whereof being the 
Caribbees
 go naked, covering onely their Privities with a Lappet. The Women, though yellow, are very comely; and both Men and Women paint their Bodies with 
Netto,
 which grows on little Trees in Cods: They make Holes through their Noses, Lips and Ears, and hang Glass, Bells, pieces of Copper, or any other Trifles that they get from the 
English
 and 
Netherlanders,
 in them: About their Necks, Arms and Legs, they wear Strings of Beads, or Cockle-shells.


Their Houses with low Roofs, serve them onely to sleep in the Night upon Cotton Hammocks, for in the day-time they sit under high Arch'd open places, that the Wind may blow full upon them. Their Houshold-stuff consists of Earthen Pots and Dishes neatly painted. They live in Tribes or Families together in a Town, which is Govern'd by the eldest of them; and their 
Militia
 is Commanded by one that is able to endure most Stripes with Switches without any shew of pain. The chiefest of their Families have commonly three or four Wives, whereas others are contented with one. The Men seldom do any toilsom Work, but make their Wives do all, insomuch that as soon as a Woman is Deliver'd of a Child, she must immediately go about her usual Employment, whilest her Husband lies lozelling out his Moneth on a Hammock.


Their Language sounds not unpleasantly, but is hard to learn, because many words differ but little in the pronunciation, and yet have quite another signi∣fication.


When they march into the Field against their Enemies, then the General sends a Stick to all the Villages under his Jurisdiction, on which are cut so many Notches as there are Days appointed before he intends to set forth, which they cut out again as the Days expire, and on the last they repair to the appointed place.


A not much unlike Custom they observe in all Promises and Bargains; for they give one another as many Sticks as they desire Days to perform the same in, and so throw away every day one, till they have onely one remaining, and then they begin to think of performing their Promise or Bargain.


They know no word whereby to express any greater number than Ten; Twenty they express by laying their ten Fingers on their Toes, and all that ex∣ceeds Twenty, they compare to the Hairs of their Head, crying 
Ounsa awara.




Some of the painted 
Canoos
 made of the Trunks of Trees, will carry five or six Tuns.


In their Wars they use Bowes, poyson'd Arrows, short Truncheons of speckled Wood, and Shields full of carv'd Images, and Fight without any Order. They go upon no Design but in the Night, and upon certain advantages. All Women and Children which they take Prisoners, are sold for Slaves, but the Men are cruelly put to death.


There is but little of Religion that can be ascrib'd to these People, onely that some shew Reverence to the Sun and Moon, which they believe are both living Creatures; but they make no Offerings to them.


Their Funeral-Feasts for great Persons are strangely kept, 
viz.
 all the Men ma∣king themselves Drunk with the Liquor 
Parranoro,
 Dance three or four days one after another, and he that drinks most, and is worst Drunk, gains the greatest Ho∣nor, whilest the Women lament and mourn for the Deceased.


Their Priests, call'd 
Peeaios,
 are in great esteem amongst them, because they pre∣tend that they Converse with the Spirits 
Wattipa
 and 
Yarakin,
 which the 
Guianians
 ex∣ceedingly fear, apprehending themselves often beaten black and blue by them.


The 
Peeaios
 also profess themselves to be Chirurgeons and Doctors, but if they cure not their Patients, they go in danger of their Lives, unless they speedily get away.


They burn their dead Bodies, together with those things the Deceased affected most in his Life-time. A Prince or Governor also hath his Slaves put to to death at the time when he is burn'd, that they may serve him in the other World.


The 
Cassavi
-Root press'd, boyl'd with Pepper, dry'd and bak'd on hot Stones, serves the Natives for Bread.


Each Grain that is Sow'n here produces in Harvest above fifteen hundred.


Their Corn makes wholsom and well tasted Beer, call'd 
Passiaw,
 and of their stamp'd 
Cassavi
 they make the Liquor 
Parranow.


In hollow Trees, and Caves under Ground, they find abundance of Honey; and their Vines afford them excellent Grapes twice a year.


No Plant is ever seen here without either Leaf, Blossom, or Fruit, except the 
European
 Apple-Tree, which never changes its nature, but blossoms and bears Fruit at the same time of the year as in 
Europe.


The wild Hogs 
Pokkiero,
 whose Navels grow on their Backs; and the 
Pangio,
 not unlike our Swine, afford the Inhabitants excellent Food.


Here are also Water-hogs, of a very delicious taste; but because they are very apprehensive, and dive at the least noise, they are seldom taken.


The Woods are full of Baboons and Apes, as also the sloththful Beast 
Ai.


The Hares here, being of a brown Colour, with white Specks, and the red Rab∣bets, are accounted great Delicacies.


There is no Countrey in 
America,
 which breeds greater 
Armadillo's
 than 
Guiana,
 some of them weighing eighty Pound.


Here are also Bears, which live on nothing but Pismires; they have long hairy Tails, with which they cover their Bodies in rainy Weather; they put their Tongues a Foot deep into the Pismires Nests, and so pulls them out.


The Tygers here are either black, spotted, or red; but the black exceed the other in cruelty, yet are seldom seen near inhabited places; the spotted and red devour abundance of Cattel, but will seldom set upon a Man, especially in the day-time.


The Woods are also full of Land-Turtles, which the Inhabitants take, and keep till they have occasion to make use of their Flesh.




The Eagles that are here with their Claws, Engage with those that go about to take them.


The Catamountains make such an exceeding noise at a certain hour, both in the Night and in the Day, that it is heard two Leagues off.


The 
Marmozets,
 a little Beast, biting the Catamountains and Apes in the Ears, forces them to leap from one Tree to another.


The black Beast 
Quotto
 hath a Face like an old Woman, and hanging by the Tail, swings from one Tree to another.


The 
Cuscary
 is a brown four-footed Creature, about the bigness of a little Dog, but hath the shape of a Lyon.


Moreover,
Guiana
 produces Teal, Geese, Crains, Phesants, Partridges, Pigeons, Marlins, Snipes, Falcons, Plovers, and Parrots of all sorts, besides many other strange Fowls; amongst which the chiefest are a sort whose Feathers glitter like Scarlet, and walk along in Rank and Fyle like Soldiers.


The Sea produces abundance of Turbots,
 Soals, Thornback, yellow Salmon, Sturgeon, Black-fish, Gurnets, Crabs, and Oysters.


Amongst other Fishes, the 
Cassoorwa,
 which is somewhat bigger than an Eel, is very strange, having two Sights in each Eye, of which it always holds one above, and the other underneath the Water when it swims.


Here are also the great Fishes call'd 
Manati
 and 
Num-eel,
 by which if any part of a Man be touch'd, it immediately becomes stiff.


There are likewise divers Vermine,
 which trouble the Countrey 
Guiana,
 among which are Serpents of thirty Foot long, that come out of the Water and feed on the Land; they do little hurt, as not being poysonous: but there are many of a lesser size, whose biting is so venomous, that it causes the Flesh of a Man to rot in twenty four hours time: others there are which have forked Tails, and Tusks in the Roof of their Mouthes.


The Crocodiles here also devour abundance of Cattel.


The Scorpions, which are black, and resemble a Lobster, breed under dry Wood or Corn; their Stings are hid in their Tails, with which if any one be touch'd, he is sure to endure an intolerable pain, but without danger of losing his Life for the present, yet nothing can perfectly cure the same, except the Scorpion kill'd and laid on the Wound.


The Bats here are as big as Pigeons, and they suck the Blood of Men and Beasts so gently, that they seldom perceive the same.


The Pismires also do great mischief, especially in sandy Grounds; and likewise the 
Musketo's,
 whose Stings cause painful Swellings; but these most of all trouble them that inhabit near the Sea side on low Lands, insomuch that the Fisher-men bury themselves in the Night in Sand, leaving onely Holes to breathe at.


Frogs and Toads also make a terrible noise here, and especially after Rain.


The Soil is inferior to none in the World, for the production of Sugar; but the general Commodities of the Countrey are Flax, Cotton, Hemp, the Berry 
Annoto,
 which Dyes an excellent Orange colour, another Berry which Dyes a deep Blue, a Tree whose Leaves Dye a Red, and the Wood of another Tree whose Juice Dyes a Purple and Crimson.


Moreover, 
Guiana
 produces the Gums 
Lemnia, Barattu,
 and 
Carriman,
 which be∣ing black and prickly, smells very pleasantly, and cures the Head-ache, Bruises, Pains in the Limbs, Gouts, and green Wounds. The same operation hath the Gum 
Baratta.


Here are also good 
Sena, Bolus Armenius, Cassia-Fistula, Terra-Lemnia,
 the Berry

Kelette,
 very effectual against the Bloody-flux, the Juice of the Leaf 
Upee,
 which cures the Wounds of poyson'd Arrows, and a sort of somniferous Apples, whereof the least bite occasions a deadly Sleep.


There is also a Tree, generally growing about the Houses of the Natives, the Boughs whereof bruis'd between two Stones, and thrown into the Creeks of deep Water full of Fish, cause them to swim above Water upon their Backs.


The 
Letter
-Wood, call'd 
Pira timinere,
 turns also to a good account, much more the excellent Stones, Jasper and Porphyr.


Nor are there wanting Gold and Silver-Mines, which doubtless would yield great profit, were they open'd.


The Grain of the Countrey grows on Stalks seven Foot long, on the tops whereof hang two Ears full of Kernels as big as Pease, which ripens in four Moneths.


The Sugar-Canes, being of the bigness of a Man's Arm, and about six Foot long, are at the years end cut off, broken and press'd in a Mill; after which the Juice boyl'd in Copper Kettles to a certain Substance, is put into woodden Tun∣nels, square at the top, and narrow at bottom, with a small Hole, which is open'd as soon as the Sugar is sufficiently hardned, to let out the Syrrup; after which it is put into Hogsheads, and so Transported.


The 
Negro's
 which are brought from 
Angola
 and 
Guinee,
 are so cruelly us'd, that they oftentimes through despair destroy themselves.


The whole Countrey of 
Guiana
 is by several modern Writers methodically divi∣ded into these inferior or lesser Provinces, 1. 
Rio de las Amazones.
 2. 
Wiapoco,
 or 
Guiana,
 properly so call'd. 3. 
Orenoque;
 and 4. The Islands of 
Guiana.


Rio de las Amazones,
 or the Countrey of the 
Amazones,
 contains all that part of 
Guiana
 which lieth on both sides of the River 
Orellano,
 of a rich and good Soil, gene∣rally, abounding with all sorts of Fruits, and especially with those which the 
Americans
 call 
Totok,
 and love it extreamly, out of an opinion, they say, that it ex∣cites them to Venery, whereunto they are of themselves but too much inclin'd; and another which they call 
Pita,
 of a taste far more delicious and pleasing, and not so hurtful as the other. The Countrey was first discover'd by the fore-mention'd 
Francisco Orellana,
 a 
Spaniard
 from 
Quito,
 but it was onely by the River 
Orellana;
 and though he be credibly reported to have Sail'd no less than eighteen hundred Leagues down the Stream, and to have discover'd a rich and fair Countrey on both sides the River, well peopled with Natives, and giving in divers places no small Arguments of greater Wealth and Riches more within Land; yet such was the bad success of his second Endeavors, and likewise of those that follow'd him, as is evi∣dent from what hath been before related, that, as yet, there seems no farther Re∣port to be given, at least not of any thing special, concerning that part of the Countrey.


Wiapoco,
 or 
Guiana,
 properly so call'd, taketh up the middle part of this Province, being divided, as the other, almost into two equal parts, by the River 
Wiapoco,
 which runs through the midst of it. The Countrey on both sides of the River is very rich and fertile, and so naturally apt, both for Sugar-Canes, Cotton-Wooll, and Tobacco, that they are said to grow here (all of them very good) without Planting, or any art of Husbandry. In this Countrey likewise should be the fa∣mous 
Dorada,
 as the 
Spaniards
 call it, or 
City of Gold
 (if it could be found) with the reports and hopes whereof some of our own Nation seem to have been not a little possess'd as well as the 
Spaniards:
 nor can we much blame them; for if the Stories of it had prov'd true, it must have been one of the goodliest and fairest Cities in the World (not to speak of the Wealth.) 
Diego de Ordas,
 the 
Spaniard
 of whom we have

lately had occasion to make frequent mention of, being reported by some to have travell'd one whole day, and half another in it, before he could arrive at the King's Palace; which yet must be suppos'd to have stood but in the midst of the City. Places of less Magnificence, but more Certainty, are 1. 
Caripo,
 which was once a Colony of 
English,
 setled there by Captain 
Robert Harcourt,
 Anno 1608. upon the Banks of 
Wiapoco,
 and not far from the Mouth of it; being a place, by the advan∣tage of a Rock, which it hath on the one side of it, of great strength and very dif∣ficult access; the Air about it sound, and said to be very agreeable to 
English
 Bodies. 2. 
Gomaribo,
 Colony formerly of the 
Dutch,
 on the North-West side of the Bay of 
Wiapoco,
 but since deserted by them. 3. 
Woyemon.
 4. 
Crewinay,
 both of them Towns of the Natives, not far distant from the other.


Orinoque,
 or the third Division of this Province, comprehendeth the most Nor∣therly parts of 
Guiana,
 lying upon, or towards the Banks of this famous River: a Countrey likewise reported to be very rich, and comparable to 
Peru
 it self for hid∣den Treasure, which, they say, is not yet discover'd, onely for want of diligent and industrious searching. The Places in it already known are onely 1. 
Coniolaba,
 as they call it, which seems to be some Town of the Natives, lying a few Leagues di∣stant from the 
Orinoque,
 towards the South. 2. 
Morequito,
 a known Port or Haven-Town upon a Branch of the 
Orinoque,
 much frequented, and of great use to the 
Eng∣lish
 when they discover'd these Coasts. 3. 
Wenicapora:
 and 4. 
St. Thomas,
 the onely Town which the 
Spaniards
 hold upon this part of the Continent, situate upon the principal Channel of the 
Orinoque,
 and consisting of two hundred Families, or thereabouts: It is now a fortifi'd Place, and was taken by Sir 
Walter Raleigh,
 in that unfortunate Action of 1617. above related more at large.


The Islands that belong to, and are commonly reckon'd as parts of 
Guiana,
 are either such as lie scatter'd about the Shore of the Province, or such as are found at the Mouth, and sometime far within the Channel of those great Rivers, which em∣pty themselves at several parts of this Countrey into the Sea, 
viz. Orinoque, Wiapoco, Rio de las Amazones,
 &c. There are many of them, but of any great name or esteem, onely two, 
viz. Trinidado
 and 
Tabago,
 the Description whereof we shall here omit, as having already taken notice of them amongst the 
Sotaventi
 and 
Caribbee
 Islands.








CHAP. IX. Paria, or New Andalusia.


VVEstward of 
Guiana
 lieth the Countrey of 
Paria,
 so call'd from its chief River: It hath also the Denomination of 
New Andalusia,
 but for what resemblance with 
Andalusia
 of 
Old Spain,
 they do not tell us.


This Countrey lying as it doth, brings us back again by the Eastern Coast to the 
Isthmus
 or 
Strait,
 which, as we have often said, joyns the two parts of the Con∣tinent of 
America
 together, at least to those Countreys that lie next upon it to the South, 
viz.
 the Kingdom of 
Granada,
 &c. It hath on the East 
Guiana,
 and those Islands which lie about the Mouth of 
Orinoque;
 on the West, the Gulf or Bay of 
Venezuela,
 with some part of the new Kingdom abovesaid; on the North it is wash'd with the 
Atlantick
 Ocean; and on the South hath some Countreys yet un∣discover'd, toward the 
Andes.
 The whole consisteth partly of Continent, and

partly of Islands near adjoyning to it, and is commonly divided into five several Precincts or Parts, which are 1. 
Cumana.
 2: 
Venezuela,
 being upon the Continent. 3. 
Margareta.
 4. 
Cubagua,
 two Islands above-mention'd, famous for Pearl-fishing; and lastly, some lesser Islands.




SECT. II. Cumana.


CUmana
 is bounded Eastward with the Gulf of 
Paria
 and the River 
Orinoque;
 on the West, with 
Venezuela;
 Northward it hath the 
Atlantick;
 and on the South, those undiscover'd Countreys above mention'd; extending a∣long the Northern Ocean, over against 
Margareta,
 two hundred Leagues or more, as some say, in length, and not much less than a hundred in breadth.


The Coast of this Countrey, as well as of the Islands 
Margareta
 and 
Cabagua,
 hath formerly been much fam'd for the rich Trade of Pearls and Pearl-fishing; which failing, its principal esteem now is for an excellent Vein of Salt, which they dig here as out of a Mine, and gather it naturally made ready to their Hands, not half a Mile from the Sea side, on the back side of the Promontory or Cape, by some call'd 
Punto de Araya,
 and by others for this reason 
Cape de Salinas.


Places of chiefest consideration here, are 1. 
Cumana
 it self, a Colony of 
Spaniards
 seated on the Banks of a little River two Miles distant from the Sea, where it hath a good Harbor.


2. 
St. Jago,
 a very strong Fortress, which the 
Spaniards
 of late years have built, for the defence and security of the Salt-works against the 
Dutch,
 who began to Trade much that way, and in the Year 1622. had a Design to have made them∣selves Masters of the Place.


3. 
St. Michael de Neveri,
 another Fortress of theirs, standing upon a River bearing the same Name.


4. 
Guaniba,
 a Town of the Natives.


This Countrey of 
Cumana,
 being generally infested with terrible Crocodiles, hath a large Inlet call'd 
Cariaco,
 which flows fourteen Leagues into the Countrey.


The Men of this Countrey wear Cotton Cloaks, and anointing their Bodies with Gum, stick the same full of Feathers.


When they go to Wars, or to a general Feast, then they shave their Hair off above their Ears, pull out their Beards, and black their Teeth with a certain Herb.


Their Princes and Grandees take as many Wives as they please, and give to those of their Guests whom they intend most to oblige, their choice of the fairest of them to lie with.


Whoring is accounted no shame, except amongst Marry'd Women, who gene∣rally live very Chaste, unless their Husbands consent to their Adultery.


The Women also Hunt, Fish, Shoot, and Swim, and are diligent in Tilling their Lands, and other Houshold Affairs. Most of them have sore Eyes, occasion'd not so much (as some wrongfully suppose) by their drinking of the Water out of the Stream 
Cumana,
 but proceeding rather from their unwholsom Food, as Spiders, and the like.


Amongst the several sorts of Trees that grow here, there are some that yield a white well scented Gum, or delicious Juice like Milk, and produce a Fruit not un∣like a Mulberry, which may be boyl'd to an excellent Syrrup; the Wood also strikes Fire: There are others, whose Timber is good for Shipping.




The Soil also produces 
Cassia-Fistula,
 Roses, and other strong smelling Flowers and Herbs.


For Beasts,
 besides Lyons, Tygers, and wild Hogs, there are several strange kinds here, as the 
Cappa,
 which is bigger than an Ass, having shaggy and black Hair; it runs away from Mankind, but devours whasoever else it meets with.


The 
Aranata,
 which hath a Goats Beard, and is of the bigness of a Greyhound; it howls very dreadfully, and feeds on Fruits.


The wild Cats which breed here, leap, though great with Young, from one Tree to another.


In the Evening a Beast like a lean Dog comes to their Huts, cries like a Child, and devours all those it meets abroad; wherefore every one that goes out in the Night carries a lighted Stick with him, for this Beast dreads the sight of Fire.


The Trees give Harbor to great numbers of Parrots, and other fine Feather'd Birds.


The Bats here are very large and hurtful, sucking the Blood from Men and Beasts.


The 
Muschito's
 also do very much plague and vex the Inhabitants.


The Spiders, much bigger than those of 
Europe,
 and of divers colours, make very strong Cobwebs.


Along the Sea-Coast, and in the Rivers is plenty of delicious Fish.


Anno
 1513. two 
Dominican
 Fryers went over from 
Terra Firma
 to 
Cumana,
 where the Natives kindly Entertain'd them, till a 
Spanish
 Ship Anchoring there for the Pearl-Trade, carry'd away by violence the Governor and seventeen of his Servants; whereupon the Natives threatned, that unless their Lord was restor'd, they would put the two 
Dominicans
 to death; the 
Spaniards
 promising restauration of him in four Moneths time, inform'd the Council at 
Hispaniola
 of it, who not consenting to his Releasement, the two Monks were, according the former threatning, presently put to death. Yet after this the 
Franciscans
 and 
Dominicans
 built each of them a Cloyster in the Province of 
Chiribichi,
 where they kept friendly Correspondence with the 
Cumana's,
 till 
Anno
 1520. when 
Alonso de Ojeda
 coming to an Anchor before 
Maracapana,
 under pretence of bartering 
Maiz
 for 
Spanish
 Goods with the 
Tagarez,
 who came about fifty from the Mountains on which they liv'd, being three Leagues up in the Countrey, and brought 
Maiz
 down to the Shore, the 
Spaniards
 took thirty six of them Prisoners, and kill'd or wounded the rest: Whereupon the Gover∣nor 
Gonzales
 being complain'd unto by the neighboring Prince 
Maraguey,
 and his assistance desir'd in taking Revenge of the 
Dominicans
 and 
Franciscans,
 who had urg'd and perswaded 
Ojeda
 to the fore-mention'd Act, 
Gonzales
 hereupon made an Agreement with 
Maraguey,
 that he should destroy the Monks, whilest he himself would kill 
Ojeda,
 which they accordingly perform'd. The Council in 
St. Domingo
 inform'd hereof, immediately sent three Ships, Mann'd with three hundred Men, under the Command of 
Gonzalo de Ocampo,
 who Anchoring in the Haven of 
Mara∣capana,
 feign'd as if he came newly from 
Spain,
 and that he knew nothing of the Business between 
Ojeda
 and 
Gonzales,
 that so he might entice the Natives into his Ship, and accordingly when divers of them came aboard, the Armed 
Spani∣ards
 started from under the Decks, and hung them up at their Yard-arms, burnt the Village 
Maracapana,
 and ruin'd the Countrey far and near with Fire and Sword.


Ocampo
 also built the Town 
Toledo,
 about half a League farther into the Coun∣trey, where the Bishop 
Bartholomew de las Casas,
 making his Visitation, commanded 
Ocampo
 to forbear his cruelty against the Natives, he having daily either burnt, hang'd, beheaded, or made Slaves of some or other of them. 
Casas
 also caus'd a

little Fort to be built at the Mouth of the River 
Cumana,
 to be near to prevent the inhumane Murders and Oppressions committed by his Countrey-men; but be∣cause the Inhabitants of 
Cubagua
 bereav'd him of his chief Builder, his Fort was left half unfinish'd; wherefore 
Casas
 leaving the Command of this Countrey to 
Fran∣cisco de Soto,
 went back to 
Hispaniola,
 where in 
St. Domingo
 he made his Complaints to the High Court of Justice of the 
Spaniards
 Cruelties; but being little regarded, he went into the 
Dominicans
 Cloyster, till he was call'd out and made Bishop of 
Chiapa.
 Mean while 
Soto,
 contrary to 
Casas
 his order, had fitted out two Ships to Trade along the Coast of 
Paria;
 but the Expedition prov'd very unsuccessful,
 for he and all his Men were destroy'd by the Natives; not without just reason, for the 
Spaniards
 (according to the Relation of 
Casas
 from an Eye-witness) destroy'd this Countrey after such a manner, that a Ship Sail'd between 
Lucago
 and 
Hispaniola
 sixty Leagues without any Compass, finding the Way onely by the floating of dead Bodies, thrown out of the 
Spanish
 Ships. Moreover, the Prisoners fainting, were set ashore on 
Hispaniola,
 and divided into Companies, each Company consisting of twenty; Parents separated from their Children, and Husbands from their Wives, and Lots cast for them: those that had either sick, decrepid, or old People fall to their share, us'd to cry (as 
Casas
 testifies he hath often heard,) 
What do I do with this sick, decrepid old Dog? give him to the Devil; I will not put my self to the trouble to kill and bury him.


But 
Soto's
 Death was not left unreveng'd; for not long after 
Jacob Castellon
 setting Sail from 
St. Domingo,
 left several Companies on 
Cubagua,
 to re-build the Town 
Cadiz,
 and rais'd a Fort at the Mouth of 
Cumana,
 which hath ever since been kept by the 
Spaniards,
 who made great slaughter amongst the Natives.


Hieronymo Ortall
 Sailing up the Stream 
Negeri,
 sent his Lieutenant 
Augustine Del∣gado
 through the populous Provinces 
Guacharuco
 and 
Parimatuotu
 to the River 
Unare,
 where, not without a sharp Conflict, he took abundance of Provisions in a Village. In the mean time 
Ortall
 travell'd to 
Meta,
 acting inhumane Cruelties all the way; but approaching 
Guiana
 (where 
Delgado
 was kill'd) he was deserted by his mutinous Men, who ran over to 
Nicholas Federman;
 so that he was forc'd to return back to the new Fort 
Miguel de Neveri,
 and from thence to 
St. Domingo
 with ten Soldiers, fearing that 
Antonio Sedenno
 (who judg'd himself wrong'd by 
Ortall,
 because 
Cumana
 be∣long'd to his Lordship) would fall upon him.


Sedenno
 being five hundred Men strong discover'd the Sea-Coast all along to 
Patigutaro;
 where Setling himself, he regarded no Discipline; which the Natives observing, kill'd many a 
Spaniard,
 and others the Tygers also devour'd, especially in the Night, they being forc'd to keep lighted Fires about them against the wild Beasts


About the beginning of the Year 1537. 
Sedenno
 travell'd to the Countrey 
Anapuya
 and 
Orocomay,
 to the Province 
Goioguaney,
 where the Inhabitants defended themselves very valiantly in a woodden Fort, before which many 
Spaniards
 were kill'd with poyson'd Arrows, and those who were not mortally wounded, had no way to escape but by burning the Poyson out with hot Irons; yet at last the Defendants were forc'd to flie with their Wives and Children up to the Mountains, overgrown with Brambles. 
Sedenno
 marching through barren Fields, and over troublesom Ri∣vers,
 came to the mountainous Countrey 
Catapararo,
 where he found abundance of 
Maiz,
 and some little pieces of Gold, and was advanc'd about a League and a half in 
Cumana,
 when dying, he made room for his Successor 
Juan Fernandez,
 who sur∣viv'd him not long; yet the Expedition was not left unprosecuted: for 
Sedenno
's Men, after the Decease of him and 
Fernandez,
 went farther, and discover'd a low

Land, which in the Winter being overflow'd, forc'd the Inhabitants to remove to the Mountains: But at last the 
Spaniards,
 being weary with travelling, fell out amongst themselves, and dividing into several Parties, went several ways, some to 
Venezuela,
 others to 
Maracapana,
 and the rest to 
Cubagua.






SECT. III. Venezuela.


THe principal part of the Province of 
Venezuela
 is border'd on the East with 
Cumana;
 on the West, with a great Gulf or Bay, call'd 
The Bay of Venezuela,
 with the Lake 
Maracabo,
 and some part of 
New Granada;
 Northward it hath the Ocean, or 
Atlantick
 Sea; Southward, some undiscover'd Countreys, which, as we said, lie betwixt the 
Andes
 and it. It stretches out in length from East to West, a hundred and thirty Leagues, or thereabouts, but in breadth little more than half so much; it was nam'd 
Venezuela,
 or 
Little Venice,
 by 
Alonso de Ojeda,
 a 
Spa∣niard,
 who at his first discovery of the Countrey fell upon a Town of the Natives, which stood like another 
Venice,
 all upon the Water, and having no passage to it but by Boats. It is a Countrey extraordinary rich in all sorts of Commodities, af∣fords good Pasture for Cattel, and abundance of fair Herds of them, Oxen, Sheep, Swine, 
&c.
 plenty of Corn, and other Grain, great store of Venison in the Woods, of Fish in the Rivers, Gold in the Mines, and therefore not likely but to be well peopled and inhabited, especially by the 
Spaniards,
 whose Towns and Places of chief importance are these,
 1. 
Venezuela,
 at the most Westerly Confines of the Countrey, built upon the Sea, with the advantage of a double Haven, in a tempe∣rate and good Air, and the Soil round about it the best in the whole Province: It is now a Bishop's See, who is Suffragan to the Arch-bishop in 
Hispaniola,
 and the ordinary Residence of the Governor.


2. 
Caravalleda,
 call'd by the 
Spaniards, Nuestra Sennora de Caravalleda,
 fourscore Leagues distant from 
Venezuela
 towards the East, upon the Sea.


3. 
St. Jago de Leon,
 in the Countrey of 
Caracas,
 four or five Leagues Southward of 
Caravalleda,
 and six or seven distant from the Sea.


4. 
New Valentia,
 twenty five Leagues distant from 
St. Jago.


5. 
New Xeres,
 a Town but lately built, fifteen Leagues Southward of 
New Valentia.


6. 
New Segovia,
 but one League distant from 
Xeres.


7. 
Tucuyo,
 a Place well known and frequented, for the abundance of Sugar that is made there, and in the Countrey round about it.


8. 
Truxillo,
 or 
Our Lady de la Paz,
 eighteen Leagues Southward of the Lake 
Ma∣racabo,
 a Place of great resort, and much frequented for Trade both by 
Spaniards
 and Natives.


9. 
Laguna,
 a Town lying more towards the bottom of the Lake, said to be much haunted with Tygers; and more than this, not much is said of it.


According to the ancient Division of the Natives, this Province contains the Countreys 
Curiana, Cuycas, Caracas, Bariquicemeto, Tucuyo,
 and 
Carora;
 in which there are estimated to be about a hundred thousand Inhabitants that pay Taxes; which Charge, according to a Law made at the 
Spanish
 Court, all Men above fifty, and Youth under eighteen, are freed from: yet this Countrey had formerly much more People, great numbers of them being destroy'd by the 
Germans,
 Anno 1529. for the Bishop 
Bartholomeus de las Casas
 relates, That above fifty hundred thousand







map of Venezuela


VENEZUELA cum parte Australi NOVAE ANDALUSIAE






of the Inhabitants were kill'd by them; nay, they rooted out whole Countreys, notwithstanding the Natives were ready to Entertain them with all Civility ima∣ginable; the Particulars of the Story are as followeth:


When the Emperor 
Charles
 the Fifth Marry'd with 
Isabella,
 Daughter to the King of 
Portugal,
 Anno 1526. the 
Welsares,
 being 
Dutch
 Gentlemen in 
Augsburgh,
 made an Agreement with him for a Sum of Money, to Conquer 
Venezuela;
 whither they sent 
Ambrosius Alfinger,
 and 
Bartholomeus Sayltar,
 with four hundred Foot and eighty Horse: These Forces Landing at 
Venezuela,
 drove away 
Juan de Ampues,
 who Sail∣ing from 
St. Domingo
 thither, had discover'd the Coast along 
Coriano,
 and already made an Agreement with a mighty Prince of that Countrey, call'd 
Manaure.
 But 
Alfinger
 marching to the Lake 
Maracabo,
 destroy'd all the Inhabitants of the Coun∣trey 
Axaguas,
 though they came to meet him Dancing, with rich Presents of Gold; which he not regarding, kill'd them, drove some into a House, and there cut them in pieces, and burnt those that were got upon the Roof. From hence going towards the 
Pocabuyes,
 who dwelt on the West side of 
Maracabo,
 amongst high Mountains, he was Entertain'd by them a considerable time very courteously, and Presented with rich Gifts, for which at his departure he shut up both Men, Women, and Children, into a high Wall'd Park, where they were all to perish, if they did not every one pay a certain quantity of Gold to be releas'd, which not being able to raise, they all dy'd for want of Food. After the same manner he dealt with the neighboring People 
Alcoholados,
 of whom he got much Gold, but not without un∣heard of Cruelties; for he burnt all their Villages and Houses, ruin'd the Coun∣trey with Fire and Sword from 
Thamaleque
 to the River 
Lebrixa,
 carry'd away ma∣ny of the Natives coupled together with Chains about their Necks, and each of them loaded with at least a hundred pound weight of pillag'd Goods; and as soon as any of them began to faint under their Burthens for want of refreshment, their Heads were immediately cut off. But 
Alfinger
 coming to certain cold Mountains, was resisted by a valiant People; in which Conflict he receiv'd a Wound, of which he dy'd at his return to 
Coro,
 Anno 1532. Upon which the 
Welsares
 sent 
John Aleman
 to succeed him; but he also dying, made place for 
George de Espoira,
 and 
Nicholas Federman,
 of which two 
Espoira
 being the chief, spent three years in ranging up and down the Countrey, without any remarkable Transactions, being continually at variance with his Lieutenant 
Federman.


The afore-mention'd City 
Venezuela,
 otherwise call'd 
Caro,
 and by the Natives 
Corana,
 was, 
Anno
 1539. taken and burnt by the 
English.


Northward from the City, the Promontory 
St. Roman,
 in the Province of 
Para∣goana,
 runs into the Sea, opposite to the Islands 
Aruba
 and 
Quuracao.


The Countrey 
Paragoana
 is low and full of Venison; out of the middle of it rises a high Mountain, the Inhabitants whereof are very hospitable and courteous.


The Lyons that breed in this Countrey run away from Men; but on the con∣trary, the Tygers are exceeding cruel.


From 
Coro
 there leads a Way up into the Countrey over the Mountain 
Xizaeza∣ras,
 to the Province 
Bariquicemeto.


Between both these Provinces very fruitful Valleys, which produce 
Maiz
 in great abundance, are surrounded by wooddy Mountains, inhabited by Man-eaters, call'd 
Axaguas.


Anno
 1552. 
Juan de Villegas
 discovering the Province 
Tucuyo,
 he found several rich Gold-Mines near the Mountain 
Pedro,
 out of which springs the River 
Burio.
 Near this place he built the Town 
Segovia,
 which, by reason of the unwholsom Air,
 was soon after transplanted, and built on the Shore of the River 
Bariquicimeto,
 so call'd,

because the Water when touch'd, turns to an Ash-colour. The Plain Countrey round about would be intolerable hot, did not the cool Winds that blow from the Mountains temper the same.


The Natives divided into Tribes that understand not one another, live on 
Calli∣bashes,
 Deers flesh, Rabbets, and the Juice of the 
Cocuy.


In the Rivers 
Hacarigua
 and 
Boraute,
 they throw the stamp'd Root 
Barbasco,
 which causes the Fish to appear above the Water, and suffer themselves to be caught with the Hand.


In the Summer they all store themselves with Venison, which they catch after this manner: They set the dry Bushes and Brambles on fire, which makes the wild Hogs, Goats, Deer, 
Armadillo's,
 Tygers, the great Serpents 
Bobas,
 and other wild Creatures, to leap forth from their Holes and Receptacles to shun the same, whilest the Hunters standing ready with their Bowes and Arrows, seldom miss one of them.


In the hollow Trees near the Rivers, the Bees make abundance of Honey for them.


Most of the Rivers here fall into the Stream 
Huriapari,
 which glides from the 
Peruvian
 Mountains to the Northern Ocean.


The Province 
Chioas
 produces plenty of Gold.


The Natives about 
Segovia
 go naked, are very ignorant, and much addicted to Drunkenness; in which humor they kill one another: They live without care, feeding on Roots till their 
Maiz
 is ripe, which in some places comes to its full ma∣turity in forty days time, and in others in three Moneths.


Close by 
Segovia
 glides the Rivulet 
Claro,
 whosse clear Water goes but a small Course from its Fountain Head, before it sinks into the Ground; in the Summer it is very high, and in the Winter almost destitute of Water.


This Countrey breeds all sorts of Fowls, but especially Quails and Turtle-Doves.


Cattel, Sheep, Goats and Hogs, increase wonderfully here, insomuch that many of them are driven to be sold at 
New Granada.


The Cotton-Clothes that are woven here, also turn to a good account.


From 
Segovia
 runs a Way through a Valley twelve Leagues long, to the Town 
Tucuyo,
 which stands low, but in a healthful Climate, and surrounded with Moun∣tains.


The Countrey hereabouts produces plenty of Corn, Pot-herbs, Sugar, and Cotton; and feeds Oxen, Cowes, Horses, Sheep, Deer, and Goats, to which the Tygers and Lyons do great mischief.


Here are Gold-Mines, but they are not open'd by reason of the great want of Men.


There is likewise plenty of the 
Bezoar
-Stones to be had here.


The 
Cuycas,
 in whose Countrey stands the Town 
Truxillo,
 are a valiant, but very cruel People.


The Lake 
Maracabo,
 running forty Leagues up into the Countrey, is ten Leagues broad, Ebbs and Flows, and feeds the great Fish 
Manati.


Westward dwell the 
Pocabuyes,
 and 
Alcoholados,
 both quiet and rich People.


The Province 
Xuruara
 lies towards the South behind high Mountains, inhabited by the valiant 
Coromochos;
 and towards the North from 
Xuruara,
 the 
Bobures,
 hard by the City 
Merida;
 the Countrey about which is unhealthful and Morassy, and the Inhabitants exceedingly plagu'd by the 
Muschito's.


The Haven 
Maracapana
 is the best in 
Venezuela,
 and lies in the Eastern part of the

Province, where the Mountains are inhabited by the wild 
Chiugotos,
 who kill and eat all the 
Spaniards
 they can get.


The other Havens Westward, not comparable to 
Maracapana,
 are 
Flechado, Sar∣dinas,
 and 
Burburute,
 where some 
Spanish
 Families have a Salt-pit.


Six Leagues up in the Countrey you come to the fresh Lake 
Tocarigua,
 full of little inhabited Isles; the People whereof live quietly, and barter Gold.


Towards the North-West the Ocean makes the great Inlet 
Triste,
 before which lies the Island 
Bonaire,
 very full of Cattel, and on each side appear the 
Aves
 and 
Quaraco,
 which abound with Fowl.


The Promontory 
St. Roman
 runs twenty Leagues into the Sea, and the Cape 
Coquibocoa
 extends farther. Between both these runs the Channel of 
Venezuela,
 which touches the Lake 
Maracapabo.


Before 
Coquibocoa
 are seen the four low Islands 
Monjes,
 with white sandy Creeks, and full of Trees: out of the middlemost rises a high Mountain.


On the Main Continent also the Mountains 
De Azieyto
 appear with scraggy tops beyond the Point: And the Bay 
Honda
 affords a safe Road.


The Cape 
De la Vela
 hath on one side the Inlet 
Portete,
 and on the other, the Vil∣lages 
Rancheria
 and 
Nostra Sennora de los Remedios;
 between both which runs the Stream 
La Hacha.


The 
German
 Commander, 
Nicholas Federman,
 intended to have built a City on 
Cape Vela,
 Anno 1535. but finding the Ground too low and unfruitful, the Pearls hereabouts very small, and the Natives living onely on Fish and wild Herbs, he chang'd his Resolution.






SECT. IV. The Islands Margareta, Cubagua, and Coche.


NOtwithstanding we have already spoken something of the Islands 
Margareta,
 and 
Cubagua,
 in regard they are by some reckon'd amongst the Isles of 
Northern America;
 yet because they are by many accounted to make up a part of the Division of 
New Andalusia,
 we shall add in this place what we have found most worthy of Re-mention, though much to the same purpose as before.


The Island 
Margareta,
 discover'd by 
Christopher Columbus,
 Anno 1498. contains thirty two Leagues in circumference, hath many Woods and Pastures, yet little fresh Water. To the Eastward of it lie the Cliffs 
Testigos,
 where it is very moun∣tainous, as also on the East. Round about the same are delicious Fish, without which the Natives could not live, because the brackish Soil produces but little Pro∣vision.


The chiefest thing for which this Island 
Margareta
 is famous, is the Pearl-Fishing, for which in times past a great Trade was driven, though of late it is come to little or nothing. The 
Spaniards,
 with inhumane cruelty, taught the 
Ne∣gro's
 to Dive for the Pearls, for those that were not nimble or dextrous enough, they beat unmercifully, dropt scalding Wax or scalding Oyl upon them, or stig∣matiz'd them with hot Irons. The Pearl-Banks were cover'd with five, six, seven, or eight Fathom Water; from whence the 
Negro's
 pull'd the Oysters with such force, that the Blood gush'd out of their Mouths and Noses when they came above Water to breath; after which, to refresh them, they receiv'd a Glass of Wine and a Pipe of Tobacco. The 
Spanish Kiay
 receiv'd a fifth part of the best Pearls that were taken here; but whether the Oysters have forsaken this Place, or

their growth hinder'd by often Fishing for them, we know not, but however it is, few Pearls are found here of late years, which makes 
Margareta
 to be more and more deserted.


Between the Main Continent of 
Paria
 lie the Islands 
Cubagua
 and 
Coche;
 the first whereof hath an unfruitful and sultry Soil, without either Trees, Birds, and four∣footed Beasts, except 
Pock
 Wood, Sea-Fowls, or Parrots; and 
Castilian
 Hogs being carry'd thither, change their Nature strangely; for in a short time their Claws grow long and crooked.


The King of 
Spain
 us'd formerly to receive fifteen thousand 
Ducats
 yearly for his fifth part of the Pearls chat were taken; which Gain invited many thither, who built the Town 
Nova Cadiz
 on 
Cabugua
 in the Year 1521. but when the 
Arayans
 de∣molish'd the Monks Cloyster on 
Paria,
 the 
Spaniards,
 being three hundred in num∣ber, fled from 
Nova Cadiz
 to 
Hispaniola,
 where the High Court, displeas'd at their cowardly deserting the Place, gave them but cool Entertainment, and sent five Ships under the Command of 
Jacomo de Castellan
 to 
Cubagua,
 to build new Store∣houses in 
Nova Cadiz,
 which was afterwards re-inhabited; but when the Pearl-Fishing ceased, the Island and Town was at once deserted.


Opposite to 
Margareta
 lies the Promontory 
Araya,
 behind which lies a salt Lake, in which is found abundance of Salt, not onely above, but under the Water; with which the 
English, Spanish,
 and 
Dutch
 Ships are fraighted.


Isaac du Verne
 describes the Salt-pans on 
Araya
 thus: 
Round about the same (saith he) the Ground is craggy, barren, and of a brackish taste, and destitute of fresh Water, which is therefore fetch'd three Leagues farther out of a Brook, flowing from the Mountain 
Bordones
 into the Bay of 
Comena;
 likewise all manner of Provisions are brought from other Parts. Westward from the Point 
Araya
 there is a convenient Harbor where the Ships take in their Salt. Three hundred Paces from the Shore lies a great Salt-pan, where the Salt being first beat in pices, is carry'd in Wheel-barrows to the Ships. The little Salt-pan produces less Salt, and lies also out of the way, which makes few Ships take in their Lading from thence.


The Countrey is every where overgrown with Brambles and Bushes, in which breed Tygers and very poysonous Serpents. There are likewise abundance of Stags, Bucks, Hares, and Coneys, besides other strange Beasts.


Till 
Anno
 1605. the 
Netherlanders
 came hither unmolested for Salt, when eight 
Spanish
 Gallions falling unawares upon them, strangely misus'd their Seamen; but afterwards the 
United Netherlands
 having made an Agreement with 
Spain
 for a cer∣tain time, renew'd their Trade to 
Araya,
 till the King of 
Spain,
 having for the bet∣ter security of the Place, built the Fort 
St. Jago,
 which Commanded the great Salt∣pan, forbad the 
Netherlanders
 from lading any more Salt; who thereupon Storm'd the Fort, though to their cost, for several of them were kill'd, and the rest return'd home empty.






SECT. V. Of the Islands of Southern America.


THe chiefest Islands of note in the Southern part of 
America,
 that is to say, those that lie remote from the Continent in 
Mare del Zur,
 are 
Los Ladrones,
 and the Islands 
Fernandinas;
 for the rest being, as we may call them, 
Mediter∣ranean Islands,
 fall naturally under the Description of the Continent.




 1. 
Los Ladrones,
 in English, 
The Islands of Thieves,
 lie as it were in the mid-way betwixt the Main Land of 
America
 and the 
Philippine
 Islands, but some hundreds of Leagues distant from either, in the fourth Degree of Northern Latitude; so nam'd by 
Ferdinand Magellan,
 from the pilfering disposition he observ'd in the Natives, when he Sail'd that way for the 
Moluccae
 Islands. They were a nimble and active sort of People, yet light-finger'd, tall of stature, and going for the most part naked, excellent Swimmers and Divers, and have not much more to be said in their com∣mendation.


 2. The 
Fernandinae
 are onely two Islands of no great bigness, lying over against the Coast of 
Chile,
 in the three and thirtieth Degree of Southern Latitude, and about a hundred Leagues, or three hundred 
English
 Miles from the Continent, yet well stor'd with some lesser sorts of Cattel, as Goats, 
&c.
 good plenty likewise of Venison in the Woods, and Fish upon the Coasts; for which reason, though lying at some distance, yet are they not a little frequented by the 
Spaniards
 of 
Peru,
 who find many good Harbors and Roads for Shipping belonging to, and about these Islands.














An Appendix, CONTAINING Partly a farther prosecution of the Descriptions of some Provinces already treated of in the foregoing Book, partly an Account of some other Discoveries than what have hitherto been deliver'd in any Description of the 
NEW WORLD.




CHAP. I. Rio de la Plata.


THe River 
De la Plata,
 by the Natives call'd 
Paranaguazu,
 is next to the River of the 
Amaszones,
 the greatest in the World, and falls into the Northern Ocean between the Capes 
An∣tonio
 and 
Maria,
 lying thirty Leagues one from another: It receives from East and West divers Rivers as far as the Lake 
Xarays,
 lying three hundred Leagues up in the Coun∣trey from the Mouth of 
La Plata.
 Also into the fore∣men∣tion'd Lake fall several Streams, which spring out of the 
Peruvian
 Mountains 
Andes.


The first that Sail'd into this great River, 
Anno
 1515. to an Island lying in the middle of it, was 
John Dias de Solis,
 who rashly going ashore, was kill'd and eaten, together with several 
Portugueses.


Eleven years after this Accident, 
Sebastian Gabottus
 set Sail from 
Spain
 to go to the Spicy Islands through the Straights of 
Magellan,
 but was forc'd, for want of Provi∣sions, and the unwillingness of his Seamen, to put into the River 
La Plata;
 in which being advanc'd thirty Leagues, he Anchor'd near an Island, which he call'd 
St. Gabriel:
 from whence going seven farther, he discover'd a Stream which fell into 
La Plata.
 This River he call'd 
St. Salvador,
 and cast up a Fort at the Mouth of it, where an Inlet afforded a convenient Harbor for Shipping; he found the River 
La Plata
 to be generally ten Leagues broad, and full of Isles; and to the West∣ward of it, the River 
Zaracaranna,
 inhabited on the South side by a subtil People call'd 
Diagnitas.
 At the place where 
Zaracaranna
 disembogues into 
La Plata
 he built a Castle, and calling the same 
Castello di Santo Spirito,
 went up farther, leaving on the West side the People 
Tenbues, Mequaretas, Mepenes,
 and 
Aigais;
 to the Eastward, the 
Quiloacas
 and 
Santana,
 and struck up out of the River 
La Plata,
 North-East into

the Stream 
Parana,
 in which he had gone two hundred Leagues, and pass'd by many Isles, when he went out of the same into the Stream 
Paraguay;
 where being set upon by the Countrey People, who were busie in Tilling the Ground, he lost so many of his Men, that he was forc'd, without any farther Exploit, to return with the 
Portuguese
 Pilot, 
Diego Garcia,
 who Sailing up the same River, had met with 
Gabottus
 in 
Paria;
 and because both had gotten some Silver, they call'd the River, from that Metal, 
De la Plata.
 The farther Discovery whereof lay neglected nine years after, when 
Peter Mendoza
 Sailing with eleven Ships, carrying eight hun∣dred Men, to the Island 
Gabriel,
 built the Fort 
Buenos Ayres,
 on the South side of it, where many People dying of Hunger, little was done.


Alvares Cabeca
 not long after following 
Mendoza
's footsteps, discover'd and peo∣pled the Province 
Rio de la Plata.
 The Mouth of the River 
La Plata Laurence Bikker
 describes thus:


Beyond the Cape 
Santa Maria
 (saith he) lies the flat Island. 
Castilhos,
 having scarce a Tree upon it; but on the North side a Rock, not unlike a decay'd Castle; to the Southward of which appear two other Cliffs; directly before the Mouth lies the stonie Island 
De Lobos,
 on which nothing is to be found but Sea-Wolves; towards the East a stonie Bank runs a good way into the River, known by the breaking of the Water upon the same.


The Promontory 
Maria
 is low and barren, but within the same the Land rises high before the Isles 
Flores
 and 
Maldonado,
 which last hath a good sandy Shore, Har∣bor, and fresh Water between the Rocks; but 
Flores
 rising with two Hills, pro∣duces nothing but Brambles.


The Stream 
Soli
 also discharges its Waters in 
La Plata,
 near the Place where the Mountain 
Seredo
 lies.


The left Shore of 
La Plata
 begins at the Promontory 
Antonio,
 and is cut through by the Rivers 
Ortis
 and 
Los Sanctos,
 where the Town 
Buenos Ayres
 is built on a smooth Shore.


Martin del Barco
 proceeding in the Description of 
La Plata,
 saith that it is dan∣gerous, by reason of the many Shelves that are in the same. The Isles in the River are as followeth: those that bear the Name of 
St. Gabriel
 are five in number; 
Garcia
 Isle is full of Trees, and for its fertility was peopled by 
Peter de Mendoza,
 and afterwards by 
Juan Ortiz Carate:
 But less fruitful are the Isles 
De Lazaro,
 where the River 
Vrayg
 unites with 
La Plata,
 being before fill'd with the Waters of 
Salvador,
 which receives the black Stream 
Negro,
 which gliding slowly from Morasses, is very full of Fish. Moreover, 
La Plata
 hath eleven Arms, each very deep and full of Isles, inhabited by the 
Guaranins.


About a hundred Leagues farther the 
Cherandies
 have setled themselves on plea∣sant Isles, lying not far from the City 
St. Fe,
 built on the Point which makes the River 
Bermeio,
 where it falls into 
La Plata.


Farther up lies the Province 
Ana,
 partly well inhabited for its fertility, and partly overflow'd.


Next appears the Rock 
Pennapobre,
 and not far from the Town 
Guayra, La Plata
 falls very high from the Rocks.


 But as concerning the Natives of this Countrey, it is inhabited by divers sorts of People, differing from one another both in Customs and Language. On the South side of the fore-mention'd River, from the Promontory 
Antonio
 to 
Buenos Ayres,
 dwell the 
Quirandies,
 a stout, but cruel People, who with the Flesh of many a 
Spa∣niard
 oftentimes keep a merry Feast. Farther into the Countrey run the 
Juries
 and 
Diagnitas.
 Along 
La Plata
 lie also scatter'd the 
Tenbues,
 a civil People, who live

by Fishing. Near the River 
Paraguay
 the 
Ameguaes
 observe the same manner of Life; But the 
Carioes
 keep Cattel, and Till their Lands. A hundred Leagues farther dwell the 
Payaguaes;
 and yet farther into the Countrey the 
Chames
 and 
Carcares
 pos∣sess much Gold and Silver, with which 
Juan d' Ayola
 having enrich'd himself here, was destroy'd with all his Men by the 
Chames,
 Anno 1541.


Alvarez Nunnez Cabeca
 came from 
Spain
 to be Governor here, but was not able, by reason or contrary Winds and Tydes to reach 
La Plata;
 wherefore Landing at the River 
Itabucu,
 and spending nine days in cutting a Way through thick Brambles, he came to the Jurisdiction of 
Armiriri,
 and a days Journey farther to 
Cipoyay;
 and not long after to 
Tocanguazu,
 where the 
Guaranies,
 who are the Natives, have two Harvests every year of 
Maiz
 and 
Cassavi,
 and breed and keep Geese, Hens and Par∣rots in their Houses: They are Man-eaters, and very revengeful. 
Cabeca
 having given this Countrey the Name of 
Vera,
 he proceeded on his Journey over the Ri∣vers 
Ignazu, Tibagi,
 and 
Taquari,
 on whose Shore appears the Village 
Abangobi,
 and somewhat farther 
Tocanguzir.
 The Countrey hereabouts is very fruitful, and hath many delightful Plains, pleasant Rivers, and Woods; but beyond appear Hills, Mountains, deep Morasses, dangerous Cane-Fields, Receptacles for wild Beasts, and great Wildernesses. 
Cabeca
 having pass'd through them all, came into the fruitful Countrey of the 
Guaranies,
 who are a wild People, and possess many large Fields of 
Maiz
 and 
Potato's,
 also several Silver Mines. From hence travelling Westwardly over the River 
Piqueri,
 he spent eighteen days before he came to the Stream 
Ignazu,
 which falls into the 
Parana,
 and at last came to the River 
Paraguay;
 along whose, Shore he found a People of a gigantick Stature, call'd 
The Agazes,
 who regarded no manner of Husbandry, but went out continually a robbing in their 
Canoos.
 These People, as 
Martin del Barco
 relates, were not long after all destroy'd by the 
Spaniards.


Not far from the 
Agazes
 dwell the 
Guaycurues,
 a valiant People; and somewhat farther the 
Cacoves,
 whose Countrey produces Gold and Silver; and yet farther in the Countrey reside the 
Guaxarapos,
 who remove yearly to the 
Paraguay
 to Fish there when the Water is low; for in the beginning of 
January
 the River swells so exceed∣ingly, that the Countrey about it being overflow'd, is cover'd with above six Fa∣thom Water. The 
Paraguay
 discharges its Waters into the great Lake 
Xarayes,
 full of Islands.


Amongst other Rivers that spring out of the Mountains 
Andes,
 the 
Ignazu,
 along whose Shore the People 
Xacoaes, Xaquesses,
 and 
Chanesses
 dwell, falls also into the foremention'd Lake. Somewhat farther lies a great piece of drown'd Land, be∣yond which the 
Xarayes
 have convenient Habitations, plant 
Maiz,
 and spin Cotton: Their Countrey borders a great Wilderness, which ends about the Province 
Tapua∣guazu,
 the Inhabitants whereof, call'd 
Tarapecocies,
 are furnish'd with plenty of all sorts of Provisions. The 
Payzunoes,
 dwelling on one side of them, are not well known as yet.


Beyond the Town 
Assumption
 dwell the 
Mayaes,
 in the Way to 
Peru,
 and border at he 
Tamacoaes,
 both which possess Silver-Mines.


Between 
Buenos Ayres
 and 
Corduba
 lies the Plain-Countrey 
Despoplado,
 ninety Leagues long, without Trees or Houses, but is most Pasture-Ground, which feed many thousands of wild Horses. From hence glide the Streams 
Luchan, Los Arre∣chivos, Arreca, Zaracaranna,
 and others, into 
La Plata.
 It is very dangerous for a small Company to travel through this Countrey, because the ranging 
Juries
 spare none alive they meet with.


Moreover, the River 
Grande
 flows with a wide Mouth into the Sea, and spreads

it self within against the Countrey 
Patos.
 Also the Rivers 
Tamandabug, Ararungo,
 and the Lake 
Alagoa,
 disembogue into the Ocean.


North-East beyond 
Alagoa
 lie the Islands 
Catharina
 and 
Gale;
 and in the Bay 
Toju∣qua
 appear several Isles.


The Streams 
Tajahu
 and 
Ytabuca
 spring out of high Mountains, inhabited by the People 
Anniriri
 and 
Cipopoy.


Lastly, the Countrey wash'd by the Stream 
Ararapira,
 produces all sorts of Pro∣visions.






CHAP. II. Chili.


THere are in this Countrey both tame and wild Sheep;
 the tame ones are call'd 
Cammel-Sheep,
 being cover'd with long fine Wool, having Necks four Foot long, their fore Feet cloven into four parts, their hindermost into two, their Mouths very wide, which they open at those that vex them, and make such a stink, that no body is able to abide near them; when tir'd, they fall under their Burdens, and will not rise, though beaten never so much: Their Flesh is tough like that of Horses. The wild Mountain-Sheep are red, and have soft glossy Wool, which makes a Stuff like that of a Chamlet: These Sheep run swifter than a Horse; the 
Chileses
 lead them by a Rope put through their Ears.


This Countrey of 
Chili
 not onely produces Wheat, Barley, 
Maiz,
 and all man∣ner of Fruit, but also the 
Teca,
 which growing half a Yard high, is not unlike Barley; the Grain thereof being dry'd in the Sun, is thresh'd, and parch'd in hot Sand, then ground on a square flat Stone with a round Rowler. This Meal, which is both exceeding wholsom and very nourishing (for a small Measure thereof sufficeth a Man a whole Week,) serves also both for Meat and Drink: for being infus'd in a greater quantity of Water, it becomes a pleasant Drink, and kneaded with a lesser proportion, it is made into Cakes or Loaves.


The Fruit 
Unni,
 by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Murtilla,
 is like a little red Grape, and hath a tart taste. The Wine press'd out of this Fruit is clear to the Eye, pleasing to the Palate, and good for the Stomach, never causing any Head-ache: It also makes good Vinegar.


But the chiefest Benefit of 
Chili
 is the rich Gold-Mines. The Countrey for the most part lies desolate, occasion'd by the continual Wars which the valiant People 
Arauco
 maintain'd against the 
Spaniards
 after such a manner, that in no place of 
Ame∣rica
 they met with such resistance, or sustain'd such Losses. They speak an elegant Language, according to the testimony of 
Elias Herkmans,
 who having committed to Wirting all the most significant Words thereof which were taught him by the 
Chileses,
 it will not be altogether amiss to set down some of them, which are these following:






A View of the Chilesian Language.


TEpanto,
 A Year.


Tien,
 A Moneth, or the Moon.


Toninco,
 A Week.


Ante,
 The Day, or Sun.


Paun,
 The Night.


Tabuyo,
 The Evening.


Eppoun,
 The Morning.


Rangiante,
 Noon.


Eppoe,
 The next Day after to Mor∣row.


Vya,
 Yesterday.


Putey,
 The Day before Yesterday.


Buchiante,
 To Day.


Mintay,
 Now.


Weytiva,
 At that time.


Wantarulei,
 In the Morning betimes.


Biliante,
 Always.


Chumel,
 When.


Chemchuem,
 Also.


Hueno,
 The Heavens.


Quereb,
 The Air or Wind.


Tomo,
 The Clouds.


Wangelen,
 The Stars.


Pillan,
 Thunder.


Gualio,
 Lightning.


Puta que quereb,
 A Storm.


Maoni,
 Rain.


Piren,
 Snow.


Veaquumao,
 Dew.


Pillingei,
 Ice.


Quetal,
 Fire.


Ko,
 Water.


Tue,
 The Earth.


Mappo,
 The Land.


Pele,
 Clay.


Cura,
 Stone.


Maviel,
 Wood.


Aluven,
 Timber.


Millia,
 Gold.


Lien,
 Silver.


Paila,
 Brass.


Titi,
 Tin.


Pavillue,
 Iron.


Quatal-cura,
 A Pebble-stone.


Chadi,
 Salt.


Lyl,
 A Rock.


Milla-mappen,
 A Golden Vein.


Aliquen,
 A Tree.


Cahu,
 Herbs.


Nebo,
 Nuts.


Pino,
 Grass.


Cayron,
 Hay.


Wento,
 A Man.


Domo,
 A Wife.


Quiduugen,
 A Youth.


Yecho,
 A Maiden


Penien,
 A Boy.


Domo-penien,
 A Girl.


Chou,
 A Father.


Nenque,
 A Mother.


Cheche,
 A Grandfather.


Domo-cheche,
 A Grandmother.


Wenco,
 Mothers Brother.


Mama,
 Mothers Sister.


Pelchuchan,
 A Stepfather.


Caulla,
 A Stepmother.


Botum,
 A Son.


Neaque,
 A Daughter.


Penu,
 A Brother.


Lamoen,
 A Sister.


Guempo,
 A Father-in-law.


Vilca,
 A Mother-in-law.


Choupa,
 A Son-in-law.


Weuro-pencho,
 A Kinsman.


Buytha,
 An old Man.


Cude,
 An old Woman.


Cunewa,
 An Hospital Child.


Peneinboe,
 A Guardian.


Apo-curaca,
 A Governor.


Curaca,
 A Lord.


Apo,
 A supream Commander.


Nentoque,
 A Ruler.


Ulmen,
 A Person of Quality.


Pulmen,
 A Gentleman.


Machi,
 A Chirurgeon.


Cona,
 A Soldier.


Retave-caman,
 A Smith.


Guito-wok,
 A Weaver.


Challo-acaman,
 A Fisher-man.


Nilla-caboe,
 A Merchant.


Turnitave,
 A Dyer.


Chumpiro-caman,
 A Cap-maker.


Tultunca-caman,
 A Drummer.


Inchetaniweni,
 A Servant.




Voerquin,
 A Messenger.


Langamcheboe,
 A Murderer.


Chiquiboe,
 A Thief.


Illuiboe,
 A Beggar.


Alvee,
 The Devil.


Ruca,
 A House.


Ullin,
 A Door.


Chaquana,
 A pair of Stairs.


Pylca,
 A Wall.


Wana-ruca,
 The Roof.


Pithe-ruca,
 A Hut.


Colcura,
 A Cupboard.


Cawyto,
 A Bedstead.


Depotuarica,
 A Prison.


Weltelve,
 A Gibbet.


Pengal,
 A Grave.


Lonquen,
 The Sea.


Leva,
 The River.


Buta-wampo,
 A Ship.


Aliwen,
 A Mast.


Mou,
 Ropes.


Dolio,
 A Canoo.


Wampo,
 A Boat.


Vela,
 Sails.


Wyta,
 An Oar.


Tubquen,
 Ashes.


Cuju,
 A dead Coal.


Ale,
 The Flame.


Aypel,
 A burning Coal.


Wietum,
 Smoak.


Catila,
 a Candle.


Wyno,
 A Knife.


Witi,
 A Spoon.


Guidi,
 A Pot.


Lepoboruwe,
 A Tooth-picker.


Pavilla-lonco,
 An Helmet.


Waiqui,
 A Pike.


Pylqui,
 A Dart.


Pulque-tuboi,
 A Bowe.


Tultunca,
 A Trumpet.


Mecane,
 An Iron Club.


Cachal,
 An Awl.


Wita,
 A Spade.


Juisue,
 A Sieve.


Chilca,
 A Letter.


Charavilla,
 A pair of Breeches.


Icha,
 A Womans Garment.


Domo-ruida,
 A Coat.


Couchon,
 A Bag.


Pino-chompiro,
 A Straw Cap.


Congi,
 Food.


Cobque,
 Bread.


Nul-cobque,
 The Crumb.


Liquangue,
 Light.


Dumingei,
 Darkness.


Quemeiquen,
 Dainties.


Medda,
 Pap.


Core,
 Broth.


Ilon,
 Flesh.


Cuichalon,
 Mutton.


Wara-ilon,
 Beef.


Chuchi-ilon,
 Pork.


Chuchi-chain,
 A Gammon of Bacon.


Chaditues-ilon,
 Salt.


Caucan,
 Roast-meat.


Avaun,
 Boyl'd-meat.


Puytscha,
 The Guts.


Curam,
 An Egg.


Quecuram,
 The Yolk of an Egg.


Lycuram,
 The White of an Egg.


Iwyn,
 Butter.


Ylu,
 Milk.


Puuloo,
 Drink.


Vino,
 Wine.


Chiche,
 Beer.


Cutan,
 Pain or Sickness.


Aren-cutan,
 A Feaver.


Towongen,
 The Head.


Cancocultano,
 The Head-ache.


Veno-aren,
 Scabs.


Albungien,
 A Wound.


Molbuen,
 Blood.


Touma,
 A blind Man.


Cawinto,
 A Meal.


Colchou,
 The Small-pox.


Wocubu,
 A wild Beast.


Pangy,
 A Lyon.


Naguel,
 A Tyger.


Cuchy,
 A Swine.


Michun,
 A Calf.


Dewe,
 A Mouse.


Waren,
 A Rat.


Twe-dewe,
 A Mole.


Tewa,
 A Dog.


Pulpeo,
 A Fox.


Guetaltuange,
 A Hare.


Noquen,
 A She-bear.


Lame,
 A Sea-Dog.


Lemo-cuchi,
 A wild Swine.


Chumam,
 A Bear.




Puedo,
 A Sea-Goat.


Quelen,
 A Tail.


Chiliweki,
 A Sheep.


Zuneu,
 a Bird.


Lyppe,
 A Plume.


Mepoiinem,
 A Wing.


Dani-inem,
 A Nest.


Achaival,
 a Hen.


Alchahawal,
 a Cock.


Pylken,
 A Duck.


Jeca,
 A Raven.


Guereo,
 A Magpye.


Cogo,
 A Cuckow.


Nullyn,
 A Bee.


Pulli,
 A Flye.


Vulgumusky,
 The King of Bees.


Petar,
 A Louse.


Perem,
 A Flea.


Piro,
 A Worm.


Vilo,
 A Serpent.


Bylcum,
 A Hedghog.


Ponono,
 A Toad.


Challua,
 A Fish.


Cawel,
 A Dolphin.


Iene,
 A Whale.


Vouqui,
 A Grigg.


Vilochalva,
 An Eel.


Chadituel-chalva,
 Salt-fish.


Anquen-chalva,
 Dry'd-fish.


Quinpilon,
 Oysters.


Chapes,
 Mussles.


Coinow,
 A Crab.


Quichiquinchio,
 a Falcon.


Manco,
 A Crane.


Choroi,
 A Parrot.


Pilo,
 Dead.


Hilca,
 A one-ey'd Person.


Topilgen,
 To squint.


Topil,
 Lame.


Poo,
 A Bough.


Kempomamel,
 Dry Wood.


Bopemamel,
 Wither'd Wood.


Nobue,
 An Acorn.


Nido-iwas,
 A Vineyard.


Nidu,
 A Pole.


Vanguen,
 Straw-berries.


Couchow,
 Black-berries.


Litue,
 Toad-stools.


Pilun-proque,
 Plantain.


Calicai,
 Clover-grass.


Curi,
 Stinking Nettles.


Pragyn,
 Flowers.


Manen,
 Seed.


Methen,
 Meal.


Chiquelen,
 To gather.


Gueli-vanca,
 Coral.


Kispi,
 Glass.


Cudi,
 Milstone.


Pel,
 Mud or Dirt.


Tassaquido,
 A Treasure.


Guengu,
 A Marriage-Portion.


Deren-culyn,
 A Debt.


Culyn,
 A Reward.


Willawyn,
 Single-money.


Guyn,
 One.


Eppo,
 Two.


Quila,
 Three.


Meli,
 Four.


Quechu,
 Five.


Cuyn,
 Six.


Regli,
 Seven.


Pura,
 Eight.


Culla,
 Nine.


Maripataco,
 A hundred.


Marama,
 A thousand.


Guiltui,
 A Kernel.


Tapel,
 Leaves.


Nil,
 The Bark.


Pelli,
 The Smell.


Oaliel,
 The Body.


Lai-calel,
 A dead Corps.


Ven,
 Flesh.


Molvin,
 Blood.


Boro,
 A Leg.


Telqui,
 The Skin.


Vel,
 The Sinews.


Ven-molvin,
 A Vein.


Congo,
 The Head.


Tol,
 The Forehead.


Lenglen,
 The Scull.


Lonco,
 The Hair.


Teren-lonco,
 Grey.


Lolo,
 The Brain.


Angen,
 The Face.


Taun,
 The Jaws.


Ne,
 The Eyes.


Tacune,
 The Members.


Denen,
 The Eye-brows.


Ju,
 The Nose.


Peloju,
 The Nostrils.




Merum,
 Snot.


Pilum,
 The Ears.


Oun,
 A Mouth.


Adem,
 Sweat.


Quewen,
 The Tongue.


Melbue,
 The Lips.


Boru,
 The Teeth.


Ilga,
 The Gums.


Bida-bida,
 The Roof of the Mouth.


Cain,
 Spittle.


Mewe,
 The Throat.


Neen,
 The Breath.


Quette,
 The Chin.


Paion,
 The Beard.


Pel,
 The Neck.


Lipan,
 The Shoulders.


Puilpa,
 An Arm.


Cue,
 A Hand.


Mancue,
 The Right-hand.


Melecoe,
 The Left-hand.


Puley-cue,
 The Palm of the Hand.


Changel-cue,
 The Fingers.


Buta-changel,
 The Thumb.


Wili,
 The Nails.


Zevo,
 The Breast.


Moju,
 The Nipples.


Pue,
 The Belly.


Weddo,
 The Navel.


Cadi,
 The Ribs.


Buri,
 The Back.


Anca,
 The Sides.


Quichio,
 The Buttocks.


Penem,
 A Man's Genital Parts.


Metu,
 A Womans.


Chan,
 The Thighs.


Lucu,
 The Knees.


Metunthoy,
 The Knee-Bone.


Hemum,
 The Calves.


Kamon,
 The Feet.


Pinque,
 The Heart.


Mocun,
 The Lungs.


Que,
 The Maw.


Curique,
 The Liver.


Vaca,
 The Milt.


Quelche,
 The Guts.


Villin,
 The Bladder.


Momay,
 To Stink.


Pelengsley,
 A Spider.


Inche,
 I.


Tubei,
 He.


Eimi,
 You.


Inchen,
 We.


Tecengen-eimen,
 You People.


Liengen,
 Those People.


Emma,
 So.


Muh,
 No.


Pichumei,
 Hard by.


Averlugei,
 Far.


Taymen,
 Against.


Woecun,
 Without.


Compay,
 Within.


Pulon,
 Below.


Wono,
 Above.


Buri,
 Behind.


Junengen,
 Before.


Quelleb,
 Near.


Munai,
 Enough.


Alengei,
 Too much.


Munalai,
 Too little.


Chemibla,
 Wherefore.


Venibla,
 Therefore.


Vei-mai,
 Let it be so.


Wei,
 These.


Temunei,
 Fair.


Woranei,
 Ugly.


Newonei,
 Strong.


Leptungei,
 Swift.


Chouwo
 Lazie.


Alilonconei,
 Very wise.


Wentannei,
 Valiant.


Queunei,
 Proud.


Culenei,
 Rich.


Cunewal,
 Poor.


Toucou,
 Foolish.


Molgei,
 Naked.


Ilungei,
 Clothed.


Queten,
 Narrow.


Anqueu,
 Dry.


Prequin,
 Bountiful.


Buta,
 Great.


Pichi,
 Little.


Montingei,
 Fat.


Toutau,
 Lean.


Pettun,
 Colour'd.


Queli,
 Red.


Calbu,
 Blue.


Carel,
 Green.


Choot,
 Yellow.


Curi,
 Black.


Lye,
 White.




Nilla-caju,
 To change.


Illawyn,
 Giving.


Tuignei,
 To be merry.


Umatum,
 Sleeping.


Limen,
 To wake but of Sleep.


Bemgne,
 To Build.


Playn,
 To find.


Vangen-lyn,
 To lose.


Necul,
 To run.


Amon,
 To go.


Utalegen,
 To stand.


Jucheleyn,
 To lie down.


Tecanen,
 To dance.


Padenatum,
 To fall.


Utalenen,
 To rise.


Avinge,
 To sit.


Dimgne,
 To speak.


Temelenge,
 To be silent,


Puronge,
 To Sing.


Pylcunge,
 To call.


Quipay
 To come.


Ien,
 To eat.


Butum,
 To drink.


Mepai,
 To go to Stool.


Willam,
 To Urine.


Cudepain,
 To play.


Locatum,
 To scold.


Mecowyn,
 To carry.


Chuquin,
 To steal.


Guallulueno,
 To restore.


Pelteney,
 To pay.


Lay,
 To die.


Rengalgei,
 To be buried.


Quedau capay,
 Working.


Intunge millo,
 To dig for Gold.


Nilla-teubyn,
 To sell.


Nilla-vin,
 To buy.


Quimli wi tami piel,
 I cannot understand you.


Chu pipaimi,
 What do you?


Champaila,
 Nothing.


Juei pingeimi,
 What is your Name?


Juan pingen,
 I am call'd 
John.


Cheo ruaimi,
 Whither do you go?


Moppo muruam,
 I go into the Countrey.


Cheo tui mi,
 From whence came you?


Miro comotoun,
 I came from home.


Chumel quipai, tuai mi,
 When shall you come?


Chumel pratuai mi,
 When shall you go?


Ale prungi tamruca,
 Is your Habitation far from hence?


Picherungei,
 It is hard by.


Aleprungei,
 It is farther.


Inchi quiparum camappumu,
 I intend to go into another Countrey.


Chemnibla qui parui cammappumu,
 Why will you go into another Countrey?


Merelya tiva mappumu,
 Here is no Provi∣sion.


Aleiblay twachi tipanto, benebliaale geniep ayn,
 The year hath been unfruitful, and therefore we want.


Cheo mappungen tamichau,
 In what Province dwells your Father?


Alu ei ei,
 The Devil hath fetch'd him away.


At eimi ruaju inchio,
 Will you keep him company?


Ailan,
 No, I will not.


Bien,
 I will.


Chuben quecken neieimi tania,
 Have you any thing to give us to eat?


Cancan achawal,
 Yes, I have roasted Hens.


Mu wy,
 How many?


Munalei enchintavia,
 There will be enough for us.


Chuben putuayn,
 Where shall we Drink?


Aile Mangunmeinis,
 I thank you.


Chuben domo trivo,
 What Woman is this?


Inchi tan curi,
 It is my Wife.


Ni nave,
 My Daughter.


Ni domo,
 My Concubine.


Alei teminigei vei domo,
 It is a handsom Woman.


Qui pangnei,
 Come hither.


Amotunge,
 Run away.


Umatuayn,
 Let us go to Bed.


Utajuca,
 Let us rise.


Wira cuchai compay tan mappumu,
 The 
Spni∣ards
 are fall'n into this Countrey.


Quipa waicha laimi,
 Shall we Fight toge∣ther?


Waiquenagelan,
 I have no Arms.


Ima en pea in Waiqui,
 Follow me, and I will get Arms.


Ali teum inche,
 I am contented.










The Seamen who went under 
Hendrick Brewer's
 Command, 
Anno
 1643. from 
Brasile
 to 
Chili,
 brought the fore-mention'd Vocabulary along with them.


Chili
 is look'd upon as no way inferior to any Countrey in 
America,
 enjoying a wholsom Air, fruitful Soil, and abundance of Inhabitants, who often furnish 
Peru
 with Provisions; which are the speedier convey'd thither, because the South-Winds always blow along the Coast.


The 
Peruvian
 Vice-Roy keeps a Deputy to Govern here. It hath two Bishop∣ricks, 
viz.
 St. 
Jago
 and 
L' Imperial.


Some of the 
Chileses
 are under the 
Spaniards
 Jurisdiction, and live in Huts; others being wilder, defend their Freedom with the Sword. They have great Heads and flat Noses: The Men continually pull out the Hair on their Faces and Privities with Shells, which they carry about their Necks for that purpose, having beforehand rubb'd the Hair with warm Ashes; the Hair of their Heads hanging downwards is cut close as far as their Ears, the rest growing long, is ty'd with the Ribbon 
Tariwelonco,
 to which Persons of Quality fix Silver Plates and 
Turkoises:
 Some also cover their Heads with the Skins of Weazels, or the like Beasts, putting the Head over their Foreheads, and the Tail down their Neck; which kind of Co∣vering they call 
Maniewelonco:
 Others wear Caps made after some strange manner or other.


The 
Chileses
 are not the tallest, but strong and well set, betwixt a white and sallow colour: Those that are in the 
Spaniards
 Service, wear long Hair, by which they are distinguish'd from the shorn 
Ucais,
 who do the 
Spaniards
 all the mischief imaginable. The Women are for the most part low of stature, but of a strong Constitution; they go bare-headed, letting their Hair hang loose over their Shoul∣ders, except when they are indispos'd, and then they tie it up: But those that dwell about 
Castro
 wear Locks like our 
English
 Ladies. In 
Coquimbo
 and 
Loquimbo
 they go after the same manner as the 
Peruvian
 Women: All of them have thick black Hair.


Their Apparel, though mean, is neat: The Men wear wide Breeches girt about their Wastes, and a piece of woollen Cloth, three Yards long and two broad, which

having a Hole in the middle, they put over their Heads, and so let it hang on their Shoulders, leaving their Arms and Legs bare; but on Festival Days they wear curious embroider'd Stockings. The Women likewise cover themselves with the same piece of Cloth, but after another manner, tying it first about their Middle, then let it down to the Ground, pinn'd before with Silver or Golden Pins; their Heads, Breasts and Legs are uncover'd; the Cloth it self is strip'd with red, white, blue, and yellow, and fring'd at the edges. For an Example of their quick and easie Labor, 
Hendrick Brewer
 relates, That a Woman being Deliver'd in his Ship, within an hour after walk'd up and down the Deck, and gave the Child suck. Some of them have such great Breasts, that throwing them over their Shoulders they suckle their Children, being ty'd at their Backs.


Their Huts being low, are made of Straw, Canes, and Boughs, and not built for one single Family; for often thirty, fifty, a hundred, or a hundred and twenty dwell under one Roof, and have a Governor, by them call'd 
Caruca.


Their Housholdstuff is little and mean, 
viz.
 two or three Cans to keep their Li∣quor 
Chica
 in, Horn Cups, a Stone whereon they grind their Corn, and one or two woodden Stools: The chiefest of them also use Sheep-skins, which they spread on the Ground before their Guests. They live without care, for they neither Sowe nor Plant any more than will serve them a Year.


Their Riches consist in Cattel, of which they have no great plenty.


About the beginning of 
October
 a whole Town meets together to Plough and to Sowe, which the Men perform in two days time, the rest of the Work being left to the care of the Women; for the Men never meddle with Reaping or Harvest.


They eat and drink from Morning to Evening, when they do not travel, for then they eat at set-times. Their Liquor is made of Barley-Meal, or Wheat boyl'd in Water. On Festival Days they drink 
Chica,
 Brew'd of 
Maiz
 chew'd by the Teeth of old Women. They likewise make a Liquor of the Fruit 
Unni,
 which tastes like 
Madera
 Wine.


Every Man Marries as many Wives as he can buy and maintain,
 for Maids and Widows must be sold by the Parents, who set not a Price upon them according to their Beauty or Quality, but their skill in managing Houshold Affairs. Their Marriages are perform'd after a strange manner: A Son having no Inheritance, lives on the Charity of his nearest Relations, who Present him, one with a Hog, another with a Cow, a third with a Sheep, and a fourth with somewhat else: thus enrich'd, he goes to his Mistresses Father, and hangs some 
Turkoises
 and Plates of Silver about his Neck, and acquainting him with what Estate he can make his Wife, he agrees as well as he can with his intended Father-in-law, to whom he gives ten, fifty, or a hundred Sheep, Oxen, Cows, Hogs, Horses, Poultrey, a Coat, and some Vessels full of 
Chica;
 which done, the Father leads his Daughter to the Bridegroom's House, where he is Entertain'd with Meat, but finds the Drink at his own Cost. Some days after the Celebration of the Wedding, the nearest Relati∣ons come to congratulate the young Marry'd Woman, and at Dinner sing an 
Epi∣thalamium
 to their Nuptial Deity 
Maruapeante,
 all of them sitting on the Ground on Sheep-skins. The Allies often take away a Woman from her Husband, especially when he misuses her; and if a Man kill his Wife, her Death is reveng'd by her Rela∣tions. Persons of Quality build a Hut for every one of their Wives, sending word to her whom they have a mind to enjoy: They respect one above the rest, who are in a manner but Slavesses, being forc'd to do all the Drudgery. The Men are exceeding jealous and chollerick, cruelly beating their Wives, if they chance but to look on another Man; and if they take them in the Act of Adultery, they im∣mediately

kill them; yet for all this they are not Chaste, but very Libidinous. As soon as a Woman is Deliver'd of a Child, she washes her self and the Child in cold Water; then kills a Lamb call'd 
Chiluraque,
 and makes a Feast; at which she her self eats and drinks freely amongst the rest, and the next day goes about her usual Employment.


The 
Spaniards
 tell us, that their Women, if they continue long in this Countrey, are more and more hardned by the Air, and are as little concern'd at the Birth of a Child as the Natives.


A Widow hath free leave to Marry again, provided she hath given to her Chil∣dren part of what she hath; but if she Marry not, but return to her Parents, then she is highly esteem'd of.


Both Men and Women wash themselves in the Rivers in the coldest Weather.


They adore chiefly their Deity 
Pillan,
 and the Devil, who doth them much hurt. They acknowledge no Resurrection,
 accounting long Life in this World the greatest Good; wherefore when any one dies, the Friends and Relations make a doleful Cry, and suffer the dead Body to lie three, nay, four Moneths before they bury them, stuffing them full of strong smelling Herbs, to keep them from putrifying: Three days before their Interrment the nearest Allies meet, kill a Sheep, make Merry, and throw the Body into a Hole near the Hut in which the Deceased dwelt, putting also a piece of the slain Sheep, and a Jug full of the Liquor 
Chica,
 into the Grave.


Concerning their Idol 
Pillan,
 to whom with strange Gestures they Sing divers Songs, they believe that he is a Spirit of the Air, and Governs all things on Earth. Some suppose him to be Thunder, and therefore they worship him in a most par∣ticular manner when they hear it Thunder; for then they stick an Arrow and Stone Ax into the Ground, and take Arms into their Hands, putting themselves into a posture as if they should suddenly be set upon by a mighty Enemy, and look'd upon it heretofore as a fore-running of the 
Spaniards
 approach, whose Cruel∣ties they exceedingly dreaded.


They call all their Hero's 
Pillans,
 and ascribe Divine powers to them.


They take very much strong Tobacco, the Smoak whereof puffing in the Air with strange Gestures, they cry, 
Receive this, O Pillan.


When they return home Conquerors from any Victory, they put a Stone Ax into the Ground, and standing Arm'd round about the same, Drink exceedingly, and sing a Song in honor of 
Pillan.
 They use their Prisoners very cruelly, for forcing them to Dance and make Merry amongst them, they on a sudden cleave their Heads with an Ax, pull their Hearts out of their Bodies, and bite the same with their Teeth. After the same manner they punish their Robbers and Traitors; but those that have good store of 
Chica
 to Present the Governors with, escape the Execution: Yet this cannot buy off Sorcerers or Witches, who are without mercy burnt alive, with all they enjoy'd.


They have no Priests, nor any that pretend to any religious Function; onely those that can Sing the 
Pawary
 well, are in great esteem amongst them.


Their second Deity 
Maruapeante
 (they say) informs them in a Dream when they must Marry; but he doth not do them this kindness before they have made them∣selves Drunk, and sung Sonnets to his praise.


This Countrey is Govern'd by prime Persons, call'd 
Ulmen,
 or peculiar Lords, call'd 
Curacen.
 The 
Ulmens
 and 
Curacens
 Command twenty five, sometimes fifty, a hundred Families: Their Power consists in calling all the People together, and consulting with them about State-Affairs, which they dare not do with any parti∣cular

Person, nor Levy any Tax without extraordinary occasion. They are bound to march in the Front of their Subjects against an Enemy, and are under a Gover∣nor-General call'd 
Apocurace,
 or under a 
Nentoque.
 Other lesser Offices are dispos'd of by the 
Curaces,
 or 
Pulmes;
 but their 
Netonques
 are chosen after this manner, 
viz.
 When that honorable Place is vacant, then whoever aims at it, computes with him∣self whether his Means will extend so far as to treat the 
Curaces
 and 
Pulmenes
 with a noble Treat; which if he is able to do, then he sends for them to an appointed place, whither they all go Arm'd, and whilest they are eating and drinking, he that desires the Place begins to tell them of his noble Extract, valiant Exploits, Riches, and eminent Relations, and therefore desires the Place of the deceased 
Nentoque:
 then the 
Curace
 rising, the intended 
Nentoque
 hangs a Chain of 
Turkoises,
 or Cockle∣shells about his Neck; whereupon the 
Curace
 moves the rest to the Election, without any Articles, the new 
Nentoque
 onely promising to Govern all things for the best advantage and benefit of the common State: which done, the 
Curace
 takes the Chain of 
Turkoises,
 and distributes them amongst the primest Persons of Qua∣lity, and so they end the Day in Drinking, Dancing and Singing.


After the same manner they chuse an 
Apocurace,
 or prime Governor; which of late the 
Uca's,
 that they may enjoy the more Priviledge themselves, have not elected.


The 
Chileses
 Arms consist of Lances as long again as the 
Europeans,
 made sharp at the Points. They also use Clubs plated with Iron, and 
Spanish
 Swords. The 
Pulches,
 who dwell behind the high Mountains 
Cordilbra,
 use poyson'd Arrows, make Helmets and Breastplates of Ox-hides, which neither Sword nor Arrow can enter: they all know how to manage a Horse, and the use of a Lance, but are very much afraid of Musquets or Fire-locks.


Because they can neither write nor read, the Governor by a faithful Messenger sends to his inferior Officers such Commands as he judges may tend to the most advantage of the Publick both in Peace and War. This Messenger carries an Arrow with a Ribbon, as a Sign of his Employment; the Arrow is held in the Right-hand, and if he who receives it will answer the Message, then he sends back the same Arrow with another; but if he judges it convenient to acquaint any other 
Curaces
 and 
Pulmenes
 with the same Message, then he sends one of his own Servants to them with the same Arrow.


As touching the Climate and Production of 
Chili,
 this Account is given by an Eye-witness: 
The Winter Season (saith he) is so tempestuous, that sometimes the Trees are not onely blown up by the Roots, but the Earth it self is rent asun∣der; some Valleys being fill'd with Snow, swell the Rivers exceedingly when it melts, which overflowing part of the Countrey, makes the same very fruitful. It is also extream cold here, because such sharp Winds blow from the Moun∣tains, that they pierce through the Skin and Flesh of a Man: and indeed these Winds would make the whole Countrey desolate, were not the Mountains over∣grown with great Oaken Trees, against which the Wind breaks. Moreover, the Valleys produce Coals, which serve the Inhabitants for Fewel. The Winter be∣reaves the Trees of Leaves; but not those which grow in the Wildernesses. In 
March
 the Fields are full of innumerable sorts of sweet-smelling Flowers; out of some whereof are boyl'd the 
Angel-Water,
 so call'd for its smell and wholsom taste. The Grass grows in 
November
 and 
December
 as high as our standing Corn. Turnips, Mint, Clover, and Mustard-seed, grow naturally for several Leagues together. Likewise excellent Physical Herbs grow here, whose power and ope∣ration their Doctors, call'd 
Maci,
 keep from the 
Spaniards.
 These 
Maci
 are in great

esteem, not onely amongst the 
Chileses,
 but also the 
Spaniards,
 for their great skill in Physick. Amongst these Herbs the chiefest is call'd 
Quincia-mali
 which grows but half a hands-breadth above the Ground, and spreads into several Stalks like a Nosegay; and on each Stalk is a Saffron-colour'd Flower. This Herb pull'd up with the Root, and boyl'd, and the Decoction given to any one that is bruis'd within, works most wonderfully, for it draws out the putrifi'd. Blood, though sunk never so deep in the Wound. Moreover the Juice of 
Culen
 is also very healing, if us'd for an Ointment, or pour'd on any Wound. This Herb, by the 
Spaniards
 call'd 
Albaciga,
 hath sweet-smelling Leaves, and a tall Body. In some places also grows an Herb, not unlike Grass, which boyl'd in Water, immedi∣ately cures the Feaver and Spleen, and cleanses the Blood. There are likewise Medicines here, which dissolving the Stone in the Bladder or Kidneys, cause it to be urin'd forth. The Plant 
Luce,
 which grows out of rented Rocks which are often overflow'd by the Sea, makes a sort of well tasted Bread.


The Wilderness 
Atacama,
 which makes a Boundary betwixt 
Peru
 and 
Chili,
 extends Northward ninety Leagues, is dry and barren in Summer, and in the Winter ex∣ceeding cold, and cover'd with Snow. No Provision is to be found upon it, except a few wild Sheep, call'd 
Guanacos.
 About the middle thereof the Brook 
La Sal
 rising in the Eastern Mountains, flows Westward through a deep Valley to the Southern Ocean.


The Water of the fore-mention'd Brook put into any Vessel, immediately turns to Salt, and all along the Shore lie greater or lesser pieces of Salt; so that the Way from 
Peru
 to 
Chili
 through 
Atacama
 is very troublesom: but that which leads thi∣ther over the snowy Mountains 
Andes,
 is much worse, because it is farther about, and threatens the Traveller with Destruction, if he observe not the right Season of the Year; for in the Winter there blows such a cold Wind on these Mountains, that a Man, being suddenly benumm'd, falls down dead on the Ground, and grows stiff against all putrefaction. 
Joseph de Acosta
 tells us, that Bodies have been found there as firm and sound, as if they had been living, which had some years before breath'd their last on the said Mountains.


But 
Diego Almagro,
 who first discover'd 
Chili,
 Anno 1536. went thither with two Companies of Horse, and five hundred Foot, through the Countreys 
Charcas, Chicas, Xuxayes,
 and 
Chaquana,
 and having pass'd over a craggy Soil and the snowy Moun∣tains 
Andes,
 he entred into the first 
Chilean
 Valley 
Capayapo,
 having lost no small number of Men and Horses with Hardship and Cold; the inconvenience there∣fore of both the fore-mention'd Ways between 
Peru
 and 
Chili,
 forc'd Travellers to go along the Shore wash'd by the Southern Ocean.
 
Copayapo
 bears that Denomi∣nation from the 
Turkoises
 which a Mountain produces there in great abundance. The Valley it self is the fruitfullest of all 
Chili;
 for in no place the 
Maiz
 grows bet∣ter, and in greater abundance than here, the Ears being half a Yard long, and the Stalks the length of a Lance; each Grain that is Sow'n, yields at least three hun∣dred in Harvest. All 
Spanish
 Fruits grow better here than in 
Spain.


Through the midst of 
Copayapo
 runs a River of the same Denomination, and twenty Leagues in length from the 
Andes,
 and at its Mouth hath a convenient Har∣bor before the South Sea.


The South part of 
Copayapa
 borders the Valley 
Guasco,
 which is less fruitful than the first, but hath a convenient Haven, into which falls a fresh River, penn'd in by Sluces for the watering of the Cane-Fields. Moreover, there are plenty of Par∣tridges; also wild Sheep and grey Squirrel-skins are of a great value. To the Southward flow also the Rivers 
Maypo, Chacha
 Pool, 
Loro,
 and 
Moule.




Beyond these Streams Eastward, the 
Promonca's
 dwell near the Mountains 
Andes.


In the Valley 
Chili,
 which gives Denomination to the whole Countrey, were formerly the famous Gold-Mines 
Quillatas,
 from whence 
Valdivia,
 Anno 1544, car∣ry'd an invaluable Treasure. The South Sea makes here a large and convenient Harbor for all manner of Vessels, built two Leagues below the City 
Serena,
 at a lit∣tle River, which so moistens the low Countrey, that it produces all manner of Plants. It rains here not above three times ayear.


From the Entertainment which Sir 
Francis Drake
 met withal here, may suffici∣ently be conjectur'd the Power of 
Serena;
 for when the 
English
 Landed here for Water, they were driven away not without great loss by three hundred 
Castilian
 Horse, and two hundred Foot that Sally'd out of the City. The Mines, though they inclose much Gold, yet they produce but little, because the 
Spaniards,
 accord∣ing to the testimony of a 
Chilean
 Pilot, whom 
Oliver van Noort
 took Prisoner, de∣stroy'd all the ancient Inhabitants that should have help'd them to dig the Gold.


The City 
St. Jago,
 lying near the Stream 
Topocalma,
 receives great benefit by the Haven 
Valparayso,
 which makes the fore-mention'd River, because in that Haven all Goods that come from 
Lima
 are unladen, and the Goods shipp'd aboard. The Countrey about the same produces plenty of Wines, Apples, Corn, and all sorts of Cattel, and especially Horses in such abundance, that thousands of them run wild.


In 
Valparayso
 Sir 
Francis Drake
 took a Ship from 
Valdivia,
 laden with two thou∣sand five hundred Bars of fine Gold. But the 
Netherland
 Admiral, 
Joris Spilbergen,
 had not such good success, who Sailing thither with five Ships, 
Anno
 1615. disco∣ver'd a 
Spanish
 Ship in the Harbor; where sending his Boats well Mann'd to fetch off a Vessel that lay hal'd on the Shore, they found it burning, and thereupon Steer'd their Course into a little Inlet full of Rocks, which serv'd the 
Spaniards
 in stead of Breast-works; for lying behind them, they fir'd continually on the 
Hollanders;
 yet 
Spilbergen
 Landing with two hundred Men, met a considerable number of 
Spanish
 Soldiers, and Horses drawn out on the Shore, from whom they soon fled.


Before the City 
La Conception
 lies the Island 
Quiriquyna,
 whose Straw Huts 
Spilber∣gen
 laid in Ashes.


At the time when 
Oliver van Noort
 came to an Anchor here, the Governor 
Fran∣ciscus de Quinones
 Commanded seven hundred 
Spanish
 Soldiers to reduce the revolted 
Chileses.


Four Leagues from 
Conception
 lie the rich Gold-Mines 
Quilacoya,
 which formerly produc'd great Riches.


Over against the Valley 
Arauco,
 which rises out of the Sea, lies the Island 
Maria,
 in a large Inlet made by the force of the Waves.


Here grows abundance of Wheat and Barley. The Rivers also afford plenty of Fish, amongst which there is one call'd 
The Lake-Spider,
 in whose Eyes are to be seen little Specks, which would exceed Pearl, if they were but hard enough.


Two 
Spaniards
 Command forty Natives on 
Maria,
 and keep them in such slavery, that they may neither eat Apples, Pears, Grapes, Poultrey, or Sheep, though they are there in great abundance.


Elias Herkmans
 was once in probability to have taken possession of this Island for the 
Netherland
 State, had he not been prevented by an extraordinary occasion.


Between the Towns 
Conception
 and 
Imperial
 lie the Provinces 
Arauco, Tucapel,
 and 
Puren,
 inhabited by a valiant People, that often alarm the 
Spaniards.
 In each Pro∣vince 
Valdivia
 built a Fort in the Year 1551. eight Leagues distant from one another. He also discover'd the rich Gold-Mines 
De Ongol,
 and built the Fort 
Confines
 there.


The Natives hereabouts being exceedingly opprest by the 
Spaniards,
 fell upon

the Fort in 
Puren,
 where those in the Garrison, unable to defend themselves, went to 
Tucapel,
 and from thence to 
Arauco,
 to Settle there. 
Valdivia
 marching with three hundred Men to the Castle in 
Tucapel,
 was so fiercely assaulted at the River 
Leto,
 that all his Men were kill'd, and he himself being taken Prisoner, had melted Gold pour'd down his Throat: One Boy onely escaping, brought the news to those in Garrison in the Fort 
Arauco,
 who fled to 
La Conception,
 as those from 
Puren
 to 
Imperial.
 Not long after the Lieutenant 
Francisco de Villagra
 went with a hundred and sixty Soldiers to 
Raquetta,
 a Promontory against the South Sea in 
Arauco,
 to take Re∣venge for the Death of his General 
Valdivia;
 but he also had like to have follow'd the same fate, for he left ninety six Men behind him, and with much ado recover'd 
La Conception:
 By which means the victorious 
Chileses
 came to be so much fear'd, that the 
Spaniards
 forsook the Towns 
Rica, St. Jago,
 and 
Confines,
 and fortifi'd them∣selves strongly in 
Imperial.


Concerning 
Arauco,
 it is a small County, twenty Leagues long and seven broad. The Inhabitants thereof are strangely valiant; those that inhabit the Mountains are call'd 
Pulches,
 and are generally of a duller Spirit than those that dwell in the Val∣leys; all of them use long Pikes, Halberds, Bowes and Arrows, Helmets, and Breastplates of Deer-skins, in the Wars; they know when to close and open their Ranks, and stand in good order according to Martial Discipline, which makes the 
Spanish
 King receive little benefit from 
Arauco,
 though it is full of rich Mines, be∣cause those in Garrison being five hundred in number, dare not come out of their Fort.


To 
Arauco
 belongs the Island 
La Mocha,
 low on the North side, and rocky on the South; against which the Ocean breaks its Billows: in the middle of it rises a split Mountain, out of whose Gap flows a fresh Brook; the fruitful Soyl produces abundance of Pumpeons, Maiz, Potato's, and all manner of delicious Fruit; as also Oxen, Sheep, and other Cattel, which go grazing up and down in great Herds; the Village that is upon it boasts about fifty Huts, built long of Straw, with a Door in the middle, and round like an Arch on the top.


Sir 
Francis Drake
 and 
Candish
 were formerly somewhat roughly Entertain'd here by the Inhabitants: but they shew'd themselves somewhat more civil to the 
Dutch
 Admirals,
 
Oliver van Noort
 and 
Joris Spilbergen:
 The first coming to an Anchor here 
Anno
 1600. put one 
John Claeszoon
 (Condemn'd for some great Crime to be Landed on some strange Place) ashore on 
La Mocha,
 with a few Trifles; for which being kindly Entertain'd, the Seamen resolv'd to go ashore the next day, who were like∣wise civilly Treated. The Governor of 
Mocha
 coming aboard, Lodg'd a Night in the Ship, and afterwards conducted the Admiral through the Village, but forbad the Seamen from entring any of the Huts; out of which the Women upon the hearing of a sudden noise, came running out, and kneel'd down on the Ground in three Parties, whilest an old Matron came forth with a Pitcher full of 
Chica,
 and gave each of the 
Netherlanders
 a Cup full to drink, sitting on Blocks in the Fields.


A Man Marries as many Wives here as he can maintain. They all live peacea∣bly one with another, and go Cloth'd with a pair of Breeches, and Frock without Sleeves. The Women tie their Hair in Braids about their Heads, but the Men let it hang down carelesly.


Fifteen years after 
Spilbergen
 Landing here with four well Mann'd Boats, found the Shore full of People, who had brought all manner of Provisions to barter against Axes and Knives. The Islanders going aboard, wondred to see the Soldiers drawn out in order, and much more when a Gun was fir'd: They furnish'd the 
Hollanders
 with a hundred Sheep, amongst which was one with an extraordinary long Neck, and Legs, Hair, Mouth, and Back like a Cammel.




The 
Netherland
 Admiral, 
Hendrick Brewer,
 coming to an Anchor on the Coast of 
Guadalanquen,
 Anno 1643. was inform'd by the 
Chileses,
 that about four years be∣fore they had burnt 
Baldivia,
 murder'd the 
Spaniards
 that were in Garrison, and pour'd melted Gold down the Governor's Throat and into his Ears, and made a Drinking-Cup of his Scull, and Trumpets of his Shin-bones. 
Brewer
 also found some Ruines of the City, which formerly boasted four hundred and fifty Houses, and was not yet so utterly defac'd, but that the two Markets and cross Streets were plainly to be seen, and the Walls gave sufficient testimony of its ancient lustre. The Countrey round about produces Wheat and Barley; neither are there any Mines to be found that produce finer Gold than those which are hereabouts. In the Mouth of the River which runs to 
Baldivia,
 lies a small Isle, the Men whereof are gross and fat, and spend their time in Drinking and Dancing, whilest the Wo∣men do all the Work.


About the City 
Osorno,
 though lying under a cold Climate, is a Soil full of Gold-Mines, where above two thousand 
Chileses
 are under the subjection of the 
Spaniards.


Since 
Teunis Swarte-Teun
 conquer'd and ruin'd this Place with small Forces un∣der 
Spilbergen
's Command, it hath not yet repair'd its Losses: The Ruines of great Buildings are sufficient testimonies of its former splendor.


On the utmost Point of the Island, on which 
Osorno
 is built, lies the Village 
Carel-Mappo,
 burnt by 
H. Brewer,
 An. 1643. for he Landing sixty six Men here, under the Command of the Ensign 
Blauewenhaen,
 they Engag'd with ninety 
Spaniards,
 who be∣took themselves to the Woods, leaving six Men and fifteen Horses behind them.


The Sea-Coast of 
Chile
 lies as followeth: It begins on the North with the Val∣ley 
Copayapo,
 runs Southerly to the Haven 
Coquimba,
 and makes the large Inlet 
Aton∣gayo;
 the convenient Harbor 
Quintero,
 at the Mouth of the River 
Concagua,
 is also to the Southward.


Next 
Quintero
 follow the Havens 
Valparaysa, Topocalma,
 and 
Penco,
 known by se∣veral Mountains cover'd with Snow.


The Stream 
Labapi
 disembogues also in the Bay 
Arauco,
 where the Sea washing over the Shore, makes good Salt.


On the Shore of the River 
Lebo, Garcias Mendoza
 built the Town 
Canete,
 which not long after was deserted, by reason of the Wars with the 
Chileses.


From the Haven 
Carnero
 a Channel runs to the City 
Confines:
 also the River 
Cauten
 makes a convenient Harbor before the City 
Imperial.


Next appear the Streams 
Tolten, Queule, Valdivia, Chabin,
 and 
Bueno;
 and near the Promontory 
Gallego, Chili
 ends to the South.


Eastward up into the Countrey lies the great Province 
Tucuman,
 inhabited by three sorts of People, 
viz. Juries, Diagnitas,
 and 
Tucumans,
 from whom the Countrey receives its Denomination, and juts Northward against the 
Chicas,
 belonging to the rich Plate-Countrey 
Potosi,
 Eastward towards the Province 
La Plata,
 and Westward towards the South Sea.


The Ground about the City 
St. Jago del Estero,
 formerly call'd 
Vares,
 being the Bishop's See, and Residence of the Governors, is brackish and sandy. The Citi∣zens are most of them Weavers; the Natives go Cloth'd, and are of an affable Temper and Disposition.


The River 
Estera
 yearly overflows the Countrey, which being dung'd with Mud, produces abundance of 
Maiz,
 Barley, Wheat, and all manner of Fruits.


The Stream 
Salado
 runs the same Course as the 
Estera,
 from the West to the East through a Plain-Countrey, but hath brackish Water, and abundance of Fish. Be∣tween




Magaglianus
 was follow'd, 
Anno
 1525. by 
Garcias Loaysa,
 who Sailing into the 
Straights
 near the Promontory 
Virgines,
 endur'd great Colds; in the Haven 
St. George
 he found store of green Cinamon: The People he reported to be of so monstrous a stature, that they might well be accounted Giants; some of whom went naked, others wore a Net of Feathers made fast about their Wastes, and others a loose Garment all over their Bodies. 
Loaysa
 gave this Countrey, inhabited by Giants, the Denomination of 
Terra del Patagoni.
 He judg'd the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan
 to be a hundred and ten 
Spanish
 Miles long between the two Promontories, 
Virgines
 at the North Sea, and 
Deseado
 at the Southern Ocean. Within lie three Inlets, which have seven Leagues in breadth.


Simon Alcazova
 Sailing hither nine years after 
Loaysa,
 shunn'd the Land on the left-side of the 
Straights,
 because it lay most under Water, and was forc'd by his Men to return to the Haven 
Leones,
 where he and all his Seamen were put to death.


Not long after the Bishop of 
Placentia
 fitted out three Sail, which entring the 
Straights,
 Anno 1540. lost their Admiral; the Vice-Admiral Wintering at the In∣let 
Las Zorras,
 (so call'd, because they took many Foxes on a Champain Countrey without Trees) return'd to 
Spain
 without any farther success: the third Ship with much ado arriv'd also at 
Arequipa.


The 
English
 Captain, 
Richard Hawkins,
 also Sailing hither, found the Land on the South side of the 
Straights,
 most broken, and in some places a few Huts.


Anno
 1578. Sir 
Francis Drake
 Sailing hither along the Coast of 
Brasile,
 Landing on an Island in the Mouth of the 
Straights,
 kill'd above three thousand Birds. Sail∣ing from hence he was miserably toss'd in the South Sea, and discover'd about the middle of the 
Straights,
 that the Current out of the Southern and Northern Ocean met at the place where a great Bay bends Southwardly: To three Isles he gave the Name of 
Elizabeth, Bartholomew,
 and 
George,
 and drove three Weeks without making any Sail, in snowy, misty, and rainy Weather, falling amongst dangerous Rocks, and at last Anchor'd in the Haven 
Health,
 which he so call'd, because his sick and wearied Men being refresh'd there, he set Sail from thence and return'd home.


Captain 
Thomas Candish
 following Sir 
Francis Drake
 eight years after, found near a Creek within the City 
Philip-stadt,
 built there by the 
Spaniards,
 to secure the Pas∣sage out of the Northern to the Southern Ocean for themselves; to which purpose they held four hundred Men in Garrison in the said City, which lying near a plea∣sant Wood, was defended by four Bulwarks, each fortifi'd with a Brass Gun: But the 
Spaniards
 not being able to endure the Cold, nor get in their Harvest, which was continually spoil'd by the Natives, were so pinch'd with Hunger, that after three years stay many of them dy'd in their Houses, which caus'd a filthy Stink, and consequently a vile Distemper, not unlike the Small-pox; at last twenty three of them, amongst whom were two Women, judg'd it convenient to bury their great Guns, and march away with their Musquets; a whole Year they travell'd in great want, feeding on the Leaves of Trees, wild Roots, and Fowls which they now and then kill'd; at last they resolv'd to travel by Land to 
Rio de la Plata,
 but never any news was heard what became of them, onely one 
Spaniard,
 call'd 
Ferdi∣nand,
 being stray'd from the rest, was taken by 
Candish,
 to whom he gave the fore∣mention'd Relation. 
Candish
 entring 
Philip-stadt,
 found a Gibbet, on which hung a Malefactor in Chains, a Church, the Houses full of famish'd Bodies, and four Brass Guns, which he digg'd out of the Ground. From hence he ran to a fresh∣water River (which disembogues into the 
Straights,
) whose Banks are inhabited by cruel Cannibals, and the Countrey all about plain Pasture Grounds, whereas most

part of the Shore in the 
Straights
 is very mountainous. 
Candish
 Landing, found 
Spanish
 Knives and Stilletto's amongst the Man-eaters, and lay a whole Moneth at Anchor in the western Mouth of 
Magellanica,
 by reason of great Storms, feeding on Mussles, Cockles, and Fowl; and from thence Sail'd about the World, returning home at last with a Booty of twenty Tun of Gold.


Anno
 1599. 
Simon de Cordes
 Commanding five 
Netherland
 Vessels, entring the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 found in the green Bay, Mussles of a Span long, abundance of Ducks and Geese, and a great many Trees not unlike Laurel, they being onely bigger, and had a sharp biting Shell. The Wind blew exceeding hard here over the Rocks, insomuch that they were sometimes driven from four Anchors.


A few Moneths after 
Oliver van Noord
 follow'd 
Cordes,
 and Anchor'd near the 
Pinguyn
 Isles, the biggest whereof is calll'd 
Castemme,
 and the least 
Talke;
 the Inhabi∣tants thereof dwell in Caverns under Ground, and feed on the Birds 
Pinguyns;
 of whose Skins they make Mantles. These Birds weigh generally fifteen or sixteen Pound, have black Backs, white Bellies, very thick Skins, long Bills like Ravens,
 short thick Necks, two plum'd Fins in stead of Wings, black Feet like a Goose, and delicate Flesh, notwithstanding they feed on Fish, after which they swim very swift with the fore-mention'd Fins, which hang down on each side along their Bo∣dies when they walk upright on the Shore; they sit generally four together in their Holes, made after such a manner, that a Man which knows not of them, may ere he be aware, sink up to the Knees in the same, and be bitten terribly by the Legs. 
Cordes
 his Seamen got in two hours time above nine hundred of these Birds, whilest he discover'd the salvage People 
Enoo,
 which inhabit the Countrey 
Cossi,
 and are di∣vided into the Families 
Kemenetes, Kennekas,
 and 
Caraike;
 the first inhabited the Territory 
Carray;
 the second 
Caramay;
 and the third, 
Morine:
 all of them Paint their Cheeks and Forehead. Farther into the Countrey dwell the 
Trimenes,
 a gi∣gantick sort of People, eleven Foot high, who maintain continual Wars with their Neighbors.


Moreover, 
Noord
 discover'd several Inlets full of Ice and fresh Water in the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 whither the 
United Netherlands
 have since sent the Admirals 
William Schouten, Joris Spilbergen,
 and 
Jaques le Heremite.
 The common opinion, that the Countrey on the South side of 
Magellan
 is of the Main Continent, Experience hath manifested; for 
Schouten
 found the same, 
Anno
 1616. who Sailing from 
Porto Desire,
 left the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan
 on the right-hand, and Sail'd Southerly through whitish Water, and in fifty four Degrees discover'd a Channel eight Leagues broad, through which ran a strong Current. The Coast rose with high Moun∣tains, whose tops were cover'd with Snow. The utmost Point was call'd 
Mauritius,
 from the Prince of 
Orange;
 the broken Coast on the other side, 
The States-Island;
 and the 
Straights
 it self, 
Le Maire,
 upon the Request of the Merchant 
Jacob Le Maire,
 whose Father 
Isaac
 was chief owner of the two Ships of which 
Schouten
 was Com∣mander, who found so many Whales here, that he could scarce Steer clear of them, they swimming by hundreds in a Shoal. The Sea-pies, much bigger than Swans, suffer'd themselves to be caught by the Hands of the Sea-men. Moreover he call'd the barren grey Rocks, and others lesser, lying North-East from the Promontory 
Hoorn, Barnevields Isles.
 Sailing beyond the Point 
Hoorn,
 he was toss'd by the vast Billows that came rowling out of the West.


It was no sooner nois'd abroad, that the 
Netherlanders
 had found the Straights 
Le Maire,
 but the 
Spanish
 King 
Philip
 immediately sent two Carvels thither, under the Command of 
Garcias de Nodal,
 who took an exact Account of the Heads, Roads, and Inlets belonging to the fore-mention'd 
Straights,
 and return'd without perfor∣ming any other Exploits.








Diego Flores
 Steer'd four years before 
Candish
 to the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan
 with twenty three Sail of Ships, Mann'd with three thousand five hundred Seamen, besides five hundred old 
Netherland
 Soldiers, with which he unhappily weigh'd An∣chor from 
Cales;
 for before he got out of sight of the 
Spanish
 Coast, he lost five of his Ships and eight hundred Men; yet prosecuting his Voyage, he stay'd du∣ring the Winter Season on the Coast of 
Brasile,
 and was surpris'd by so vehement a Storm, near the Island 
Catalina,
 that a company of Women, sent under the Charge of 
Peter Sarmiento
 to Settle in the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 were all cast away, with the greatest part of the Ammunition and Provisions. The 
English
 Admiral 
Fenton
 took three Ships of this Fleet from 
Flores,
 two were cast away in the River 
La Plata,
 and one ran back to 
Spain,
 whilest 
Flores
 came into the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan
 on the last day of 
March,
 at which time the whole Countrey lay cover'd with Snow; wherefore seeing no hopes of finding out any place to Settle 
Sarmiento
 upon, he stood back with eight Sail to 
Brasile,
 and in his Return burnt three 
French
 Ships, took two more, and Sail'd home. But his Lieutenant 
Diego Ribera,
 and the Gover∣nor 
Peter Sarmiento,
 Landed the Year after 
Flores
 his departure, with four hundred Men, thirty Women, and Provisions for eight Moneths, in the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan;
 from whence 
Ribera
 Sail'd back, whilest 
Sarmiento
 built on the North side of the Mouth of the 
Straights,
 the Town 
Nombre de Jesus;
 and fifty Leagues farther in the narrowest place, 
Philip-stadt,
 with four Bulwarks; the Inhabitants of which (as is before related) were destroy'd by Famine.


Terra del Fuego,
 already mention'd, opposite to the Countrey of the 
Patagones,
 ly∣in the South between the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 is a broken Countrey, with high Mountains full of Trees, and wash'd by pleasant Rivulets: four Foot deep in the Ground it begins to be all Rocky. The Air is troubled with exceeding great Winds out of the West. The Inhabitants are pale Countenanc'd, but Paint their Bodies with divers Colours; they have long, thick, and black Hair, and very sharp Teeth; the Men go stark naked; the Women cover their secret Parts with a piece of Leather, and wear Strings full of Shells about their Necks; some also Mantle

themselves with the Skins of wild Beasts, which affords but little warmth against the Cold that is here in Winter. Their Huts consist of Trees, and are made round at bottom, and sharp on the top like a Tent, having onely a Hole for the Smoak to go out at; they are digg'd three Foot deep into the Ground, and also heap'd round with Earth; within the Huts nothing is to be found but Baskets with Fish∣ing Utensils and Stone Hooks. Their offensive Arms the Men always carry about with them, because they always maintain Wars with their Neighbors. They han∣dle a Quarter-staff very dexterously, are good Slingers and Bowemen; they also use Lances with sharp Stone Points. Moreover they make Boats of the Bark of Trees, which they first cut out into a Form, then sewing it together, bow the same after the manner of a Boat, which rises before and behind, and being fifteen or sixteen Foot long, can carry eight Men, going exceeding swift. These People are not onely beastial in their Practices, but also Murderers.


Lastly, besides the 
Straights
 of 
Le Maire, Henrick Brewer
 hath found a new Pas∣sage to the Eastward above the 
States-Island,
 out of the Northern Ocean to the South Sea.






CHAP. IV. The unknown South-Land.


THe unknown 
South-Land
 extends with several Points to the Southern Ocean, which have been more seen than discover'd by divers Nations.


Opposite to the 
East-India
 Island 
Gilolo,
 lies 
Terra des Papous,
 to which 
Jacob Le Maire
 gave the Denomination of 
New Guinee.


The 
English
 Commander, 
Richard Hawkins,
 Sailing to the Southward behind 
Papou,
 found the Inhabitants black like 
Negro's:
 round about appear several Isles and convenient Harbors. 
Herrera
 places here on the East, the Countrey 
Agnada,
 the Road 
St. Jago,
 the Island 
Los Crespos,
 the Haven 
Andreas,
 the River 
Virginum,
 and the little Isle 
La Vellena,
 before the Mouth of the Stream 
Augustine.
 Next you meet Easterly with the Rivers 
St. Peter
 and 
St. Paul,
 the Havens 
Hieronymus,
 the Isles 
Punta Salida, Abrigo, Malagente,
 and 
Maure de Dios,
 inhabited by white People.


The first that discover'd 
New Guinee,
 Anno 1529. was 
Alvares de Savedra,
 who, as also several others besides him, suppos'd that some of the Islands 
Solomons
 border 
New Guinee.


Eighteen of the many 
Solomon
 Isles exceed the rest, of which some are three hun∣dred Leagues in circumference, some two hundred, others one hundred, and some fifty: All that are inhabited have a fruitful Soil, producing all manner of Provi∣sions, particularly Hogs and Poultrey. The Natives differ very much one from another, for some are black, others white or tawny.


The fore-mention'd 
Hawkins
 in his Voyage towards the 
Straights
 of 
Magellan,
 supposing it by estimation to be fifty Leagues from the Main Coast of 
America,
 dis∣cover'd forty Degrees to the Southward of the 
Equinoctial Line,
 with a Westerly Wind, the unknown 
South-Land;
 which he found to consist of low Land, and to be inhabited, by reason of the many Fires which he saw ashore in the Night.


The 
Spanish
 Commander, 
Peter Fernandes de Quiro,
 and the Admiral 
Lodowick Paes de Torres,
 have made a farther Discovery of this Countrey; for Landing on the

South-Land,
 they met with several People, some whereof were brown, others white, and others sallow; some had long and lank, others short and curl'd Hair: They acknowledg'd no King or supream Governor, nor were Govern'd by any Laws, neither had they any Wall'd Towns or Forts; but being divided amongst themselves, they continually Encountred one another with Darts, Clubs, and Staves. Their Houses built of Wood, were cover'd with the Leaves of Palm-Trees. Their Housholdstuff consisted in Earthen Dishes, Pots, Ropes, Fish-nets, Flutes, Drums, and varnish'd Spoons. Their Gardens were neatly kept. Near their Temples were Burying-places. They Row'd very swift in little Boats. Their Bread, well tasted, was made of long thick Roots, either roasted or boyl'd.


Here also grow six sorts of 
Platano's,
 great abundance of Almonds, Oranges, Cittrons, thick Sugar-Canes, Palm-Trees, which yield Wine, 
Cocoa's,
 and 
Obos,
 in taste not much unlike Quinces; but the greatest benefit which they receive, is from the 
Cocoa
 Nuts, the Pulp whereof is delicious Meat and Drink; the outermost Shells whereof serve for Cups or Dishes, the inner for Ropes and Cordage; of the Leaves they make Sails and Mats, and cover their Houses with the same; of the Body, Oars, Clubs, Pikes, and Props for their Houses.


Besides several sorts of Pot-herbs, here grow very high Coleworts and 
Bledo's.


The Countrey also abounds with Pigeons, Partridges, Ducks, Goats, Hogs, and other ordinary Cattel and Fowls.


The Rivers afford them Souls, Salmon, Thornback, Sea-Cocks, Eels, Gurnets, and several other unknown Fishes, very delicate and wholsom.


This Countrey also produces Nutmegs, Mastick, Peppers, Ginger, Cinamon, Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silk, Sugar, Anniseed, Honey, Wax, Ebony-wood, Turpen∣tine, Lime-pits, and Marble.


Philips-Bay
 bends twenty Leagues into the Countrey, hath a safe Harbor, and excellent Ground, consisting of black Sand. Two great Rivers discharge their Waters into the said Bay, round about which are pleasant Woods, full of Quails, Parrakito's, Parrots, Nightingales, and Bulfinches, which Sing very sweetly. The Blossoms, especially of Orange-Trees, and the Herb 
Alvaca,
 yield an odoriferous smell. The wholsom Air adds vigor to aged People.


Fernandes de Quir
 delivering the fore-mention'd Account to 
Philip
 the Second, King of 
Spain,
 mov'd him to Plant the unknown 
South-Land,
 and the rather, be∣cause he had not found any snowy Mountains, drown'd Land, Crocodiles, 
Mus∣chito's,
 or any hurtful Creature, yet was not regarded; so that no 
Spaniard
 hath since that time set Foot on the unknown 
South-Land.
 But the 
East-India
 Company undertaking the Design with great eagerness, sent thither two Ships, 
viz.
 the 
Hems∣kerk
 and 
Sea-Cock,
 under the Command of 
Abel Tasman,
 to make a farther Disco∣very of the said 
South-Land: Anno
 1642. on the twelfth of 
August,
 they weigh'd Anchor from 
Batavia,
 Sail'd through the 
Straights
 of 
Sunda
 to 
Maurice-Island,
 where they Anchor'd in the North-West Haven before the Castle 
Frederick-Henrick,
 on the fifth of 
September
 in the fore-mention'd Year. On the eighth of 
Octob. Tasman
 stood over to the 
South-Land,
 near which he was surpris'd by a violent Storm; af∣terwards, on the twenty fifth of 
November,
 he discover'd a barren Shore, against which the Sea beat very furiously; and Steering along this Coast, he found a con∣venient Inlet, but was forc'd by the hard Weather to stand off to Sea again; yet not long after approaching the Shore, he saw great hollow Trees, and round about them abundance of Mussle-shells, and from the Wood heard a shrill noise of Peo∣ple Singing: Going to the same place again, he put the Orange Flag on a Pole, Carv'd with the 
East-India
 Companies Arms, and call'd the Inlet 
Frederick-Henrick,


the whole Coast, 
Anthony van Diemen.
 Sailing from thence Eastward, he on the eighteenth of 
December
 discover'd a convenient Haven, where sending his Sloop to discover the Shore, he came back in the Evening, being follow'd by a Boat, which approach'd nearer and nearer, but Night coming upon him, he could not well discern what they were that pursu'd him, but heard the cry of hoarse Voices, and a shrill noise like that of a Trumpet, which the 
Netherland
 Seamen answer'd by hollowing, and blowing on their Trumpets, and at last firing a Gun, the 
South∣landers
 made a hideous noise, and blowing their Horns, return'd ashore. 
Tasman
 hereupon call'd his Watch, laid Hangers, Pikes, and Musquets ready Charg'd, up∣on the Decks. The next day the 
Southlanders
 came in several Boats, two and two ty'd together, and cover'd with Planks, towards the Ships;
 the Gunner of the 
Hemskerk
 going with six Men in a Boat to help mount some Guns in the 
Sea-Cock,
 were betwixt both Ships set upon by the 
Southlanders,
 who approacht with a hideous noise, kill'd four of the 
Hollanders
 with long Poles, and forc'd the other three to save themselves by swimming; which they had no sooner done, but they Row'd with incredible swiftness towards the Shore, insomuch that they were out of the reach of their Guns before they could make ready to fire at them. 
Tasman
 finding that there was no good to be done here, since he hazarded the Lives of his Seamen against a company of wild People, he set Sail, but was follow'd by divers Boats, at which he fir'd his After-Guns with pieces of Iron and Stones, which killing some of them, made the rest return. In the midst of the Boats, which were ty'd two and two together, sat the Commander, who encourag'd the Rowers; they all us'd Clubs without Points.


These People were gross of Body, undaunted, strong, and of a tawny colour; the Hair of their Heads stroak'd up round, was ty'd up on their Crown, on which stuck a stiff white Feather; about their Necks hung a square Plate; they wore in stead of Cloaks, square pieces of Cloth, made fast before on their Breasts.


Tasman,
 by reason of his rough Entertainment call'd this Harbor, 
Murderers-Bay,
 and afterwards Sail'd along the Shore till the fifth of 
January
 1643. on which Day he dropt Anchor near a little Rocky Island, from which fell two Streams, with a great noise into the Sea. The Inhabitants, a strong People, beckned to the Seamen to come on Shore; some lean'd on thick Clubs, others Fenc'd one with another. 
Tas∣man
 sending his Sloop ashore for Water with two Drakes, return'd without any, not being able to Land, by reason of the hollow Sea near the Shore; wherefore Sailing from thence he discover'd two low Isles, which were full of Woods of very tall Trees; from the biggest whereof came a little Boat, sharp before and behind, in which three sallow Men, sitting behind one another, Row'd with great swift∣ness towards the 
Hemskerk;
 whereupon 
Tasman
 commanded all his Men to go un∣der the Hatches, that the three 
Southlanders
 might not be afraid to come aboard; he also threw a piece of Linnen out of his Cabbin Window, which one of them, leaping into the Sea, took up, and as a sign of thankfulness, laid the same on his Head, and being hereby emboldned, they came nearer the Rudder, where they took up a Knife, ty'd to a piece of Wood, out of the Water, and return'd the Seamen a Fishhook of Mother-of-Pearl, ty'd to a Cotton Line. Approaching the Shore, they saw abundance of People running along, with two little Flags on Sticks. Some of the Natives came in their Boats close up with 
Tasman
's Ship; and one more bold than the rest entring the same, was found to be a tall Man with a broad black Beard, and green Leaves about his Neck, who sat down on the Deck with his Legs under him, and bow'd down his Head oftentimes very low: 
Tasman
 re∣turning his Civility, took him by the Hand to Treat him in his Cabbin, but a

Dog which was in the Ship Barking, he grew fearful, and went into his Boat again. Several other 
Southlanders
 swam aboard, and others brought 
Pisang
 and 
Clappes
 in their Boats. Against the Evening a great Vessel, surrounded with lesser Boats, came Rowing towards the 
Hemskerk,
 the Men making a great noise; the Seamen fearing some Design, ran all to their Arms, but were convinc'd of their Friendship by the Gifts they Presented them with from the Governor of the Island. The next day a strange Boat came near the 
Sea-Cock, viz.
 two Sloops, which being ty'd together, and cover'd with Boards, carry'd several Men, Commanded by a Captain, by them call'd 
Orangkay:
 On the midst of the Boards which co∣ver'd the two Boats, stood a Hut made of Rushes, and cover'd over with 
Pisang
 Leaves; the Sails being made of Mats, caus'd it to Sail very swiftly. Round about this Sloop Row'd lesser Boats, out of which loud Acclamations were heard, every one crying out, 
Hael, Hael:
 during which noise, those 
Southlanders
 which were already come aboard, sat still on the Decks, which made 
Tasman
 think that their King himself was coming to give him a Visit, which accordingly fell out, for he came and Presented him with several Hogs, Poultrey, 
Clappes
 and 
Pisang,
 all cover'd with white Cloths.


This 
Southlandish
 King was Habited in a Suit, the Stuff whereof resembled 
Chi∣nese
 Paper, doubled and pasted together, and was attended by a great Train of Men, Women, and Children, all of them as black as a Coal; some of them swam after, and others follow'd him in Boats.


These 
Southlanders
 barter'd their Clothes and Necklaces, which consisted of Mother-of-Pearl and white Cockles, and Fishhooks made also of Mother-of-Pearl, against Nails, Knives, and the like Trifles.


Tasman
 caus'd a Shirt, Breeches, Doublet, and Hat, to be put on an old 
Orang∣kay;
 who being thus Cloth'd, stood a considerable time admiring of himself, and was also much wonder'd at by his Subjects; but going into the Countrey, he came back without his Clothes.


Another 
Orangkay
 being Presented with a Rummer of Wine, pour'd out the Wine, and setting the Rummer on his Head, went away with great joy.


Some of the Governors view'd the Ships, not onely above, but also below the Decks, and being brought to the Guns, they desir'd to know the use of them; whereupon one being Discharg'd, it so affrighted them, that had they not been held, they had all leap'd overboard.


Provisions were daily brought by the 
Southlanders
 to the 
Hollanders
 in great Ves∣sels, surrounded by many lesser; still as they put their Oars into the Water, they made a hideous noise.


Tasman
 bringing some empty Vessels upon the Deck, thereby to make them un∣derstand that he wanted fresh Water, the 
Orangkays
 pointed to the Shore; whither they went with two Boats, which return'd without Water, the Inhabitants them∣selves being forc'd to dig Pits to get the same.


Mean while other 
Southlanders
 coming aboard, the Pilot and Boatswain's Boy blow'd on their Trumpets, another play'd on a Flute, and a fourth on a Violin whilest some of the the Seamen Dancing, so amaz'd the Natives, that they stood like senseless Creature, gaping with open Mouth upon them.


Tasman
 looking into a Grammar which contain'd the Language of the 
Solomons
 Isles, found that many words which were us'd by these People, had a great simi∣litude with those of that Language.


Besides these Men, there came likewise a great many Women aboard, all of them extraordinary tall, especially two, who might justly be stil'd Giantesses; 


one whereof had Mustacho's; both ran, and embracing the Chirurgeon 
Henrick Haelbos,
 desir'd carnal Copulation with him, and seem'd to quarrel one with ano∣ther about him: Others confidently put their Hands into the 
Hollanders
 Breeches, their Husbands giving consent thereunto: All of them had thick, curl'd, black Hair, which they colour'd red, and comb'd with ten little round Sticks ty'd toge∣ther on the top, and left wide like Teeth at the bottom; yet some of them let their Hair hang down in long braided Locks; they shave their upper Lips, but keep a square Beard on their Chin; yet amongst the old People there were some whose Cheeks were overgrown with Hair: Their manner of shaving is with the Teeth of certain Fish made fast to a Stick; they all went bare-headed, except some few, who ty'd a square piece of Stuff, wrought of Leaves or Feathers, above their Eyes against the Sun; the upper parts of their Bodies were all naked, but about their Middle some wore a Girdle, others a Mat of 
Clappes
 Leaves, others a Cloth not unlike 
Chinese
 Paper, about the lower parts of their Bodies. The Wo∣mens Apparel differ'd little from the Mens, excepting that their Aprons reach'd farther down, 
viz.
 to their Knees. They barter'd their Clothes against Nails. Some of the 
Orangkays,
 being Entertain'd in the Cabbin, wonder'd to see a Bullet that was Discharg'd from the Quarter-deck, fall into the Water at so great a distance. They wore about their Necks Mother-of-Pearl, white Cockles, sweet-smelling Flowers, green Leaves, or the Nails which they had gotten of the 
Hollanders:
 Some of the aged Women wanted both their little Fingers, and the young ones the upper Joynts of them, which the old Men also wanted: 
Haelbos
 pointing at the Stump, ask'd the reason of it, but one of them laying his Hand under his Chin, made strange Signs, out of which he could apprehend nothing.


On the twenty third of 
January,
 a second time 
Tasman
 went ashore for Water, carrying Spades and Pick-axes with him, to dig Pits with. Two of the 
Hollanders
 Boats going close together, in each of which were three 
Southlanders, Tasman
 call'd to his Rowers to pull stoutly; which the 
Southlanders
 in 
Tasman
's Boat observing to tend to their Rowing the swifter, laugh'd and hooted at their Countrey-men that were in the 
Sea-Cocks
 Boat, when they chanc'd to get beyond them. 
Tasman
 in his going ashore discover'd several Isles at a distance, was kindly Entertain'd, and towards the Evening carry'd by four Men through the Water, on a Mat made fast betwixt two Poles, to his Sloop, whither they also brought nine Hogs, and fresh Water digg'd out of Pits.


Tasman
 being got about the Point of the Island, saw the 
Hemskerk
 under Sail; wherefore Rowing aboard the 
Sea-Cock,
 he was inform'd that she had slipt her An∣chor; whereupon following her, he got sight of another green Island the next day, along the Shore whereof ran several People with Sticks, on which hung white Cloths: some of them came aboard, and brought with them what Provisions the Island afforded. The Inhabitants barter'd 
Clappes, Pisang,
 Fowls, Hogs, Mother-of-Pearl Fish-hooks, Stone Axes, little Stools, great Clubs, with a black Point as long as a Man's Arm, and hooked, against Trifles. The 
Hollanders
 were also stor'd here with fresh Water. The People both in Language, Habit, rud Customs, were very like those of the first Island, but were not altogether so courteous. One of the 
Southlanders
 stealing a Half-pike out of the Boat was forc'd by his Companions to restore the same.


The fore-mention'd 
Haelbos
 relates, That going ashore with some Soldiers, he saw their Houses, which he found to be built after a strange manner, 
viz.
 some of them were round like Towers, Wider at top than at bottom, and without any Holes for Air, but all built close of Canes, which were stuck in the Ground; other

Huts were cover'd with a long Roof of 
Pisang
 or 
Clappes
 Leaves, resting on Posts; under which kind of Building 
Haelbos
 shelter'd himself against a mighty Shower of Rain, found divers young Men and Women sitting on Mats, and an old Woman, blind through Age, lying by them on the Ground, and Fanning her self with 
Pi∣sang
 Leaves: The Men going away, signifi'd thereby a kind of Invitation to the 
Hollanders
 to go to the Women, who not receiving the Entertainment they ex∣pected, rose altogether on a sudden, and Singing, Danc'd about the 
Hollanders.
 The Men had on their Shoulders and Breasts, Scars of half an Inch deep, and an Inch long; upon some of which, being fresh and bleeding, the Flyes sat. They eat after a strange manner, for stripping off the outmost Rinds of the 
Clappes
 with their Teeth, and breaking the hard Shell against their Elbows, they pull out the Kernel, and eat the same. Whatever Flesh-meat they eat, they never throughly boyl or roast it, but make it onely just warm. They sleep on the Ground upon Mats, and lay their Heads on a little woodden Cricket with four Feet. They take great pride in their Hair, and those that have not long Hair of their own, use Perukes.


Tasman
 steering his Course towards the high Coast that lay before this Island, was follow'd by several small Vessels from the adjacent Shore, of which some car∣ry'd a Bough of 
Clappes
 or 
Pisang,
 with white Veins at the ends; but seeing the Ships Sail from them, they threw the same overboard. 
Tasman
 standing Westerly, discover'd three Isles, near the last whereof the Sea broke exceedingly, which the 
Hollanders
 not without great danger had approached in the Night: after which they discover'd to Leeward of them, a high Coast, which extended it self a great way, but the Sea went so rough, that they durst not venture near the Land; be∣sides, the Sea went very high on a Bank, first ten, then five, three and a half, and again ten, fourteen, and seven Fathom deep; and oftentimes a Man might see the Ground, insomuch that they kept out the Boats belonging to the 
Hemskerk,
 which was in most danger, to carry them aboard of the 
Sea-Cock,
 if the first should chance to split. Lastly, getting over the Bank, they saw very high Land to Windward, and many hilly Isles to Leeward; the Sea also was full of blind Rocks and Shelves, so that they were in danger every hour, and the rather, because the Wind blew hard every day; yet at last losing sight of Land, they steer'd their Course Westerly in five Degrees Southward of the 
Line,
 towards 
New Guinee.
 On the two and twentieth of 
March
 they discover'd low Land full of Woods of tall Trees, sur∣rounded with a company of Isles, against some of which the Sea brake with great violence, insomuch that they were again in great danger, especially when they were got amongst eighteen Isles, between which the Water being shallow, and the Current running very strongly, drove the Ships towards the Shore: Whilest they were Tacking to and again to get beyond the Shelves, a little Vessel, carrying a great Weather-cock on her Star-board, came from the Shore, Row'd by seven Men, who sat on Boards which lay over the same; they were of a brown Complexion, onely girt about with a hairy Girdle, made fast on the top of their Heads; under their Feet they also wore something in stead of Shoes, about their Necks hung Flowers, and their Bodies were Painted black: Among the seven, one who was very fat, and whose Head was adorn'd with two Feathers, stood up and proffer'd the Seamen two 
Clappes,
 in return whereof 
Tasman
 gave them a Box of Nails and a piece of Sail-cloth, which sinking under Water, an aged Man div'd for the same, and bringing it up, gave it to his six Companions, who made no shew of thank∣fulness. Their Arms consisted in Bowes and Arrows. Their 
Clappes
 they call'd 
Anieuw,
 as the other Islanders had done.




Sailing from hence, they discover'd two low Islands full of Trees; and three Leagues from them, on their Star-board, a high Coast, and on the other side a great Island, whither they drove with a small Gale; approaching the same, two very small Boats came towards the 
Hemskerk;
 the biggest of the two carry'd six Men, and the least three, all of them very deform'd; they went stark naked, onely their Yards were ty'd up with a String on their Bellies, and about their Arms hung Chains of Mother-of-Pearl; they were Coal-black, onely red about the Mouth, which redness was occasion'd by the chewing of 
Pisang;
 in their Hair stuck wood∣den Combs, and on their Foreheads green Leaves; but in each Boat was one who had a bruised Reed made fast in his Neck like a Plume; the biggest Vessel was Painted with strange Shapes of Men and Beasts; they us'd red Bowes and Ar∣rows, and having call'd to the Seamen, they Row'd back again to the Shore; which 
Tasman
 left a Stern of him▪ and ran between the Main Coast (by all suppos'd to be 
New Guinee
) and several great Islands, that lay scatter'd along before the Main Coast; from whence came four small Boats, adorn'd with Imagery like Serpents, but kept without Gun-shot from the Ships; at last one leaping overboard, swam to the smallest Boat, out of which one swam back in his stead to the other, and after∣wards came to the 
Hemskerks
 side; he was a black Man, wore Leaves before his Privities, and Armlets about his Elbows; through the Gristle of his Nose stuck a white Bone Bodkin, sharp at the ends, and of a Fingers length, and about his Neck a String full of Cockle-shells.


Tasman
 Sailing on along the Main Coast, met with eighteen Boats more, the Rowers whereof laid their Oars upon their Heads, and not without strange Ge∣stures call'd aloud, and invited the 
Hollanders
 to come ashore: On the Sterns and Heads of these Boats were likewise divers Shapes Painted, upon a white Ground; in some were two, and in others three, four, and five Men; eight of them going into the 
Hollanders
 Boats, were made Drunk with 
Arrack.
 These 
Southlanders
 went stark naked, some onely covering their secret Parts with Leaves; their Skins were black, onely on their Foreheads they drew a red Stroke, which reach'd to their Ears; their brown curl'd Hair was by some colour'd grey, by some red, some let it hang loose over their Sholdiers, others ty'd the same in a Tuft on their Crown, cover'd with a Cap of 
Pisang
 Leaves, others wore their Hair scarce two Fingers long, and through the Gristle of their Nose, a piece of Cane or Quill, and a broad Beard without Mustacho's; they had nothing to barter but large Snail-shells, on which they made a strange noise; and whatsoe're they receiv'd, they first smell'd on it like Dogs: they fancy'd not Nails, as all the other 
Southlanders
 had done. Their manner of Fishing was thus: They ty'd several half 
Clappes
-shells, made fast like a Chain, to a long Reed, shook the same to and again on the Water, to ga∣ther the Fish together. In the Boats lay Planks of an oval fashion, which by Ropes ty'd in the middle they held before them in stead of Shields. When these 
South∣landers
 went from the Ships, one of them threatned to beat the Seamen, shaking his great Club at them; whereupon they all Row'd with great speed to the Shore, whilest one in every Boat knockt with a Staff against the sides, just as if they had beat an Alarm. Amongst them one had barter'd for an old Doublet, with which he shew'd many antick Tricks, putting it on the wrong way, sometimes on his Head, then his Feet into the two Arm-holes, and anon the Button-holes behind on his Back.


The Ships Sailing from hence, ran along a broken Coast, and on the twelfth of 
April
 were so terribly shaken by an Earthquake, which lasted an hour and a half, that they seem'd shivering to pieces in the Water, as if they had ran against a

Rock, notwithstanding they could not fathom Ground with their longest Line. Somewhat farther they discover'd a burning Mountain on an Island, between which and the Main (on which stood also a very high Mountain) they steering their Course, came into a white Water, mov'd by a strong River from the Continent; and coming to an Anchor before the Island 
Jamna,
 they saw the Isles 
Moa
 and 
Ari∣moa
 before them. The 
Jamneans
 calling 
New Guinee
 by the Name of 
Belah,
 inform'd the 
Hollanders,
 that they Warr'd continually with the Inhabitants thereof. These People being also Coal-black, some of them had loose curl'd Hair, hanging down over their Shoulders in long Braids, and others had onely two thick Locks, which cover'd their Ears; all of them wore four Feathers on their Heads: the Men pull'd out their Beards, and hung a great Bone Ring through their Ears, at which also hung a Shell like a Spur; most of them had red Roses ty'd about their Heads, and a Necklace of Hogs Teeth about their Necks; under their Navels they wore Gir∣dles, a handful and a half broad, and about their Wastes Strings full of Shells, or Sea-Cockles, to which a small Lappet was ty'd, and hung down before their Pri∣vities; but because it was but two Fingers broad, and moy'd to an again by the Wind, their Nakedness appear'd to those that took notice thereof; through the Gristle of their Noses they wore a Hogs Tooth, or the Splinter of a Cane. Upon the Stern of their small Boats was the Shape of a little Lyon. One of these Islan∣ders imitated the 
Hollanders
 when they spoke, endeavoring to repeat their words after them, and therefore was call'd 
Parrot.


Tasman
 Sailing from hence to 
Moa,
 came to an Anchor before the Coast, ten Leagues beyond 
Jamna,
 where a great Boat, carrying seventeen Men, coming near the Ship, let flie a great many Arrows at the Seamen; but the next Morning being better reconcil'd, they came aboard, where the Chirurgeon of the Ship gave a Cap to one of 
he 
Jamneans,
 who, as a testimony of his thankfulness for the Present, re∣quested him to sit down; which done, he began to braid his Hair from his Fore∣head to his Neck, tying the same with a String.


Tasman
 weighing Anchor, Sail'd between 
New Guinee
 and the Island 
Insou,
 having got nothing but a few 
Jamnean
 words from the Islanders, who call'd a Bone, 
Ver∣tilia;
 a Hog, 
Paro;
 a Knife, 
Sapera;
 Beads, 
Sassera;
 a Nail, 
Tortor;
 Sleep, 
Moeni;
 and a Rat, 
Asphoo.
 So steering his Course along 
Arimoa,
 which is both higher and larger than the neighboring 
Amoa,
 and resembles a Seaman's Cap, he left 
New Guinee
 a Stern of him, and Steering on Northerly, Sail'd by 
Schoutes-Island,
 where eight large Boats came within Gun-shot of him, each of which had on each side a Wing, under which sat four Rowers, two and two together, with their Feet hang∣ing in the Water; at their approaching near the Ship they put out a long Pole, with a white Flag upon it; whereupon 
Tasman
 also commanded his white Ensign to be put forth, and threw a String of Beads, ty'd to a piece of Wood, out of his Cabbin Window; which the 
Southlanders
 had no sooner taken up, but in testimo∣ny of thankfulness they all broke their Arrows over their Heads, and kept near the sides of the Ship, till such time as the Boatswain thereof sounded a Trumpet, up∣on the hearing of which thep all Row'd away with as much speed as they could possibly. These People were of a sallow Complexion; they broke their Arrows with great Ceremony; for first they pointed with them towards the Skie, then put them into the Water, and breaking each Arrow in two pieces on their Heads, they threw one over the Larboard, and the other over the Starboard; he that broke the Arrow, made a long Speech to the 
Hollanders,
 who took the same for an Oath of their Fidelity toward them. In every one of these Boats were twenty eight or thirty Men.




Tasman
 prosecuting his Voyage farther, discover'd the following day another Island, and a crooked Arm of 
New Guinee,
 near which he judg'd might be an Open∣ing betwixt 
New Guinee
 and 
Gilolo;
 then leaving on his Starboard a great many blind Cliffs, dangerous Shelves, and uneven Grounds, he cast Anchor near a Rock, which at high Water was overflow'd. A Boat coming near the Ship, in which were six Men, whose long Hair hung down their Backs, one of them amongst the rest standing up, call'd to the 
Hollanders
 in the 
Ternaren
 Language, saying, 
What People?
 to which a Seaman, who understood and spake the said Language, an∣swer'd, 
Spaniards:
 whereupon he ask'd, 
From what Countrey, and whither bound?
 to which he was answer'd, 
From Moa to Ternata:
 The 
Southlander
 hereupon reply'd, 
You are Deceivers, the Ship is not Spanish, but Holland make;
 whereupon 
Tasman
 caus'd the Prince of 
Orange
's Flag to be put out, which the 
Southlanders
 no sooner saw, but he cry'd, 
It appears by your Flags that you are Hollanders, who are always more welcom to us than Spaniards:
 However, though the Seaman acknowledg'd his mistake, in saying they were 
Spaniards;
 yet the 
Southlanders
 would not stay within shot of them, but at their Rowing away cry'd aloud, 
Here is abundance of Pisang, Clappes, Potato's, Sugar-Canes, and other Fruits on Shore.


From hence 
Tasman
 Sail'd Northerly between many Isles, and a Channel that separates 
New Guinee
 from 
Gilolo,
 by 
Cerani, Manipe, Bolao,
 and 
Burro,
 to a narrow Opening, where 
Pangesane
 being on his Larboard, rose with exceeding high Rocks, as 
Botton
 on the Starboard. These Rocks are most of them overgrown with Trees and Brambles. In the middle of this Channel also lies a Rock, for its shape call'd A 
Galley,
 by which 
Tasman
 Sailing, bent his Course homeward, and at last, on the fifteenth of 
June,
 Anno 1643. cast Anchor before 
Batavia.






CHAP. V. Terra Borealis, or The Artick Region.


HAving spoken something of the 
Terra Australis Incognita,
 or 
Unkown South-Land,
 there remains something to be said of the opposite part, namely, the 
Terra Borealis,
 or the 
Artick Region;
 which is call'd 
Incognita
 in like manner as the 
Terra Australis,
 in regard, though very much, as well of the one as of the other, hath been search'd into, and in part discover'd by several Voyagers, yet doubtless there is a very vast Tract of Land, in the 
Artick Region
 especially (if it be not rather Sea,) which is altogether unknown, and those parts which have been discover'd, as 
Groenland, Iseland, Nova Zembla, Spilbergen, Hudson's Straights
 and 
Bay,
 &c. so imperfectly known, that they may well deserve the Title of 
Unknown.


The several parts of this 
Artick Region
 are, 1. 
Terra Subpolaris Incognita,
 or that part which lies directly under the 
Pole,
 and is otherwise call'd 
Orbis Arcticus.
 2. 
Groenland.
 3. 
Spilbergen,
 or 
Nieuland.
 5. 
Iseland.
 6. 
Nova Zembla.


The 
Terra Subpolaris
 is describ'd by a certain Seaman of 
Bosleduc,
 to be a great black Rock, about thirty five Leagues in compass, and of an extraordinary heighth; through the Land adjoyning to which the Sea violently breaking, makes four great and violent 
Euripi,
 or Whirlpools, whose Waters driving Northward with so forcible a Stream, that no Ship, though carry'd by nexer so strong a Gale, is able to stem the Current, are at last swallow'd up in the Earth. It is also re∣ported,

that between two of these 
Euripi,
 namely that made by the 
Scythick
 Ocean, and that on the back side of 
Groenland,
 there lieth an Island Northward of 
Lappia
 and 
Biarmia,
 inhabited by 
Pygmies.
 Much more to this purpose is related of the 
Subpolar
 Region, but since it is very improbable that any one could come so near as to make any discovery thereof, to say more of this Matter, would be but to in∣sist upon things savoring more of Fables than Reality.


Groenland
 is that part of 
Terra Septentrionalis,
 which winds about from South to East, and decline Northward from Cape 
Faruel,
 in the 
Deucaledonian
 Sea; however, 
Groenland
 hath been generally taken for an Island; yet many late Navigators think it joyns with the Continent of 
Tartary,
 and others leave it in doubt whether it be Island or Continent: It is bounded towards the East with the 
Deucaledonian
 Ocean; towards the West, with 
Hudson's Straights
 and 
Bay,
 which separate it from 
America;
 towards the North its Bounds are altogether unknown, and is not without reason suppos'd to be the utmost part of the World towards the 
North Pole.
 There are who believe it to be one Continent with 
America,
 and that upon this ground, be∣cause several who have attempted to pass through the 
Straight
 commonly call'd 
The Straight of Davis,
 into the 
East-Indies,
 affirm, that they found it to be a Gulph; but one Captain 
John Monk,
 who was also a great Undertaker in the North-West Passage through this 
Straight,
 or 
Gulf of Davis,
 alledges great Probabilities of this Lands being divided by Sea from the Continent of 
America.


This Countrey hath anciently been divided into two Regions, 
East-Groenland
 and 
West-Groenland;
 answerable to which Division 
Errick,
 surnam'd 
The Ruddy,
 the Son of 
Torvalde,
 is reported by the 
Danish
 Chronicle to have built two Forts or Lodges, 
Ostrebug
 and 
Westrebug,
 in the Eastern part. The first Planters of 
Christia∣nity
 built the City 
Garde,
 which became, as the said Chronicle mentions, a City of great Repute and Traffick, and not long after, the Town 
Albe,
 and towards the Sea-Coast, a Monastery, dedicated to 
St. Thomas.
 The City 
Garde
 was a Bishop's See, to which belong'd a Cathedral Church, by the Title of 
St. Nicholas,
 built in the same City, though a certain 
Iseland
 Chronicle makes mention of the Church of 
Strosnes,
 as the chief Metropolitan and Bishop's See of 
Groenland.
 The Bishop as∣sisted oftentimes in the Assembly of the 
Estates
 of 
Denmark,
 and held of the Bishop of 
Nidrosia
 or 
Drunthen
 in 
Norway,
 as the Temporal 
Estates
 of 
Groenland
 held of the Crown of 
Norway,
 the 
Norwegians
 being the onely known Planters of this Countrey, deriving their Original from the aforesaid 
Errick,
 according to the testimony of 
Mr. Vormius,
 and also of 
Angrimus Jonas,
 in his 
Specimen Islandicum,
 and the Vice-Roy of 
Norway,
 the 
Nomophylax
 (as the said 
Angrimus
 calls him,) or Sovereign Judge of the Countrey. The Inhabitants of 
Westreburg,
 or the Western Coast of 
Groenland,
 are by some call'd 
Skreglinguers.
 According to the 
Iseland
 Chronicle, the Towns and Places of chief note are 
Skageford,
 in the most Eastern part; a little farther West, the Port of 
Funchebuder,
 so call'd from a Page of 
St. Olaus King
 of 
Norway,
 who together with several others were cast away upon that place; a little higher, the 
Roansen,
 full of white Bears, and other wild Beasts. In the Western Coast, 
Kindelfiord,
 an Arm of the Sea, on the right Shore whereof stands 
Korsekirk, i. e.
 a Church built cross∣ways; also the Town 
Vandalebug,
 and not far off a Monastery, dedicated to 
St. Olaus
 and 
St. Augustine;
 the next Place is 
Rumpesinfiord,
 where there is a religious Convent, and divers little Islands, in which are Springs of Water, warm in the Winter, and temperate in the Summer, which are accounted Medicinal, and of great Vertue in the curing of divers Maladies; upon the same Coast lies 
Etsnats∣fiord;
 between which and 
Rupesinfiord
 is the Palace 
Fos,
 and a great Church, dedi∣cated to 
St. Nicholas;
 near the Promontory 
Clining
 is another great House call'd

Daller,
 and beyond 
Eynatsfiord,
 a great Island denominated 
Reynatsen,
 from the abun∣dance of Rein-Deer which breed there: In the same Island is a Quarry of the Stone 
Talguestin,
 not consumable by Fire, and yet soft enough to be cut into any form, insomuch that Vessels have been made of it, containing twelve Tun. More Westerly lies the Island 
Langen,
 and another Royal House call'd 
Hellestad,
 then 
Er∣ricksfford,
 another Arm of the Sea, and at the Entrance thereof, the Island 
Herrieven,
 part whereof belongs to the 
Dome,
 or Cathedral, and the other part to the Church of 
Dunes,
 the principal Church of 
Groenland,
 next to the Cathedral. North-West from 
Erricksfiord
 is 
Midfiord,
 and farther Northward, 
Bondeford;
 near which are several little Isles and Ports. Between 
Ostrebug
 and 
Westrebug
 is a large Desart, alto∣gether uninhabited.


This Description of the Countrey, Extracted from the 
Iseland
 Chronicle, is look'd upon by a late 
French
 Writer of note, as the most particular and faithful; however, the 
Danish
 Chronicle differs in many things, and amongst others in this, that not the hundredth part of 
Groenland
 is possess'd by the 
Norwegians,
 but that there inhabit several different sorts of People, of different Fashions and Governments, altogether unknown to the 
Norwegians.


Groenland,
 notwithstanding its Northerly Situation, is reported to be a Coun∣trey not unfertile of Corn, and other Productions of the Earth; and in respect of its verdant Aspect at some Seasons of the Year, above the rest of those 
Septentrional
 Regions, it is concluded to have merited the Name of 
Groenland,
 i. e. 
Greenland;
 nay, so great is the Heat that is said to be there during the Moneths of 
June, July,
 and 
August,
 by reason of the reverberation of the Sun-beams from the Rocks, that ma∣ny times there is but six Weeks space betwixt Seed-time and Harvest.


The Beasts, which are said to breed here in great numbers, are Horses, Deer, Foxes, Hares, Bears, both black and white, common Wolves, and a sort of Beast between a Deer and a Wolf, besides great store of Beavers and Martins, as the 
Iseland
 Chronicle testifies, whose Furr in fineness may compare with the Sables of 
Russia.
 There are also Gerfalcons in abundance, both white and grey, of so deli∣cate a kind, that they were in ancient times sent to the Kings of 
Denmark
 as Pre∣sents of great rarity.


The Seas about 
Greenland
 abound in very many sorts of Fish, as Sea-Wolves, Sea-Dogs, Sea-Calves, and above all, incredible numbers of Whales of a vast bigness.


But the most remarkable Commodity of this Countrey, is a kind of Horn, com∣monly call'd the 
Licornes,
 or 
Unicorns-Horn,
 which is found there in great quantities, and great store of it is to be seen in 
Denmark,
 some whole, some in great pieces, sometimes onely the Ends or Stumps; but since it appears very different from all other kind of Horn, there is great Question made amongst Naturalists, whether it be Horn or Tooth? and if Horn, whether the Horn of a Beast or Fish? but it is discover'd of late to be the Horn, or rather Tusk of a certain Fish, which the Islanders call 
Narhual,
 being indeed a kind of Whale, as the Name seems to imply, signifying a Whale which feeds upon Carcases.


This Countrey is call'd by the Natives, 
Secanunga;
 who was the first Discoverer thereof is not certainly known, but the first chief Voyagers thither were, of the 
Dutch, William Barents,
 or 
Barentson,
 of 
Amsterdam,
 who set forth towards those Parts in the Year 1594. and before him, 
Dithmar Blefkens,
 in the Year 1563. of the 
Eng∣lish,
 Mr. 
James Hall,
 who set out from 
Copenhagen
 in 
Denmark,
 Anno 1605. and in a second Voyage was slain by a Salvage of the Countrey.


The Coastings, Courses, Havens and Creeks of 
Groenland,
 according as 
Barentson


receiv'd an Account of them from 
Iver Boty,
 a 
Groenlander,
 written in the 
Norsh
 Lan∣guage, as it is call'd, are as followeth: From 
Stad
 in 
Norway,
 to 
Hornness,
 the East part of 
Groenland,
 it is seven days Sailing. Between 
Iseland
 and 
Groenland
 lieth a Riff call'd 
Gombornse-skare,
 the Ice lying upon which, hindreth the Passage. Those that Sail from 
Bergen
 in 
Norway
 South of 
Rokeness
 in 
Iseland,
 come under 
Swafster,
 a Promontory, or high Land in the East part of 
Groenland,
 and within sight of the high Mount 
Whitsark;
 between which and 
Groenland
 lieth a Headland, call'd 
Her∣noldus Hook,
 not far from 
Sound-Haven,
 formerly much frequented by the 
Norway
 Merchants. Those that Sail from 
Iseland
 to 
Groenland,
 Steer to 
Snoffness,
 West of 
Rokeness,
 and after South-West. East of 
Hernoldus Hook
 lieth the Village of 
Skagen∣ford,
 the most Easterly Village of the Island; East of 
Skagenford,
 the Haven 
Bear∣ford,
 inaccessible by Ships, by reason of a great Riff lying at the Mouth thereof. This Place is chiefly remarkable for the Whale-fishing, the Whales upon the going back of the Tide running into a great 
Swalth,
 as they call it, which is in the Haven. East of 
Bearford
 is the Haven call'd 
Allabong-Sound,
 full of little Isles. East from the Icy Mountain, the aforemention'd Haven 
Fendobothes.
 Farther East is the High∣land 
Corse Hought,
 where they Hunt white Bears. West from 
Hernoldus Hook
 is the Village 
Codosford,
 and hard by the Sea-Coast, a fair Church, which we conceive to be the same with 
Korsekirk
 above spoken of, as 
Codosford
 may also probably be the same with 
Kindelfiord.
 A little farther West lieth the 
Boy,
 or Town of 
Wartsdale
 (for in the 
Norsh
 Language 
Boy
 signifies a Town,) belonging to 
Petresuik,
 or 
Peterswike
 Church: Near this 
Boy
 or Town standeth a Cloyster, or Abbey of Canons Regu∣lar, dedicated to 
St. Olafe
 and 
St. Augustine.
 Next to 
Codosford
 is 
Rompnesford,
 the same questionless with the above-mention'd 
Rumpesinfiord,
 where there is a Cloyster of Nuns of the Order of 
St. Benedict:
 In this Ford lie many small Isles. Between 
Rompness
 and the next Sound lieth a great Garden call'd 
Vose,
 belonging to the King of the Countrey, as also 
St. Nicholas
 Church before mention'd. At the en∣trance into 
Emnestnesford
 is the Inlet 
Southwoderswike,
 and somewhat higher on the same side, the little Cape 
Bloming,
 beyond the Inlet 
Granwike;
 above that, the Garden call'd 
Daleth,
 belonging to the Cathedral Church; and on the right-hand to those that Sail out of the said Sound, a great Wood belonging to the same Church, where they feed their Oxen, Kine, and Horses. The Highland lying by 
Emestnesford,
 is call'd 
The Ramas Hayth,
 from the Rain-Deer which use to be there Hunted: And hereabouts is that sort of Stone of which they make large Fats or Cisterns, as hath been before intimated; it is by some call'd the 
Zevell-Stone,
 being a sort of Marble, or (as some will have it) Load-stone, of all colours. West from this lieth another Highland, call'd 
Long-Highland.
 The next Sound is call'd 
Swal∣terford,
 having a Church belongining to it of the same Name, and where there is also a Garden belonging to the King, call'd 
St. Hentelstad.
 Next to that lieth 
Erricksford,
 and at the entrance thereof the Highland 
Erricks Hought,
 belonging to 
Deverskirk,
 the first Parochial Church in 
Groenland.
 North-West from 
Erricksford,
 is 
Megdenford.
 Farther out is a Church call'd 
Scogelkirk;
 and farther in the Sound, 
Leadenkirk.
 Beyond 
Erricksford
 is another Ford or Sound, by the Name of 
Fossa,
 belonging to the Cathedral Church; and to the North of it, two Villages, 
Ever-boy
 and 
Forther-boy-
 From thence farther North lieth 
Bredaford;
 and after that 
Lormontford;
 and from thence Westward, 
Icedeep.
 To the North of the 
Westland
 lieth a spacious Wilderness, call'd 
Hemel Hatsfelt,
 and Edg'd with massie Rocks and Cliffs towards the Sea side; beyond which the Sea is innavigable, by reason of the many 
Swalgen,
 or Whirlpools thereabouts.


In 
Groenland
 there are divers Hills, wherein are Silver-Mines, multitudes of white

Bears, with red Patches on their Heads; also white Hawks, and all sorts of Fish. There are moreover in the Countrey divers Rivers, frozen up for the most part of the Year, and cover'd with Ice; yet it is generally affirm'd, that it is not so cold there as in 
Norway
 or 
Iseland.
 On the Hills are said to grow Acorns and Nuts, very well tasted, and as big as Apples; also as good Wheat as is commonly produc'd in other Parts.


In the 
Journal
 of 
Dithmar Blefkens
's Voyage, mention is made of a certain blind Monk, brought up in the Monastery of 
St. Thomas,
 who reported several memora∣ble things concerning this Countrey, as that it was call'd 
Groenland
 antiphrastically, or by contrariety of Speech, as appearing seldom or never green; and that it abounded with Bears and white Foxes, and was not without Pygmies and Unicorns, which never appear'd till after the Sun was entred into 
Aries;
 that in the said Mo∣nastery of 
St. Thomas
 there was a Fountain of scalding Water, which was convey'd through Pipes of Stones to the Monks several Cells, and serv'd them not onely for Stoves, but for the dressing of their Meat, which was as well boyl'd by means of this Water, as if it had been over a real Fire, and that the Walls of the Monastery were made of a kind of Pumice-stone, upon which if Water were pour'd, it would produce a slimy Matter, commonly us'd in stead of Lime for Mortar, like the Stone of Mount 
Hecla
 in 
Iseland;
 that two of these Pygmies, a Male and a Female, were kept by the Abbot, and were both endu'd with perfect humane Shape, and over∣grown with Hair, even to the outermost Joynts of their Fingers, the Male espe∣cially, who had a Beard reaching down to his Knees, but that they seem'd wholly devoid of Reason and Understanding, nor had any distinct use of Speech, onely made a semblance of Hissing of the manner of Geese; lastly, he reported the dura∣tion of the Lives of these Creatures to be answerable to the shortness of their Sta∣ture; but that concerning their Wars with the Cranes, he had no other knowledge than by Tradition.


The Description of 
Groenland
 left by Mr. 
James Hall,
 renders it a high, moun∣tainous, and craggy Region, sufficiently water'd with Rivers, and provided with good Harbors, of a Soil not unfertile in all places where he came, having between the Mountains fruitful Valleys and pleasant Plains, abounding with several sorts of Fowl, as Partridges, Pheasants, Sea-mews, Gulls, Crows, 
&c.
 but of Beasts, chiefly black Foxes, and (as was conjectur'd by the plenty of Harts-horns found about their Tents) Rein-Deer, yet not destitute of other Beasts, the 
Vestigium
 of one whereof was found to be not less than eight Inches over.


As for the Manners and Customs of the Natives, they are by the said Descri∣ption represented to be a kind of 
Samoid,
 or wandring People, still moving from place to place, warlike and active, using Slings and Darts with marvellous dexte∣rity, of a brown Complexion for the most part, and of an indifferent Stature, eat∣ing their Meat either quite raw, or onely a little parboyl'd, Clothing themselves with the Skins of such Beasts, or other Creatures, as they kill, especially Seals, or some of the largest size of Fowls, which they Dress very smooth and soft, turning the Feather or Hair side outwards in Summer, and inward in Winter. Their Wea∣pons Bowes, Slings, and Bone or Iron-headed Darts; their Religion Idolatrous, but chiefly Sun-Worship, as was gather'd from their manner of Accost, when any of the 
English
 first approach'd them, for they us'd to point up to the Sun, as chief Author of their, felicity, and then beat their Breasts, crying, 
Iliont,
 which seem'd to signifie as much as 
I mean no harm,
 and would not come near till those that met them did the like. Their Houses built of Whales Bones, and the Baulks thereof with Whales Ribs, and cover'd with Earth, but the best sort with Seal-Skins, having Vaults or

Rooms under Ground, four-square, and two Yards deep in the Earth. Their manner of Burial, a Pile of Stones thrown over the Corps, being first wrapt up in Seal-Skins.


Spilbergia,
 so call'd by the 
Hollanders,
 from 
Spilbergen,
 whom probably they rec∣kon to have been the first Discoverer of it, is the same that we vulgarly call 
Green∣land,
 and which Sir 
Hugh Willoughby
 (if not the first of all, yet at least the first of the 
English
 that discover'd any thing of these Parts) nam'd 
King James's New-Land.
 The said Sir 
Hugh Willoughby
 set forth 
Anno
 1553. in the 
Bona Esperanza,
 accompany'd with two Ships more, 
viz.
 the 
Bonaventure, Richard Challoner
 Captain, and the 
Bona Confidentia,
 and after some time of Coasting up and down those Northern Seas, he Landed with his Company upon the Place, where staying a few days, he sent three Men three days Journey into the Countrey South-West, and three more as far full West, who all, after much hardship in their Travelling, return'd without having met any People by the Way, or seen the least appearance of any Habitation. Sail∣ing hence back for 
Lapland,
 they were all frozen to death in the Haven 
Arzina.


A Description of 
Greenland
 by one Mr. 
Robert Fotherby,
 represents the Nature of this Place contradictory to its Name, as before was observ'd of 
Groenland:
For certainly (saith he) no part of the World, yet known and discover'd, is less Green than this, both the Mountains and Low-lands being cover'd with Snow till the beginning of 
June.
 The Countrey, which is for the most part mountainous, bearing neither Grass nor Tree, save onely Heath or Ling, as it is call'd in the North parts of 
England,
 which grows upon the Moors or Heathy Grounds when the Snow begins to melt, and on which in Summer the Deer feed themselves fat in one Moneth; but how they live in the Winter, is a thing beyond any Man's skill to comprehend, especially during the Sun's absence under the Horizon, which in the Latitude of seventy seven Degrees continues from the eighteenth of 
October
 to the fourth of 
February.


This Countrey is by many suppos'd never to have been inhabited by Men, yet not altogether uncapable of affording Habitation to such as would bring with them sufficient defensive Weapons against Hunger and Cold: For other Animals, it is found, by the testimony of those that have been upon the Place, not to be desti∣tute; for besides Deer before mention'd, there have been seen Bears and Foxes; and of wild Fowl, 
Cuthbert
 Ducks, Willocks, Stints, Sea-Pigeons, Sea-Parrots, Gulls, Noddies, 
&c.


The Southermost part of 
Greenland,
 call'd 
Point Look-out,
 stands in seventy six Degrees and thirty Minutes. The West side of the Land was discover'd by the first Voyagers Northward as far as eighty Degrees and odd Minutes, and in that compass six or eight good Harbors for the Whale-fishing; the East side as far as seventy eight Degrees, with divers Islands, both great and small, yielding good Harbors, and store of Whales and Sea-Horses.


In the Year 1610. 
Jonas Pool,
 Master of the 
Amity
 fell in with this Land in 
May,
 and continu'd upon the Coast, discovering of Harbors, and killing of 
Morses,
 till 
June
 following: and he is said to have been the first that gave this Countrey the Name of 
Greenland.
 The next year he set out again, accompany'd with 
Thomas Edge,
 Commander of the 
Mary Margaret;
 And since many other Voyages have been made as to a Place known, and a great Trade driven in catching of Whales, not without several Contests with the 
Dutch
 and 
Danes,
 but nothing of late discover'd considerable more than in the first Voyages. The Harbors, Sounds and Coastings most taken notice of, are 
Fair Foreland, Cape Cold, Black-Point, Horn-Sound, Knotty-Point, Bell-Sound, Lowness, Cross-Road, Deer-Sound, Fowl-Sound, Close-Cove, Gurnet-Nose, Ice-Sound,
 and 
Green-Haven.




There are few that have Sail'd to 
Greenland,
 but make great mention of 
Cherry Island,
 so call'd, as having been first discover'd at the Charges of Sir 
Francis Cherry,
 an eminent Merchant; by others 
Bear-Island,
 from the multitude of Bears found there; it lies in the Latitude of seventy four Degrees, and is noted for store of Fowl, Foxes like Dogs, and upon the Coasts great store of Whales, Sea-Horses, and Morses: It is also said to be furnish'd with Lead-Mines, and Pits of Sea-Coal.


Iseland,
 so call'd from the continual Ice which is upon it, is a craggy mountain∣ous Countrey; and not onely the Hills, but a great part of the Low-land cover'd with perpetual Snow: It is of a Form somewhat oblong, lying between the fifty fourth and fifty ninth Degree of Northern Latitude, having 
Norway
 on the East, the 
Orcades
 and 
Scotland
 on the South, 
Grenland
 on the West, and the 
Hyperborean,
 or frozen Sea on the North. It is by 
Olaus Magnus
 suppos'd to be twice as big as 
Sicily,
 that is to say, about a hundred Leagues in length. It is the most known, and most througly discover'd of all the Countreys of the 
Artick Region,
 and is said to have been first found out and peopled in the Year of our Lord 900. by certain of the Nobility of 
East-Frisia
 in the Countrey of 
Breme,
 in the time of 
Alebrand,
 Bishop of that Coun∣trey; but whether or no utterly unpeopled till that time, is a Question not easie to be determin'd, though in all probability so obvious a Place to be found out, could not lie so long totally uninhabited. Not long after several Colonies of 
Norwegians
 Setled themselves, some in 
Hitland,
 some in 
Ferow,
 others (following the Example of these 
Bremers
) in 
Iseland.
 The Countrey is full of Rocks and Stones, and (as is credibly reported) not a cultivated Field or Garden in the whole Island, and by consequence no sort of Corn, yet the People living without either Bread or Salt, are very strong, and of a good Complexion: Neither is there a Tree to be seen, except the Birch, which likewise grows but in one place, and exceeds not the heighth of a Man, by reason of the violence of the Winds; yet there is said to be great plenty of Butter, the Grass being so fat, that the Oxen are not suffer'd to stay long at a time in the Pastures for fear of bursting. Till of late there was neither Town, nor any thing that could be call'd a Village, in the whole Island, but stragling Cottages here and there, not above three or four together in a place, most by the Sea side for the convenience of Fishing; they were built pretty deep in the Ground, but artificially fram'd of Whales Bones, with Seats, Benches, and other Utensils of the same; now sometimes they use Fir to the same purpose, which is cast upon the Coast by the force of the Sea from 
Tartary
 or elsewhere. For want of Vessels, they lay their Butter in Heaps in the Corners of their Houses like Mor∣tar. In the Winter, wanting Fodder, they feed their Cattel with Fish. Besides these Cattel, which are Kine without Horns, Horses onely fit for carrying of Burthens, and very large Sheep, there are store of white Foxes, and huge Bears of the same colour, and a sort of rough Dogs, very well known, and frequent amongst us by the Name of 
Shocks,
 which the Islanders esteem not a little, and will part with their Children at a far easier rate: They keep neither Hogs nor Poultrey, for want of Grain to feed them.


The Rivers belonging to this Island are many, and those not unpleasant, afford∣ing to the Inhabitants plenty of Fish, especially Sturgeon, Trouts, and Salmons; and one is especially remarkable for a Bridge made over it, which being the onely Bridge of the Countrey, is made of the great Bones of a Whale. The whole Island is one continu'd Desart, without any trodden Path or Road from one end to the other; so that all that have occasion to travel to any part thereof by Land, make use of the Compass, as if they were Voyaging by Sea.


The Coast of 
Iseland
 hath many strange and monstrous Fish worth observation,

as first the 
Orca,
 which though nothing near so big as the Whale, yet is able to be the death of it; for being of the shape of a Ship turn'd upside-down, and having sharp long Fins on its Back, it pricks the Belly of the Whale therewith till it kills.


The next is the 
Hackfall,
 which is very fat, and about twelve Inches long.


Then the Dog-Fish, which lifting up its Head out of the Sea, Barks, and letting forth its young ones, receives them into her Belly again, when they have sported a while in the Sea.


Lastly, another Monster, of a most frightful shape, mention'd by 
Olaus Magnus,
 but not by any particular Name.


In divers parts of the Island are Fountains of scalding Water, which as soon as taken from the Fountain begins to cool, and when cold, hath a sulphury Substance swimming on the top.


At the West end is a smoaky Fountain, very cold, and turning all that is cast into it into Stone.


At the place upon the Sea call'd 
Turlocks Haven,
 are two Fountains of different quality, the one hot, the other cold, which by Pipes being brought together into one place, make a Bath of an excellent temperature, and of a medicinal Vertue.


Not far from 
Haven Halneford
 is a Cliff in a Rock of an unknown depth, and no Water to be discern'd by those that look down into it, but if a Stone be cast in, it shall make a noise for half an hour together, as if it were striking against a Brazen Vessel, and all this while the Water will be rising till it comes up to the brim, and then will be so long sinking again as the Stone was falling.


There are also three Mountains in 
Iseland
 not to be left unmention'd, the Moun∣tain of the 
Cross,
 the Moutain 
Snenelstockel,
 and the Mountain 
Hecla;
 the two first are chiefly considerable for their wonderful heighth, and for the dreadful noise of Thunder which is heard on the top of them, when in the adjacent parts below, the Air is calm and clear; the third lying in the North of the Island, and not very high, is one of the most prodigious 
Vulcans
 in the World, for the casting forth of Flames, black Ashes, and Pumice-Stones, insomuch that there is no possibility of Habita∣tion within six Miles of it round about; and it is a receiv'd Opinion of the Inha∣bitants, that it is the place of Torment for the Souls of the Damned; from whence there hath risen such a company of strange Stories and Fables, that it would make up a Volume of it self to relate them. The occasion of the great Eruption of this Mountain is not without much reason imputed to the inflammation of the Sul∣phur, of which there are several Mines or Pits in the Countrey, though none of any sort of Metal.


Waldemarus,
 King of 
Denmark
 and 
Norway,
 being consequently Master of this amongst the other 
Norwegian
 Colonies, Planted the 
Christian
 Religion in this Island in the Year of 
Christ
 1398. and Ordain'd two Bishops, one in 
Schalholden,
 in the East part, another in 
Hollen,
 in the West; and after the 
Reformation
 was begun, 
Christianus,
 King of 
Denmark,
 took care to propagate the Reformed 
Doctrine
 there, as well as in other parts of his Dominions; and to that end sent over a PRINTER thither, that the BIBLE, together with the Works of 
Philip Melancthon
 and 
Urba∣nus Regius,
 might be publish'd in the Vulgar Tongue of the Countrey. But these Proceedings were mainly oppos'd by the Bishop of 
Schalholden,
 who animating the People to Rebellion, they slew the King's Lieutenant: Whereupon the next Year 
Paul Holfelt,
 a Knight of the 
Danish
 Order, being sent over with an Army, over∣threw the Rebels, and taking off the chief Heads of the Rebellion, committed the Charge of the Government to another Nobleman of 
Denmark,
 whom he left upon the Place. But one 
Tadde Bonde,
 a great Man of the Countrey, meditating a Revolt,

drew divers Persons of principal note into Conspiracy with him, and was advan∣cing to a formidable Power, had not the Bishop given continual Intelligence of their Proceedings to the King's Lieutenant, who thereupon employ'd Agents to the chief Accomplices of the Faction, and what with fair Means and threatnings so wrought with them, that they return'd to their Obedience, and forsook 
Todde,
 insomuch that he flying with a small Party, betook himself to a fastness at the Foot of 
Heckelveld,
 where being hemm'd in, those about him were slain, and he himself taken Prisoner; and because no Man to whose safe custody he was offer'd durst receive him, so much dreaded was his Power, one 
Jonas,
 a bold courageous Fellow, slew him with his own Hand, and thereby put an end to all farther Tu∣mults and Seditions.


So much have the People of this Island been ever addicted to Sorcerie and Su∣perstition, that notwithstanding the Profession of 
Christianity,
 and the frequent Preaching against those Sins, especially since the 
Reformation,
 the generality of them are still wedded to many of those old diabolical Customs, which were pra∣ctis'd there in time of 
Paganism;
 and amongst other things they are said to be serv'd, many of them, by Spirits, which constantly attend them, and (as 
Olaus Magnus
 writes of the 
Finlanders,
 they are oftentimes dealt with by Strangers, to sell them prosperous Winds for Money, and (doubtless by the help of the Devil) perform the same; as also on the contrary, they are said by their Enchantments to stop the Course of a Ship, and make it as it were immovable, though in the Stream of ne∣ver so prosperous a Gale. They are a proud, haughty People, and for the most part endu'd with vast strength of Body; their Habit so promiscuous, that neither Sex can be distinguish'd by it. They are not onely forward to prostitute their Daughters to those 
Germans
 that Trade with them at 
Hafnefords,
 but that Virgin who hath had to do with a 
German,
 shall be sure to be so much the more esteem'd and Courted.


The onely Towns and Buildings of note here, and those erected but of late Ages, are 1. 
Hafnefords,
 a Haven Town, chiefly frequented by 
Dutch
 Merchants for Traffick with the Natives.


2. 
Bedstede,
 the Residence of the Lord Lieutenant or Governor for the King of 
Denmark.


3. The Bishops See of 
Halsar,
 having four Monasteries belonging to it, 
viz. Pingore, Remestede, Modor,
 and 
Monkeniere.


4. The Bishops See of 
Schalholt,
 to which also doth belong four Monasteries, 
viz. Vedey, Pernebar, Kirkebar,
 and 
Schirde.


The Nobles of 
Iseland
 are call'd 
Bonden;
 their 
Justiciaries
 or Judges, being twelve in number, 
Lochmaders,
 that is, Men of Law or Justice, who are said to meet once a year on the twenty ninth of 
June,
 to administer Justice in a place ordain'd for that purpose in the midst of the Island, appearing like some feigned Paradice, so plea∣sant a place it is represented to be at that time of the year, being (as the Tradition goes) from a high burning Mountain like 
Hecla;
 consum'd to a Plain, and so envi∣ron'd with Rocks, that there was left but a small Passage for one at a time to enter. Here the Governor having first given the Charge, leaves the Trial of all Matters to the 
Lochmaders,
 who having diligently heard every Cause argued on both sides, withdraw for a while to Consult together, and then proceed to Sentence, the same Persons being both Jury and Judge; but if any Case of difficulty or scruple arise, they consult the Governor.


Angrimus Jonas
's Relation of 
Iseland
 differing much from what hath been deliver'd by 
Blefkens,
 is not to be omitted. He saith it was first discover'd by one 
Naddecus,
 a

Pyrate, who going towards the 
Farensian
 Islands, was cast by Tempest upon the Shore of 
East-Iseland,
 near the Mountain 
Reidarfial;
 and as he departed from the Coast, perceiving the tops of the highest Mountains cover'd with a very deep Snow, call'd the Island 
Snaelandia,
 that is, 
Snowy Countrey.


Upon the fame of 
Naddocus
's Discovery, one 
Gardarus,
 the Son of 
Suavarus,
 a 
Swede,
 was desirous to make a Voyage thither, and arriving near the Eastern Shore, Winter'd in the Bay of 
Skialfanda,
 or 
North-Island,
 in the Year of our Lord 864. and call'd the Haven 
Huscawick,
 from the Houses or Wintering-places built there, as the next Haven to it was call'd 
Nartarawick,
 from 
Natrare,
 an eminent Mariner in this Expedition. 
Gardarus
 returning home about the beginning of the Spring, call'd the Countrey from his own Name 
Gardarsholm.


The next that follow'd his Example, was one 
Flocco,
 a famous Pyrate, whose Daughter 
Geirhilda
 being drown'd upon the Coast of 
Schetland
 (anciently 
Hietland,
) gave the Name of 
Geirhildarwata
 to the Sea thereabouts: Not having the use of the Mariners Compass, he made use of Ravens for the steering of his Course, and ha∣ving sent forth two without success, by the guidance of the third he had sight of the Eastern side of the Island; and Steering Southward, he found a very wide Bay, between the Promontories 
Renkanes
 and 
Snaefesness;
 which Bay, from 
Faxa
 a 
Scot∣tish
 Mariner that accompany'd him, he nam'd 
Faxaos,
 that is, 
The Mouth of Faxa,
 though from its many Havens it came afterwards to be term'd 
Hafnafiordur.
 Sailing along the West side of the Island, he entred the Bay 
Bredafiord,
 and took up his Quarters at 
Watnesfiordur,
 a Haven in the Province 
Bardostraund
 (for by these Names these Places came afterwards to be known:) Having stay'd here two Winters, he return'd back into 
Norway,
 and is said to have been the first that gave this Countrey the Name of 
Iseland,
 from the great quantities of Ice which fill'd the Seas thereabouts, he also gave it the Name of 
Rafnaftock,
 from the Ravens which serv'd him in stead of a Compass.


The last and most considerable Adventurer was 
Ingulfus,
 the Son of 
Orn,
 Duke of 
Fyrdafilace
 in 
Norway,
 who, together with his Cousin 
Hiorleifus,
 that Marry'd his Sister 
Helca,
 being adjudg'd to Banishment by 
Halsten
 (to the Award of whose Judgment they had submitted themselves) upon the slaughter of his two Brethren, 
Holmsten
 and 
Hersten,
 (these three Brethren were the Sons of 
Atlas,
 one of the prime Noblemen of 
Norway
) in a Quarrel, wherein 
Halsten
 was chosen Umpire; and al∣so detesting the Tyranny of 
Haraldus Pulchricomus,
 King of 
Norway,
 went over 
Gon∣faloniere,
 or chief Leader of a great Colony of People, whom he rais'd for the setling of a Plantation in some foreign Countrey: Accompany'd with his Cousin 
Hior∣leifus,
 he took Shipping for 
Iseland
 in the Year of our Lord 854. having been over to visit it about four years before; he Landed at a Promontory on the South Shore, which from him took the Name of 
Ingulfholde,
 and 
Reicharwick
 setled his Habitation, while 
Hiorleifus
 seated himself at the Promontory by him call'd 
Hior∣leifholda,
 where he built two very large Houses, each being about a hundred and thirty Foot long; then he set himself to Manure and Till the Ground, employing in that Work ten Slaves, whom he brought with him for that purpose out of 
Nor∣way;
 but it was not long ere they traiterously set upon him and slew him by an Ambuscade which they had laid for him; after which they betook themselves to certain little Isles, which were nam'd 
Westmafyar,
 where before they had well nest∣led themselves, the whole Race of them were rooted out by 
Ingulphus,
 in revenge of his Kinsman's Death. After this the Island grew daily more and more populous by the coming over of new Families from 
Norway;
 so that at this day it is a Place not the least considerable belonging to the Kings of 
Denmark.




The ancient Inhabitants of this Place (for it is to be suppos'd that there were People here before the coming over of 
Ingulfus
) were call'd 
Papae
 or 
Pappae,
 and the East side of the Island, 
Papey,
 which agrees very well with the Names of two little Islands on the Coast of 
Scotland, Pappa
 and 
Westrepappa,
 from which many conjecture, as also from several Crosses and Bells found upon the Place, that there hath been in former Ages a resort of the 
Irish,
 and of the People of the North-West parts of 
Scotland.


The Eastern Bound of 
Iseland
 is call'd 
Austurborn;
 the Western, 
Randesandur;
 the Northern, 
Langanes;
 and the Southern, 
Reicranes.
 The Island being divided ac∣cording to the four Quarters of the World, 
North-Island
 is sever'd from 
East-Island
 by the aforesaid Promontory of 
Langanes;
 from 
West-Island
 by 
Rutafiordur
 Bay; from 
South-Island,
 by vast and unpassable Desarts. Between 
South-Island
 and 
East-Island
 runneth the River 
Jocolsu,
 through the Desarts of 
Solseimasande.
 Between 
South-Island
 and 
West-Island
 a famous River nam'd 
Albis,
 which emptieth it self into the Bay of 
Bargarfiord.


'Tis a vulgar Opinion, that this Island is the same which the Ancients call'd 
Thule;
 but upon consideration it will appear, that by the 
Ultima Thule
 taken notice of by 
Virgil, Claudian, Statius, Pythias Massiliensis, Pliny, Seneca, Solinus, Tacitus,
 and others, is meant one of the 
British
 Isles, amongst which were comprehended the Isles on the North of 
Scotland,
 as the 
Orcades,
 and some others, the utmost of which we call 
Schetland,
 and is very probable to be this 
Ultima Thule
 of the Ancients.


Nova Zembla,
 lying under seventy six Degrees of Northern Latitude, and a hun∣dred and twelve Degrees and twenty five Minutes of Longitude, and being rec∣kon'd above two hundred Miles in length, was, together with the River 
Puora,
 and Straights of 
Weygats,
 discover'd, (and, as it is thought, first of all) by 
Stephen Bur∣rough,
 who was sent out by the 
Muscovia
 Company in the Year 1556. to find out a Way to 
Cathay
 by the North-East.


Afterwards one 
Oliver Burel, a Dutch
-man, mov'd with the hope of Gain, went from 
Enkhuissen
 to 
Pecora;
 where (having first discover'd 
Costinfarca
 in 
Nova Zembla
) he lost all by Shipwrack.


The 
States-General
 nothing discourag'd with the little success of these two Voya∣gers, sent forth two Ships under the Command of 
Hugo Linschot,
 to the Straights of 
Weygats,
 and two others under 
William Barrents,
 who were to go directly Northwards for 
Nova Zembla: Linschot
 went fifty Miles beyond the Straights, but the Nor∣therly Winds and late Season of the year forc'd him to hasten back with all possible speed. 
William Barents
 and his Company were necessitated in the Year 1596. being not able to get off, in regard the Ice increas'd upon them more and more, to take up their Winter Quarters there in a Cottage, which they made a shift to cast up for their present necessity, having much ado to defend themselves against the Bears, that continually assaulted them.


This Countrey is generally deliver'd to be a barren and desart Countrey, full of Wood indeed, but the Boughs as bare of Leaves, as the Ground of Grass; also very incommodious to be travell'd through, by reason of its desartness, and the danger of Bears, great fierce Foxes, and such like ravenous Beasts, which feed onely upon Flesh, and which are the onely Beasts this Countrey harbors.


In a 
Journal
 of Mr. 
Henry Hudson,
 there is to be found a much more favorable Description of the Countrey: 
Generally (saith he) the Land of 
Nova Zembla
 that we have seen, is to a Man's Eye a pleasant Land, much Main High-land with no Snow on it, looking in some places green, and Deer feeding thereon, and the Hills partly cover'd with Snow, and partly bare.




It should seem to have beery a receiv'd Opinion from the first Discovery of 
Nova Zembla,
 that it was inhabited by 
Pygmies,
 it being several times, in the 
Journals
 of some Voyages, mention'd particularly by the Name of 
The Land of Pygmies,
 but upon what certain Ground cannot in the least be discover'd; for we find not from the 
Russians
 (to whom the Place, by reason of its Vicinity, is probable to have been first known) any other Account of the Inhabitants, but that they are a People wholly destitute of civil Manners, and unlimited by Law or Religion, saving that they seem to give some kind of Adoration to the Sun, Moon, and North-star, and have some Qualities which speak them national Creatures; whereas the 
Pygmies
 (if there be any such Creatures) are thought to have nothing of Humane but their Shape onely.


Besides 
Nova Zembla
 there is not far from it another Island, known by the Name of 
Willoughby-Island,
 from Sir 
Hugh Willoughby,
 the first Discoverer; they both are of the Dominions of the 
Czar of Russia.




Several Attempts for the discovery of the 
North-West Passage.


WHat hath been discover'd of Sea in the North or South parts of the World, is of no less Consequence than what hath been discover'd of Land, and the 
Straight
 of 
Hudson
 Northward, is no less considerable than the 
Straight
 of 
Magellan
 South; we shall therefore compleat this Discourse of the 
Artick Region
 with a brief Mention of what Capes, Bays, Sounds, 
&c.
 have been found out by those that have attempted to find a Passage by the North-West to the 
East-Indies.


Not to insist upon the fabulous Stories of King 
Arthur
's first conquering 
Ireland,
 and then Sailing into the Northern Seas, and subduing 
Scantia, Iseland, Groenland,
 and (as the Story saith) many other Islands beyond 
Norway
 even under the 
Pole,
 or of 
Malgo
's subduing 
Ireland, Iseland,
 the 
Orcades
 and 
Norway,
 or 
Octher
's Reports to King 
Alfred
 of his Voyages to the North-East parts beyond 
Norway,
 or the Voya∣ges of the two famous 
Venetian
 Brethren, 
Nicolo
 and 
Antonio Zeni,
 or of 
Marcus Pau∣lus Venetus, Odoricus
 and 
Vertomannus;
 the first 
English
-man we hear of, that made an Expedition into those Northern Seas, was Sir 
Hugh Willoughby,
 before taken notice of for the Discovery of 
King James's Newland
 and 
Willoughby-Island,
 in the Year of our Lord 1553.


Stephen Burroughs
 (as hath been intimated) discover'd amongst other Places, about the Year 1556. the 
Straight
 of 
Vaigats.


In the Year 1576. Sir 
Martin Forbisher
 setting forth with two Barques, after he had been out about five Weeks, had sight of a High-land, which he nam'd 
Queen Elizabeths Foreland:
 Thence Sailing more Northerly to the heighth of about sixty two Degrees, he descry'd a great Sea or Inlet, which he entred, and thence it took the Appellation of 
Forbisher's Straight.
 About two years after proceeding to a farther discovery of it, he entred a good way into it, and took possession of the utmost Place he went to for Queen 
Elizabeth,
 who thereupon gave it the Name of 
Meta Incognita.


Anno
 1580. 
Arthur Pett
 and 
Charles Jackman
 were sent out by the 
Russian
 Company, to make a Discovery of the River 
Ob,
 and passing the 
Straight
 of 
Waigats,
 took par∣ticular observation of the Islands and Places there, but not being able to pass much farther, by reason of the Ice, towards the latter end of the year they return'd.


In prosecution of this Discovery to the North-West, Captain 
John Davis
 of 
San∣druge
 in 
Devonshire,
 made three Voyages; his first 
Anno
 1585. his second, 1587. in which he met with many strange Adventures; but the main thing that accru'd

from these Voyages, was finding of a mighty Through-let between vast and desart Islands, to which his Name gave the Appellation of 
Fretum Davis,
 or 
Davis's Straight.


The next that went upon this Design was Captain 
George Weymouth,
 who from the Year 1585 to 1602 made several Expeditions, which produc'd large Relations of strange Accidents that befell them, but little of Discovery farther than what had been made before.


Mr. 
James Hall,
 very noted for his Voyages to 
Groenland,
 (which before was by Captain 
Davis
 call'd 
Desolation
) at his falling in with that Place nam'd a Head-land from then King of 
Denmark, Cape Christianus,
 which some think to be no other than 
Cape Farewel.


Anno
 1606. Mr. 
John Knight
 was set out by the King of 
Denmark,
 of the Passages of whose Voyage little or nothing memorable is recorded.


The next and most famous Attempter in the discovery of the 
North-Wast Passage,
 was 
Henry Hudson,
 who is said to have discover'd farther Northward to the 
Pole
 than any before him. From the Year 1607 to 1610 he made several Voyages, be∣ing set out by Sir 
Thomas Smith,
 Sir 
Dudley Diggs,
 and Mr. 
John Wostenholm,
 with others that were his great Friends, and Advancers of such publick Designs. In his last Voyage the Isles of 
Gods Mercy, Prince Henry's Foreland, King James's Cape, Queen Annes Cape, Digg's Island, Cape Wostenholm, The King's Foreland, Mount Charles, Cape Salisbury,
 &c. were first taken notice of and nam'd, and, which were his princi∣pal Discoveries, and therefore worthily retaining his Name,
 
Hudson's Straight and Bay;
 but in his return homeward he was set upon in his Cabbin by one 
Green, Wil∣son,
 and others of their Conspiracy, and together with his Son 
John Hudson, Tho. Widdows. Arn. Ludlow, Sidrach Faner,
 and two or three more, was put over into a small Shallop, in which they were forc'd to seek their Fortune, and in all likeli∣hood perish'd, for they were never heard of after. Nor long after 
Green
 going on Shore upon a strange Island, was shot from an Ambuscade of Salvages into the Heart; the like End has 
Wilson,
 and three more of the Conspirators dy'd of their mortal Wounds, the rest with much ado got home in a very sick and weak Condi∣tion, through the Hardships the had sustain'd, and want of Provisions.


There was also another 
Hudson,
 who 
Anno
 1608. went to the height of eighty one Degrees, and gave Names to certain Places, which continue to this day, as 
Whale-Bay, Hackluit's Headland,
 and 
Hudson's Touches.


By the Assistance of Prince 
Henry,
 and those other Noble Persons above men∣tion'd, Captain 
Thomas Button
 set out in the Year 1612. and is said to have pass'd 
Hudson's Straight,
 and leaving 
Hudson's Bay
 to the South, to have Sail'd two hundred Leagues South-Westward over a Sea above eighty Fathoms deep, which at length he discover'd to be another great Bay, since call'd 
Button's Bay:
 He is said also to have discover'd a great Continent, which he call'd 
New Wales.


Several other Voyagers there were in this great Attempt of the 
North-West Pas∣sage,
 as Captain 
Gibbons, Robert Bylot, William Baffins,
 and Captain 
William Hawkridge,
 who though they all came short of the main Enterprize, yet every one found out some new Cape, Bay, or Promontory, or open'd a farther Passage than had been before, as 
Bylot
 made known 
Cape Comfort; Baffin,
 the Inlet call'd from him 
Baffins Bay,
 as also Sir 
James Lancaster's Sound; Hawkridge,
 a farther Passage into 
Lumly's
 Inlet.


From the Year 1616. to 1631. the Business slept, and then a Voyage was under∣taken by Captain 
Luke Fox,
 who at his Return gave very good hopes and encou∣ragement, that the Work, so long in prosecution, was not impossible to effected; nevertheless, by reason of the late troublesom Times i
 
 wholy laid

aside for almost forty years; but in the Year 1668. several Persons of Honor un∣dertook to revive the Work, and to that purpose furnish'd out two Ships, which set forth in 
June,
 and return'd about the beginning of 
October
 the Year following, giving so satisfactory an Account of their Voyage, that in the Year 1670. the same Adventurers thought fit to send out two Ships more, so furnish'd, as to endure a Wintering there, which they did, with greater hopes than ever of finding out the 
North-West Passage,
 besides a handsom Ca
go of rich Furrs, which made it more than a saving Voyage; so that 'tis suppos'd this will not be the last Attempt, but that another will suddenly follow. And it may well be observ'd, that nothing considerable hath been done, in this grand Enterprize, but by the 
English.






A brief View of what Places are posses'd at this day in the 
West-Indies 
by the
 English, Spaniards, French, Portuguese,
 and 
Dutch.


THe 
English
 possess in 
Northern Amerrica, New England,
 the Bay of 
Trinity, Chincet,
 and a part of 
Terra Nova,
 or 
New-found Land; Virginia,
 part of 
Florida,
 now call'd 
Carolina,
 the 
Bermudas,
 or 
Summer-Islands, New Holland,
 which they took from the 
Dutch
 An. 1664. with 
New Amsterdam
 and 
Fort Orange Terra Mariae,
 or 
Mary-Land,
 part of the Isles call'd 
Lucaies;
 among the 
Antillae
 or 
Caribbee-Islands, Barbados, An∣guilla,
 part of 
St. Christophers, Montserrat, Nieves
 or 
Mevis, Antego, Dominico,
 and 
St. Vin∣cent;
 the Isle of 
St. Catherine,
 otherwise call'd 
Providence, Jamaica,
 the Isles of 
Curacao
 and 
Trinity,
 several Colonies at 
Surinam
 and 
Sinamari,
 with several Forts upon the Coast of 
Guiana;
 and lastly, the Haven 
Porto Bello,
 once the 
Spaniards.


The 
Spaniards
 possess the greatest and best part of 
America,
 wherein they have a vast number of very considerable Towns. In 
Northern America
 they have 1. 
New Spain,
 in which are the 
Audiences
 of 
Mexico, Guadalajara,
 and 
Guatimala.
 2. The Islands 
Cuba
 and 
Hispaniola
 (excepting some parts towards the West, which are in possession of the 
French) Boriquen,
 &c. also 
St. Augustine
 and 
St. Matthew
 in 
Florida,
 and a part of 
New Mexico.
 In 
Southern America, Castilla d' Oro
 or 
Golden Castile,
 otherwise call'd 
Terra Firma,
 in which are the 
Audiences
 of 
Quito, Lima,
 and 
La Plata;
 lastly, 
Chili
 and 
Paraguay,
 which comprehends the Countreys of 
Tucuman
 and 
La Plata.


The 
French
 have in 
Canada,
 or 
Nova Francia, Montreal,
 the Rivers 
Quebeck, Tadousack,
 and some Places upon the great River of 
St. Lawrence;
 also 
Accadie,
 or 
Nova Scotia,
 the Isle of 
Cape Breton,
 with the Fort 
St. Peter,
 from whence they Traffick to 
Nepigiquit,
 with the Salvages of that Coast; part of the Isle of 
Terre-Neuve, Pemptagoet, St. Jean, Port-Royal,
 and other Fortresses. Among the 
Caribbee-Islands,
 part of 
St. Christo∣phers, St. Bartholomew, St. Crux, St. Martin, Guadalupe, Deseado, Marigalante, Todos los Sanctos, Martinico, St. Alousie
 and 
Granada;
 likewise some Colonies on the West of 
Hispaniola.
 Upon the Continent of 
Southern America,
 on the Coast of 
Guiana,
 the Isle 
Cayene,
 where stands the Fort of 
St. Michael de Ceperoux,
 now 
Fort Louis;
 also the Colonies of 
Mathouri
 and 
Armire, Courrou, Coonama
 and 
Comaribo.


The 
Portuguese
 possess all the Coast of 
Brasile
 in 
Southern America,
 with the several 
Capitania's
 or 
Praefectures
 thereof.


The 
Dutch
 have onely the Isles of 
St. Eustace
 and 
Saba,
 the Town of 
Coro
 in 
Terra Firma,
 the Colonies 
Boron, Esquib, Berebie, Aperwaque,
 and others, on the Coast of 
Guiana.






FINIS.












Directions for placing the Whole-sheet Prints in this Volume of 
America.




TItle


The general Map of 
America Fol.
 1


Christoffel Colonus 
Fol.
 43


Angra op Tercera 
Fol.
 52


Americus Vesputius 
Fol.
 60


Ferdinand Magellanus 
Fol.
 79


Vetus Mexico 
Fol.
 87


Athabaliba 
Fol.
 97


Novum Belgium quod nunc Nov. Jorck vocatur. 
Fol.
 168


Mary-Land 
Fol.
 183


Nova Virginiae Tabula, 
Fol.
 192


Arx Carolina 
Fol.
 205


Virginiae pars Australis & Florida 
Fol.
 213


Pagus Hispanorum in Florida 
Fol.
 218


Yucatan & Guatimala 
Fol.
 222


Francisco de Campeche 
Fol.
 223


Truxillo 
Fol.
 231


Nova Hispania, Nova Gallicia & Guati∣mala, 
Fol.
 238


Nova Mexico 
Fol.
 243


Muteczuma 
Fol.
 253


Portus Acapulco 
Fol.
 260


Viztlipuztli 
Fol.
 297


Insulae Americanae in Oceano Septen∣trionali 
Fol.
 304


Mappa AEstivarum Insularum alias Bar∣mudes. 
Fol.
 311


Urbs Domingo in Hispaniola 
Fol.
 318


Porto Rico 
Fol.
 327


Havana 
Fol.
 333


Jamaica 
Fol.
 337


Urbs Martini 365


Carthagena 
Fol.
 401


Terra Firma, Regnum Granatense & Popayan 
Fol.
 408


Peru 
Fol.
 412


Franciscus Pizarrus 
Fol.
 429


Cusco 
Fol.
 456


Potosi 
Fol.
 463


Callao de Lima 
Fol.
 466


Chili 
Fol.
 470


Magellanica 
Fol.
 472


Paraquaria 
Fol.
 474


Brasile 
Fol.
 477


Sinus omnium Sanctorum 
Fol.
 502


Olinda 
Fol.
 505


Ostium fluminis Paraybae 
Fol.
 508


Itamaraca 
Fol.
 517


Fluvius Grandis 
Fol.
 517


Siara 
Fol.
 517


Urbs Salvador 
Fol.
 519


Obsidio & expugnatio Portus Calvi 
Fol.
 554


Alagoa del Zul 
Fol.
 556


Serinhaim 
Fol.
 580


Mauritio-Polis 
Fol.
 604


Castrum Mauritii ad ripam Francisci 
Fol.
 605


Arax Principis Guilielmi 
Fol.
 605


Bonavista 
Fol.
 606


Guiana sive Amazonum regio 
Fol.
 607


Arx Nassovii 
Fol.
 608


Venezuela cum parte Australi novae An∣dalusiae 
Fol.
 624











