Queries in order to the description of Britannia
Ogilby, John, 1600-1676.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 1 1-bit group-IV TIFF page image.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2009-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A53238




Wing O180A



ESTC R218657





99830230




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Queries in order to the description of Britannia
Ogilby, John, 1600-1676.
1 sheet ([1] p.)   


[London :


s.n.],


1673.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
2007-12
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2008-02
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2008-03
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2008-03
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2008-09
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






O180A


99830230


34680












QUERIES In Order to the Description of BRITANNIA.


WHEREAS 
John Ogilby
 
Esq
 His Majesties 
Cosmographer,
 being Authoriz'd by His Majesty to make an 
Actual Survey
 of His Majesties Kingdom of 
England
 and Dominion of 
Wales,
 in order to the Compiling 
An Historical and Geographical Description
 thereof, more Accurate than what∣ever has been heretofore done, in a fair large Volume, sold 
BRITANNIA
: accompanied with another Volume of all the Principal ROADS of 
England,
 ichnographically describ
d in Copper Sculptures. And being sensible that the Well-performance hereof will render it a Work highly grateful to the Publick, his Re∣quest is, That the Nobility and Gentry, and all other Ingenious Persons, would be pleas'd to return him, to his House in 
White-Eryers, London,
 such Remarques of the Country or Places of their Residence, or what other they may be acquainted with, as shall happen within the Verge of these following 
Queries.




1. Cities, 
their Antiquity, Government, Privileges, Commerce,
 &c.


2. Towns Corporate, Market-Towns, Fair Towns, Villages, 
and
 Hamlets, &c.


3. Houses 
of
 Nobility 
and
 Gentry, 
with the ancient as well as present Possessors.


4. Castles, Churches, Chappels, Schools, Colleges, Hospitals, 
and other
 Publick Buildings, &c.


5. Mills, Beacons, Bridges, Crosses, Towers, Pyramids.


6. Chaces, Forests, Woods, Groves, Parks, Warrens, Commons, Heaths, &c.


7. Mountains, Valleys, Dikes, Rivers, Brooks, Water-works, Sluces, Ponds, Meres, &c.


8. Springs, Wells, Baths, 
Cold and Hot
 Waters, 
Medicinal, Aluminous, Bituminous, Nitrous, Petrifying,
 &c.


9. Works 
and
 Mines 
of
 Gold, Silver, Copper, Lend, Black-lead, Tin, Iron, Salt, Salt-petre, Allom, Coperas, Gems, Precious Stones, Glass, Crystal, Marble, Alabaster, Plaister, Fullers-Earth, Ochre, Tobacco-pipe Clay, Potters Clay, Lime, Chalk, Marl, Freestone, Milstone, Grindstone, Whetstone.


10. Precincts 
of Diocesses,
 Bounds 
and
 Limits 
of Counties, Hundreds, and Parishes, Peculiars, and Privi∣leg'd places.


11. Roman Ways 
and
 Stations, Coins 
and
 Monuments, 
and other Antiquities.


12. Extaordinary 
Accidents, Calamities,
 and 
Casualties.


13. Peculiar 
Customs
 and 
Manners.


14. Decay'd Places, 
whether Cities, Towns, Castles, Monasteries, Abbies, or other Houses of Note.


15. Vaults, Caves, Caverns, Holes, Hollows, Subterranean Passages, 
or other Rarities.


16. Places of Birth, Education, Habitation, and Sepulture of 
Eminent Persons.


17. Improvements 
in
 Husbandry, Mechanicks, Manufactures, &c.


18. Extraordinary 
Productions
 of 
Cattel, Fowl, Fruit, Plants, Herbs,
 or other Animals or Vegetables.


19. What Part of the Country is 
Arable, Pasture, Meadow, Woods,
 and 
Champain.


20. On the Sea-coasts, 
Ports, Harbors, Havens, Creeks, Peels, Peers, Watch Towers, Land-marks, Light-houses, Sands, Sholes, Islands, Eits,
 &c.


21. Productions of the Sea-coasts, of 
Fish, Shell-fish, Amber, Jet, Coral, Herbs,
 &c.


22. Extraordinary or Irregular 
Ebbings
 or 
Flowings
 of the Sea, &c.




To such Ingenious Persons as shall be more Eminently Instrumental herein, either by themselves or others, the Author will make Honorable Returns of Books, and carefully discharge whatever necessary Expences shall appear to have been laid out in this Concern.


And to whom Money shall be more acceptable, the Author promises such Wages and Allowances as may handsomly correspond their Pains; Always presuming, That nothing will be impos'd upon him, without suffici∣ent Authority for its Assertion; Truth being the main of his Design in all his Collections.


From the Office in 
White-Fryers,
 London 
Anno
 1573
.


T.O.









