A voyage to Suratt in the year 1689 giving a large account of that city and its inhabitants and of the English factory there : likewise a description of Madiera, St. Jago, Annobon, Cabenda, and Malemba (upon the coast of by J. Ovington.
Ovington, J. (John), 1653-1731.
Approx. 771 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 321 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A53649




Wing O701



ESTC R26896





ocm 09571011




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A voyage to Suratt in the year 1689 giving a large account of that city and its inhabitants and of the English factory there : likewise a description of Madiera, St. Jago, Annobon, Cabenda, and Malemba (upon the coast of by J. Ovington.
Ovington, J. (John), 1653-1731.
[12], 606 p.   


London :


Printed for Jacob Tonson ...,


1696.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels.
Surat (India) --  Description and travel.
2010-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-10
Lauren Proux
Sampled and proofread
2010-10
Lauren Proux
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






O701


9571011


43688
















Francis Douee.










A VOYAGE TO 
SURATT.










A VOYAGE TO 
SURATT,
 In the Year, 1689.


Giving a large Account of that City, and its Inhabitants, and of the 
English
 Factory there.


Likewise a Description of 
Madeira,
 St. 
Jago, Annobon, Cabenda
 and 
Malemba
 (upon the Coast of 
Africa)
 St. 
Helena, Johanna, Bombay,
 the City of 
Muscatt,
 and its Inhabitants in 
Arabia Felix, Mocha,
 and other Maritine Towns upon the 
Red-Sea,
 the 
Cape of good Hope,
 and the Island 
Ascention.


To which is addded an 
Appendix,
 containing I. The History of a late Revolution in the Kingdom of 
Golconda.
 II. A description of the Kingdoms of 
Arra∣can
 and 
Pegu.
 III. An Account of the Coins of the Kingdoms of 
India, Persia, Golconda,
 &c. IV. Observa∣tions concerning the 
Silk worms.


By 
J. Ovington,
 M. A. Chaplain to his Majesty.


Qui mores Hominum multorum vidit & urbes. 
Horat.


—Orbesque novos trans aequora pandit. 
Grot.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
Jacob Tonson,
 at the 
Judges Head
 in 
Fleet-street,
 near the 
Inner-Temple-Gate.
 1696.










To his EXCELLENCY,
 CHARLES 
Earl of
 Dorset 
and
 Middlesex: Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's House∣hold; Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, 
&c.
 And one of the Lords Justices of 
England.


May it please your Excellency,


AS the 
Eastern
 Princes, upon the News of any Fo∣reigner's Arrival, are wont to expect some Curiosities of the Place from whence he came, to prepare the way for his Reception,


and Introduce the Stranger into their Presence; so, in imitation of this respectful Custom, this Foreign Voyage hopes for admit∣tance to your Favour and Ac∣ceptance, upon that Stock of No∣velty which it presumes upon; and which it brings with it as well from 
Africa,
 as several remoter Parts and Kingdoms of the 
East:
 For in those Places, there are se∣veral Things here taken notice of, which have escap'd the Observa∣tions of other Travellers. I need not mention, my Lord, with what facility you can employ your Judgment, to penetrate into all that is any where useful, whilst your vigorous Fancy can as rea∣dily present to you all that is di∣vertive in its Entertainment. And tho' I confess I have very great Reason to dread the strictness of


your Censure, upon the strength of your admirable Endowments; yet methinks I find a relief to this Fear, in that Native Candor, which so easily tempers the Ac∣curacy of your Thoughts with favourable Constructions.


But I will not transgress those Measures of Civility, of which your 
EXCELLENCY
 is so absolute a Master, by being too tedious in this Address; nor there- violate those Decencies and Re∣spects, which your Practice re∣commends so fully to the World, and of which none have had more sensible Demonstration than my self: Especially considering how much is due to you from the Sacred Order, which you treat with that constant uncommon Civility, as if you design'd to ballance that Contempt, which is


too apt to be cast upon it: Imi∣tating, as in other Perfections, so in this too, the Ancient Poets, who instructed Men in Reverencing not only the Gods, but in a due Re∣gard to such as were their imme∣diate Servants; and in all things maintaining still that Greatness by your Munificence, which you freely part with in your Conde∣scensions. I need not determine, with how much Reason the 
Eastern
 Subjects ascribe this Character to their Emperours, 
That their Roy∣al Condition is owing to their Merits, and that they as far transcend other Mortals in those, as they do in Pow∣er;
 but I am satisfied, 'tis the un∣questionable Loyalty, Prudence, Greatness of Mind, and other Virtues, which have justly rais'd you to that Sphere, wherein you move, kindly influencing the


Affairs of this great Kingdom; and from whence you look down, like the Heavenly Bodies, from the highest Orb, with a kind and obliging Aspect. And that their other Opinion of their Princes, 
That they are the Adopted Sons of Heaven,
 may be your happy Por∣tion too, is not more unfeigned∣ly desir'd by any, than


Your EXCELLENCY's Most Obedient, Most Obliged, and Devoted Servant.
 J. Ovington.










TO Mr. 
J. OVINGTON,
 ON HIS VOYAGE TO 
SURATT.




HArd is our Task to Read with fruitless Pain,


The Dreams of ev'ry Cloyster'd Writers Brain:


Who yet presume that Truth's firm Paths they tread,


When all the while through wild 
Utopia
's led,


With Faiery-Feasts, instead of Science fed.


As dreaming Wizzards Midnight Journeys take,


And weary with imagin'd Labour wake,


So vain is 
Speculation
's fancy'd Flight:


But search of Nature gives sincere Delight.


Through her vast Book the World, a curi∣ous Eye


May Wonders in each pregnant Page descry,


Make new Remarks, which Reason may re∣duce


To Humane Benefit, and Publick Use.






Then Happy they who quit their private Home,


And gen'rously through Foreign Climates roam;


Who, like 
Ulysses,
 can despise the Toil,


And make each Land they meet their Native Soil.


See Men and Manners scarce by Rumour known:


Visit all Countreys to improve their own.






But ah! how few, my Friend, with your Design,


On such Discov'ries bound, have cross'd the Line!


For sordid Gain, new Worlds they will descry,


Seize Nature's Wealth, but pass her Wonders by.


Their Fleet returns opprest with Trafficks Weight,


But Knowledge makes no part of all the Freight.






Yet this, of Old, was 
Jason
's Noble Prize;


'Twas this that plac'd his 
Argo
 in the Skies:


Experience was the far-fetcht Golden Fleece,


The Prize so much admir'd by Ancient 
Greece,


From whence may be inferr'd what Thanks are due


From 
Britain
's Sons, Industrious Friend, to you.


Fame shall in State, your useful Book Install


In 
Bodley
's Pile, the Muses Capitol.






You have so lively your Discoveries Writ,


We Read and Voyage with you as we sit,


With you hoise Sail and reach the 
Indian
 shore;


The real Scene cou'd scarce delight us more.






As when some Prophet from a Trance awakes,


And to Attentive Crowds Description makes


Of Wonders, which he did in Rapture view,


The Listners think they see the Vision too.


Thus, Entertain'd with Nature and with Art,


We hear your Travels told, and well-pleas'd Guests depart.




N. TATE.










THE CONTENTS OF THE Principal Places and Things.


THE Island of 
Madeira. p. 4


The Island of St. 
Jago. 38


The Island of 
Annobon. 54


The Coast of 
Africa. 59


Malemba
 on the Coast of 
Africa. 73


The Island of St. 
Helena. 89


The Island of 
Johanna. 108


The Island of 
Bombay. 129


The Island of 
Elephanta. 158


Of the 
Great Mogul. 165


The City of 
Suratt. 214


The 
Moor
 Inhabitants of 
Suratt. 235


The 
Bannians
 at 
Suratt. 275


The 
Faquires
 near 
Suratt. 359


The 
Persies
 at 
Suratt. 371


The 
Halalchors
 at 
Suratt. 382


The 
English
 Factory at 
Suratt. 385


The Confinement of the 
English
 at 
Suratt,
 in the Year, 
1691, 1692. 410


Muscatt
 in 
Arabia Felix. 420


Mocha
 and other Places on the 
Red Sea. 447


The 
Cape of Good Hope. 479


The Island of 
Ascention. 512


The late Revolution in the Kingdom of 
Golconda. 525


The Kingdom of 
Arracan. 553


The Kingdom of 
Pegu. 583


The several Coyns in 
India, Persia,
 &c.


Observations concerning the Nature of the 
Silk-worms. 599








The Reader is desir'd to Correct these 
Errata
 following, 
viz.


PAge 
182.
 line 
25. after
 the Throne, read, the Titles of the King of Bisnagar, p. 
109.
 l. 
9. for
 gralis r. gratis, p. 
171.
 l 
8.
 r. pursue 
for
 persue, p. 
393.
 l. 
11. for
 place r. plate, p. 
397.
 l. 
10. for
 added r. clod∣ded, p. 
493.
 l. ult. dele of 
before
 all.














A VOYAGE TO 
SURATT,
 &c.


ON 
April
 the 11th,
 1689. the Memorable Day, whereon their Majesties, King 
Wil∣liam
 and Queen 
Mary
 were Crown'd, did the 
Ship Benjamin
 break ground from 
Gravesend,
 towards her intended Voyage to 
Suratt
 in the 
East Indies.
 Whither she was sent as an Advice-Ship of that wonderful Revolution, whereby their Sacred Majesties were peaceably setled in


the Throne, and had been receiv'd with the Universal Joy of all the Nation. In all places where we came, we were welcomed with loud and chearful Acclamations, and were entertain'd with unusual Congratula∣tions and Respect, as happy Mes∣sengers of as grateful News, as ever arrived in those Parts. They were every where truly sensible of their unexpected Deliverance from that Misery and Thraldom which even there threatned them, and likewise of the invaluable Blessing of living under a Peaceable Government, free from their former Apprehensions, ei∣ther of violence upon their Temporal Enjoyments, or disturbance to the Tranquility of their Minds.


We had not long left the Lands-End of 
England,
 before we espied a great Fleet of Ships, which appear'd to us at a distance like a floating Fo∣rest, and seiz'd us with no little Con∣sternation. Their lying off not far from 
Brest,
 made us for some time conjecture them to be 
French,
 till we were happily undeceived by the ap∣proach of an 
English
 Frigot, which


discover'd them to be Friends. How∣ever, one of our Company, who had faithfully ingaged to stand by us, and on whose Assistance we de∣pended, without any Ceremony, be∣ing apprehensive of the danger, clapt upon a wind, and so left us.


After this, we kept on our course with a favourable Wind, till we arrived at 
Madeira,
 a small Island appertaining to the Crown of 
Por∣tugal,
 situated about the Two and Thirtieth Degree of Latitude; it is in length, about Twenty Five Miles, about Eight or Ten broad, and Sixty in its Circumference.








THE ISLAND OF 
MADEIRA.


THis Island, as we are inform'd by good Historians, was first discover'd by 
John Gonsalvo
 and 
Tri∣stan,
 under the Patronage of 
Henry In∣fanto
 of 
Portugal.
 But the present Inhabitants give us a different Ac∣count of its Discovery, 
viz.
 That in the Year 1344. an 
English
 Gentleman,
 having Married a Lady of a conside∣rable Fortune, and setting out with her for 
France
 from the Port of 
Bristol,
 was by gusty weather, and opposite winds, driven into this Island: Where, upon his Landing, finding it a forlorn Place, both Uncultivated and Unpeo∣pled, he fell into an extream fit of Melancholy, and yielding too much to that black Distemper, contributed by


his own Death to make it still the more desolate. The Mariners however, who were not so readily dejected at this Misadventure, set Sail with their Vessel, and landed safely on the Coast of 
Barbary;
 where, after some Re∣freshment and Respite upon the place, they fortunately fell into the Company of some Ingenious 
Portuguese;
 to whom, after a little Conference, they Related the Hardships of the Voyage, the Situation and Native Pleasantness of the uninhabited, but most habitable Island they had left, and the just hopes and prospect they had of regaining a sight of it, were they but provided with Ships and Men. This excited the Attention of the 
Portuguese,
 and likewise, without much reluctancy, procur'd their Promise of endeavour∣ing with their Prince to incline him to hearken to these Proposals, and like∣wise to equip them with Necessaries and Conveniencies for a second Under∣taking: And succeeding with him ac∣cording to their wishes, they set for∣ward, found the Island, landed their Men, and in a short time converted the Wilderness into a Garden of Pleasure.


Some say 
Madeira
 was discover'd by the 
Portuguese,
 in 
Anno
 1429. and de∣riv'd its Name from the abundance of Wood that grew there. It was over∣spread with Wildernesses and plenty of Trees, (which gave it this Name,) as with one intire Wood; the tedious thoughts of cutting down which, per∣swaded them to a more speedy Method of destroying it by fire. After it was kindled, the Flames grew to such a head, raged so violently, and by de∣grees became so furious, that the Peo∣ple were forc'd for their Ease and Pre∣servation, to betake themselves to the water, to avoid the violence of the heat.


The remaining Ashes contributed so much to the Fertility of the Ground, that it at first produced sixty for one, the fruitful Vines brought forth more Grapes than Leaves, Clusters of two or three spans length; and in all its Products, their Beauty and Fertility were so remarkable, that it gain'd the Title of the 
Queen of Islands.


The Air here, to which the Pleasure as well, as Health of Humane Life is so much owing, is generally very


Temperate and undisturbed, and the Heavens smiling and serene. For those Climates which are placed be∣tween the Thirtieth and Fortieth De∣grees of Latitude, enjoy a Tempera∣ture, generally very equal and conve∣nient, infested neither with the ex∣cess of Heat, nor rigid Coldness, but moderately participating of those trou∣blesome Extreams. They seem indi∣sputably to be most suited to the Plea∣santness of Humane Life, and accom∣modated to our Constitutions; afford∣ing that delight to the Body, which Virtue imparts to the Mind, in avoid∣ing all excesses, as dangerous and un∣grateful, and opposite to the Ease, as well of the Sensitive, as Intellectual Part.


The principal Town is 
Tunchal
 or 
Tonzal,
 some of them term it 
Funchal,
 from the abundance of Fennel which they say grew there. 'Tis the sole place of Trade, from whence they Export all their Wine and their Su∣gar, which is esteem'd superiour to any in the world.


The adjacent Rural Places are very Mountainous; but however, they


Rival the Valleys in Fruftfulness and Delight; tho both are much fallen from their Primitive Fertility, and in∣stead of sixty for one, which was the Original Increase,
 have gradually de∣scended to twenty five. Seven or eight Rivers with variety of Rivulets refresh the place, which fall down from the Mountains, which, notwithstand∣ing their heighth and steepness, are Planted and Improv'd, as well as the most Champaign ground in 
England.
 At the utmost top of the high Hills, the Corn thrives well, but the abun∣dance of Clouds that breed there, are prejudicial to the Grapes.


The main product of the Island is Grapes, brought hither first from 
Candy,
 of which there are three or four kinds, whereof they make their Wine. One is coloured like Champaign, of little esteem; another is more strong and pale as White Wine; the third sort is rich and delicious, called Malmsey; the fourth is 
Tento,
 equalling Tent in colour, but far inferiour in Taste; it is never drunk unless in other Wines, with which it is mixt to give them a Tincture, and to preserve them. And


for fermenting and feeding them, they bruise and bake a certain Stone, called Jess, of which nine or ten pounds are thrown into each Pipe.
 The 
Ma∣deira
 Wine has in it this peculiar Ex∣cellence, of being meliorated by the heat of the Sun when it is prick'd, if the Bunghole being open'd 'tis ex∣pos'd to the Air.


The Product of the Vine is equally divided between the Proprietor and him that gathers and presses the Grapes; and yet for the most part the Merchant is Thriving and Rich, whilst the Grape-gatherer, imploy'd by him, is but Poor. Among the Merchants, the 
Jesuits
 are 
one of the meanest, who every where contend for prece∣dence in Fortune, as well as in place; and have here secured the Monopoly of 
Malmsey,
 of which there is but one good Vineyard in the whole Island, which is entirely in their possession. Twenty Thousand Pipes of Wine,
 by a modest Computation, may be recko∣ned the Annual Increase of the Grapes, which number is thus exhausted and spent. Eight Thousand are thought to be drunk upon the Island, three or four


are wasted in Leekage, and the remain∣der is Transported, most of it to the 
West Indies,
 especially to 
Barbadoes,
 where it is drunk more liberally than other 
European
 Wines.


Plenty of Citrons grow here, of which the Natives make a delicate Sweetmeat, called 
Sucket;
 and load with it yearly two or three small Ships for 
France.
 The Sugar which in can∣dying them they make use of, and is often effectually prescrib'd against Con∣sumptions, is but rarely transported, because of its scarcity, which hardly supplies the Necessities of the Island.


They are some years under great want of Corn, because the Grain that grows here produces no great Plenty; so that sometimes they are threatned with Famine: For prevention of which, while I was there, they used their Au∣thority in Pressing Ships which anchor∣ed in the Road, and commanded them, before they would allow them any Commerce, to the 
Azores Islands,
 to Import a quantity for their subsi∣stence.


This Island affords store of Peeches, Apricocks, Plumbs, Cherries, Figgs,


and Walnuts; and the 
English
 Mer∣chants, allowed to Reside and Traffick here, have transplanted from 
England
 Currans, Gooseberries, Philberts, 
&c.
 which are more kindly entertain'd in this Soil, than many of their Fruits are with ours, whose coldness and moi∣sture are not so proper for the pregnan∣cy of the Fruits of a hot Climate. The 
Bonanoe
 is with them in singular esteem,
 and even veneration, affecting the Pa∣lat with that sensible sweetness, that it gains with them the credit of being the Forbidden Fruit. And for confir∣mation of this Surmise, they produce the extent of their Leaves, which be∣ing of a large size, they infer from thence, their fitness to make Aprons for 
Adam
 and 
Eve,
 to veil their Nakedness. 'Tis almost a Crime inexpiable to cut this Fruit with a Knife, which after dissection gives a faint similitude of our Saviour Crucifi∣ed; and this they say is to wound his Sacred Image. Oranges and Lemons abound here in that Plenty, that I have seen them drop into our Dishes, as we sat at Dinner under their delightful Boughs, and opportunely prevented


the trouble of rising up to pluck them, by freely offering themselves to our wants. And these, tho they are in my Opinion as inviting as their Cele∣brated Fruit, and yield as useful and kind Refreshment to the Stomach, must yet not be suffer'd to vie delica∣cie, with their Venerable Admir'd 
Bo∣nanoe,
 which by the awful Impressi∣ons of a powerful Priest upon the Thoughts of the Vulgar, commences Sacred, and must not be violated by the bold Attempt of any Weapon upon it.


The 
English
 Merchants here, which are not reckoned above a dozen, imi∣tate the 
English
 way of Living in their City and Country Houses; and, wea∣ried with the Town, divert themselves in their Rural Plantations, to which they gave us 
English
 that were Stran∣gers a Solemn Invitation;
 and placed us under the spreading boughs of O∣ranges and Lemons, with living Springs under their refreshing shade. Nature here displayed to us a Scene of Joy and Love, and waited on us in all her Pomp, in all the Delights and Beauties of the Field. The Hills


were all cover'd with Vines, and the Valleys with ripe Grapes, which yield∣ed us a fragrant smell from the fruitful Vineyards. The Groves and Woods were all sprightly and gay, nothing seem'd to us drooping or languid, but all things smil'd round about the place of our Entertainment. The Air was clear, and made Melodious by the Voices of Birds. The Ships and Ocean were at a convenient distance, where∣on we looked, and still new Charms sprung from that admirable variety of Objects, whither soever we turn'd our Eyes, and all things conspir'd to yield together a ravishing satisfaction to our Senses. Thus we spent the day in abund∣ance of delight, happy and retir'd from Melancholy and all disturbance.


The ordinary Food of the poorer sort,
 is little else in the time of the Vintage, but Bread and ripe Grapes; which simple Nourishment affords sufficient pleasure and delight, when it meets with true Hunger, which never fails of Cooking the Meat with a gusto for the Palate. For Pulses and Leguminous Food, as it was a great part of the Diet of our Forefathers


and Antediluvian Patriarchs, and very Congenial to the Nature of Man; so is this spare Food, with a very mode∣rate mixture of Flesh, the frequent Repast even of those here of better Note, who find it easily elaborated and transmitted in such manner as is pro∣per for Digestion; who thereby pre∣serve their Bodies in Health and Strength, and keep the Crases of the Parts pure, which are otherwise per∣verted by Intemperance.
 And were it not for this great abstinence in Eating, the danger of Fevers in the hot Sea∣son would be rarely avoided, and the Venereal Excesses to which they are strangely addicted, with the immode∣rate heat of the place, would be apt to put Nature under various disorders. Therefore Men of the greatest Conse∣quence and Fortune, (whether it be that Sobriety might render them more Spruce and Amorous for the Exercise of Love, or that they are bred up in an Antipathy to that gross and scanda∣lous Vice of Drunkenness,) seldom ex∣ceed the allowable bounds of Drinking, and accustom themselves to a very spare Diet. Nor are they apt to


impose their Wine upon others in their ordinary compotations; but the Ser∣vant attending holds the Bottle in his hand, and delivers the Glass to him that Drinks, to receive from the Ser∣vant's hand, who pours out leisurely what the Guest pleases, either a larg∣er or a less quantity; by which means he that is intent upon Drinking, may take his Liberty, and he that is wil∣ling to refrain, is not forced. When the Company breaks up, the Porches and Entries of the Houses,
 and par∣ticularly the private place behind the door, are allowed for the conveni∣ence of Urine; because that action in the Streets is reputed Indecent, and liable to the Censure of Drunken∣ness.


The People very much affect a gra∣vity in their Garb,
 and are cloathed all in Black, in complaisance (as I imagin) to the Sacerdotal Function, and the better to ingratiate with that Profession, which challengeth so much Authority among them. But they cannot live without the gallantry of wearing the Spado and the Dagger; those inseparable Adjuncts, even of


Servants attending their Masters at the Table, who proudly strut with the Dishes in their Hands, in that So∣lemn Garb, with a Basket Hilt to a Sword at least a yard long, even in the midst of Summer.


Their Houses too, as well as Cloaths, are made without much Expence or Splendour; neither Curious by the Em∣bellishments of Art without, nor Rich in Trappings and Furniture within; some of them shoot up a little in height, without any other Characters of great∣ness: The generality of them are flat-roofed, and all of them give admit∣tance to the open Air thro the Win∣dows, which, being without the use of Glass, are kept open all the day, and closed by Wooden shutters at night.


The Soil allows no venomous In∣habitant, nor Creature of Infectious Malignity, which whether it is peculiar to the Earth or Air, or derivable from some other cause, I know not; who found nothing in this place different from the disposition of others of the same Climate.


The Qualities of all Poisons are af∣firm'd by some to be either hot and in∣flaming, as 
Euphorbium;
 or cold, as 
Opium;
 or dry, as 
Vitriol;
 all which qualities may be found in the Elements here, as well as in other Regions, and therefore apt enough to supply Matter for all Venomous Animals, which for this reason might be presum'd to be found here; and much rather than in the Kingdom of 
Ireland,
 which is a Country of noted Humidity; and no Poisons, they say, are simply Humid, because Humidity is a quality purely Passive, and of it self incapable of causing pain.


Lizards,
 of which they have here an infinite number, are very destructive to their Fruits and Grapes, and mighty devourers of whatever they light upon. But Snakes and Toads, of which in the 
Indies
 are such innumerable Multitudes, find here no Entertainment; there they haunt the Chambers and private Apart∣ments of the Inhabitants, lurk fre∣quently in the roofs of their Houses, as well as in the Grass; sometimes they espy them in their Chambers and about their Beds, in the Walls and


Seelings of their Lodgings, and in the dark corners of their Vaults and Cellars.


The Fertility of this Island is much abated from what it was in the time of its first Plantation, and the constant breaking up the ground has made it in many places feeble in its Producti∣ons, so that it wholy discourages their Labours, till it has lain fallow for three or four years; after which time, if there springs up no Broom, as a token of its following Fruitfulness, they desist from all their hopes of its Fertility, and conclude it quite Barren. The present barrenness of much of their Land, re∣minds them of the growth of their Vices,
 to which they ingenuously ascribe it. Among which, their Effe∣minate Lewdness may very well stand in the front of their Accusations, which prevails not a little, even among those whose double Obligations, of Christi∣ans and Married Persons, should mighti∣ly deter them from that sin;
 especial∣ly considering how they may satisfie all their Desires at home, and double their Pleasure by their Innocence. But vagrant Lusts, like other Fires, when


they once get head, are not easily tamed and stifled, till they consume those Materials that feed them. This Inconstancy in the Husband encourages (tho it cannot Legitimate,) the same Levity in the Wife, the weakness of whose Sex is not so much proof against the Charms of alluring Temptations. Therefore are the Wo∣men here as apt to defraud their Husbands, as the Husbands are to de∣fraud their Wives, and both equally kind to Strangers, especially the Wo∣men, whose proneness that way, is more excited by their being cloister'd and kept in, and restrain'd from all Company. Their Appetites are aug∣mented by difficulties, and increased by being oppos'd:

Quod licet, ingratum est, quod non licet acrius urit.

This made 
Lycurgus
 Enact a Decree for keeping up Matrimonial Affection, 
That Married Persons should be as cautious as Celibates, to enjoy one a∣nother, and never do it but by stealth.


Another reason that offers for their mutual Infidelity, is the Ignorance they have of each others personal Humours, and unacquaintance with their disposi∣tions before Marriage, which some∣times is Celebrated before a mutual Interview has preceeded the Engage∣ment. Whereas a competent time of Courtship and frequent Visits gives them some Inspection into each others Genius and Inclinations, engages their mutual Passions and good Liking, by their constant endearing Presents and Conversation, which by degrees unites their Hearts, and ripens their Affecti∣ons for a happy Marriage. For which purpose it is practis'd in some parts of the World, in the very Minority of their Children, who are engaged by Contract at the years of five or six, as in the 
Indies.


During our stay upon the Island, a young Gentleman of an advanc'd Fortune, which was valued at 60000 Dollars, was ingaged in the Court∣ship of a Lady of 8000, and proceed∣ed to Marriage, without the opportu∣nity of one sight of her before the So∣lemnity, besides what was allow'd


him the day before. He was then, as it happen'd, in the Company of her Brother, and espied thro' a Lattice two young Ladies, and imagining one of them to be his Mistress, was curious to enquire, whether of them it was? To which he receiv'd no more satisfaction, than, 
Tomorrow, Sir, is time enough for that.


In Treating about Marriage,
 their principal Enquiries are into the Family and Descent of the Courtier, for pre∣vention of all occasions of the detesta∣ble Affinity with 
Moors
 and 
Jews,
 which among them are very numerous. To join in Matrimony with any of them, is esteemed a debasement of her Line∣age and Extraction, especially in a Woman that pretends to Family and Education. But the 
English
 Merchant is on the other side as Reputable,
 and stands as fair in their Accounts; his very Name makes way for his admit∣tance, and Incorporating into the best Families, especially if any equality ap∣pears in his Fortune; for their subtle Casuists make sometimes an inequali∣ty of Fortune a just Plea for dissolving a Contract. But then, alas! the



English
 Merchant, if he Marries, must first renounce his Religion, and aban∣don the care of his Soul, for the En∣joyment of her in whom he delights. But that which much surpriz'd me, was the prohibition of an Old Gentle∣woman, to the Proceedings of a Young Pretender to her Daughter,
 upon this Account; because she was inform'd of the Health and Soundness of his Con∣stitution, of the Moderation and Cha∣stity of his Manners, so that he was never known to labour under any Ve∣nereal Disease; which she concluded to arise only from the weakness of his Constitution, for it seems she presumed there was no need of the restraints of Conscience for so Venial an Offence, the committing of which, in her Opi∣nion, was Meritorious.


The Execrable Sin of Murther has gain'd too not only an Impunity but Reputation among them, and it is made the Characteristick of any Gen∣tleman of Rank or Fashion, to have dipt his Hands in Blood. To this they frequently are obnoxious, and readily incline, by reason of the easie recourse they have to their Churches, which


shelter them from any Process, and are met with at every turn. For in the Metropolis, 
Tunchal,
 which exceeds not a good Country Town, are almost twenty Churches and Chappels, besides abundance in their Country Plantati∣ons. These Christians are as Licen∣tious in commiting this Crime, as re∣miss in inflicting due Penalties for it, and indulge the guilt of it, even beyond what the Almighty did the 
Jews,
 tho' 'tis voluntary, by sparing the Criminal if he can lay hold on the Horns of the Altar; and make Banishment or Con∣finement his utmost Penalty, both which by a large Present are bought off.


The Numbers of their Clergy in∣crease here,
 as well as in other Popish Countries, even to the oppression of the Laity, with whom they seem to vie for Multitude. 'Tis scarce imagi∣nable, how so many Rich Ecclesi∣asticks can be supported by the La∣bours of so few People. But to abate this wonder, they tell us, that none of their Nation is admitted to the Priest∣hood, who is not possess'd of some Pa∣trimony, to avoid a burthen to the Church. They are totally averse here


from admitting any into Sacred Or∣ders,
 whose Originals are either 
Jews
 or 
Moors,
 and yet this Caution is not observed by them at St. 
Jaques,
 where Native 
Africans
 Officiate as Priests.


The 
Jesuits,
 among all the rest of their Orders, are the only Men in Su∣pream Repute, which they aspire to by the easie Absolutions of their Peni∣tents, and pretentions to stricter San∣ctity, and a more unblemisht Chara∣cter, than the rest of the Orders. For this end, they closely conceal from publick notice all the Enormities and Irregularities of their Order, and all their Failures, but what are legible in their Ignorance,
 which was so re∣markable, that scarce one in three of those I convers'd with understood Latin. If any Delinquent is expell'd the Convent, his Faults are stifled and kept as secret as Confession, lest the noise of them among vulgar Ears, should scandalously reflect upon their Society, and diminish that Veneration they so zealously affect. And the only Answer which is vouchsafed to any Querist,
 for the reason of their Expulsi∣on, is, 
He was unworthy of our


Society.
 This is a Maxim worth the Wisdom of that Order, and the imi∣tation of all others, and highly justi∣fies the prudent concealment of such Men's Faults, whose Examples might eminently scandalize any kind of Pro∣fession.


The 
Jesuits
 Chappel is far the most splendid of all their Churches,
 which we chanced to view in the greatest Lustre, at St. 
Ignatius
 his Eve, (as they are pleas'd to term him) a time observable for the Magnificence of the Ceremony and Pomp: Variety of the choicest Anthems were sung, with the sweetest Instrumental and Vocal Musick, sufficient, had their Doctrine been answerable to it, to have charm'd us into a Conversion. The Vigils of all their Saints, as well as that of St. 
John Baptist,
 are Celebrated with a∣bundance of shining Lights, placed conspicuously upon the tops of their Steeples, after the Sun-set. But the bright Illuminations this Night about the Steeple of the 
Jesuits
 Oratory, far out-did the rest of the Apostles Eves, and dazled the Eyes of the Spectators at a distance. Some of the Chappels,


as well as Houses, are built upon such steep declining Hills, that they seem to indanger the precipitation of such as come out of them; and questionless the protection of the Saint is extolled for the deliverance from those Perils.


Near the 
Jesuits
 Chappel is a cer∣tain Hospital, much frequented by the Natives, Erected for the Entertain∣ment and Cure of such as have smart∣ed for their Feminine Pleasures; whose miserable Spectacles are so ghastly and frightful, that were there nothing of future Punishment, that only might very well curb Men in their highest Ca∣reer to those foul Sins. Among the rest of the Female Penitents, we espied one near the Altar, weeping bitterly, with a sorrowful dejected Countenance, and in deep anguish of Heart. This sight produc'd something of the same Me∣lancholy Effects upon us, till I reco∣vered my self at the hopes I had of her happy Condition, which such floods of Tears seem'd to promise. Had all the rest evidenc'd the like Sorrow and Concern she did, this Infamous Society (for ought I know) had been the most Honourable upon the Island. But their


Measures herein are very unequal, for a modest Salute is an Offence insuffera∣ble, whilst this abominable Vice many of them scarce stand to Parly with.


Their Churches are most commonly made use of for Repositories of their Dead,
 in the Interment of whom they mix store of Lime with the Earth, to hasten the consumption of the Corps, by whose sudden mouldring away, upon this account, there is room made within a fortnight for a fresh Funeral. To signalize their Respect for the Deceased, the Corps is curiously trimm'd and adorn'd, as a faint Em∣blem of its glorious and triumphant Resurrection, in imitation of the Wise King, who buried with his Royal Fa∣ther an invaluable Treasure.


But as their Church allows no Cha∣ritable Thoughts to the Souls of He∣reticks,
 so does it forbid all kind∣ness to their dead Bodies, and prose∣cutes the 
English
 that die there, with more inexorable hatred, than what they shew to the Carcasses of Beasts and Birds, which may find a resting place on shoar, and quietly remain


upon common ground; both which are strictly forbid the 
English,
 who are cast into the Sea, and committed to the waves. And accordingly an 
Eng∣lish
 Merchant falling sick of a sudden Distemper at 
Madeira,
 was unfortu∣nately carried off by it; which mov'd the rest of our Nation that were there, to contrive for his decent Interment. And therefore, lest a publick Burial might expose him to the Rage of the People, or the Clergy's Indignation, they concluded to deposit him among the Rocks, in order to his better con∣cealment. But the Rocks were una∣ble to shelter him from their Tyranny, which was exercis'd upon him in this barbarous manner, they dragg'd him from the place where he lay, up and down the Island, and expos'd him to the contempt of the Inhabitants, till they threw him into the Ocean. This Inhu∣manity, which is carried even beyond the Grave, is propagated as far as their Plantations in the 
East;
 where if any Protestant chance to die among the Nation of the 
Portuguese,
 no place is allowed for his Reception, nor vile enough for his Sepulchre, but the very


Corps of a rank Heretick annoys the Dominions of a Catholick Country, tho' it were buried under ground.
 And yet a powerful Summ of Mony, which is said to blind the world, prevail'd to open the Eyes of the Priests Intellectu∣als in this very case; for thus they stated the difficulty concerning an 
English
 Child, which had been clan∣destinely Interred there, that if it were immediately taken up, and then Bap∣tized after their manner, and so made a Member of their Church, it might be admitted among their Dead. This Conclusion was approv'd of as Cano∣nical, for the Child was Baptiz'd, Bu∣ried after their manner, and deposited where it was taken up.


The Canons of the Cathedral Church,
 which stands about the midst of the City, are as exquisite in their contrivance for their Ease, as the others were for burying-mony. The Consti∣tutions of their Church oblige their Attendance at Prayers by Four a Clock in the Morning. But because such early Rising is very troublesome, espe∣cially to Corpulent Men, therefore they agree, that the Clock shall never


in the Morning strike Four, till it real∣ly be Five; and order its motions by this Method, always an Hour or so slower than the Sun, that they may punctually indulge their own Repose, by this mock obedience to the Orders of their Church.


Yet how negligent soever they may appear in this Instance, they all pre∣tend a mighty Zeal for their Faith, especially in the Meritorious Conver∣sion of any Stranger, upon which we suspected they had been too intent, by the loss we had of some few of our Men, whom no search could discover to us. The 
Jesuits
 we conjectur'd must be concern'd in it, because their Love for the Cause is generally more flaming than that of the other Orders among them; and therefore we resolved upon addressing to the Governour for de∣manding an enquiry after them in the College of the 
Jesuits;
 but we found his power could not reach it. The time grew on that we must depart, and were much concern'd to leave our Men, when we were engaged to set Sail, because the want of them on Board might be very prejudicial in a


tedious Voyage. Our Commander therefore having got without Gun-shot of their Citadels, Mann'd out his Pinnace with twelve or fourteen Hands, well provided with Swords and Fire-Arms, and appointed them to Row along the Shoar, to apprehend, if possible, some few of their Fishers, to supply the places of our Sailers. As they cruised along, they met by chance with another Prize, 
viz.
 a Comely Abbot and a Vicar, coming up to 
Tunchal
 from the Country in a Boat.
 They were strangely surpriz'd, to find themselves unexpectedly taken, and Pirated by a Boat's Crew; but much more concern'd, when we told them they must bid farewel to all their Friends and Festivities at 
Madeira,
 and Imbarque with us in an 
Indian
 Voyage, or at least remain our Prisoners on Board, till the 
Jesuits
 restor'd our Men on Shoar. The thought of this amazed and struck them with confusion, and forc'd from their Breasts many a groan and sigh, for their Sorrow seem'd to surpass its expression by any Tears. And yet they were not so far lost in this Consternation of Mind, but that they


kept within limits of Reflection, and recollecting a Method for their Release. Therefore they speeded an Express to the Governour, and passionately im∣plored him for the sake of God, and the Virgin 
Mary,
 to bethink himself of some Project for their Liberty, for which their Prayers should continually ascend for his deliverance from such Disasters. And our Commander va∣luing his Sailers above the Priests, di∣rected a Letter to the 
English
 Consul on Shoar, to this effect.




The Cap∣tain's Let∣ter to the Consul on shoar.


SIR,


THE Honour and Duty we owe our King and Employers, obliged us to make this Restitution to our selves, since your Governour wou'd not. To deprive Prin∣ces of their Subjects, and Masters of their Servants, under a pretence of making them better Christians, is in my Opinion to make them worse. And if the Religion of your 
Jesuits
 admit of such Immoral Actions, neither our Laws nor Religion require our taking it at your Hands. If your Gover∣nour has little Command over them, he


has less over us, and he therefore may take the keeping of some of your Subjects as patiently from us, as he does their detaining some of our Sailers (as we presume) from them. In the mean time, endeavour to see they be restored, or rest satisfied with the loss of those we here detain. If your Go∣vernour wou'd not give us satisfaction if he could, he cannot then excuse himself in this matter. If he wou'd, and cou'd not, we shall be so kind, as to do it for him, which may thereupon prove an Obligation, as well to him, as


Yours, 
&c.




These Epistles were no sooner re∣ceiv'd and read, but the whole place was in an uproar about their Priests, either their Priests must be return'd, or all the 
English
 must suffer for it. This startled the 
English
 Merchants on shore, and awaken'd their Care of contriving some means for their Safety; for they perceiv'd the inraged Multitude, who stood upon the Strand, would not be pacify'd without them. And there∣fore lest our Commander should prove


inexorable, and seriously resolv'd upon what he writ, the 
English
 Merchants brought along with them Money for a Voyage, after they had prevail'd to get on Board. For they durst not re∣turn without their Priests; and they knew not where the Voyage would end. After their difficult Passage on Board, they related the Confusion the Place was in, and how tumultuous the People had suddenly grown, upon the account of the Detention of their Priests; and how they were upon the Bank of the Sea, repeating their Excla∣mations, 
Our Padres! Our Padres!
 A sudden Joy sprung up in the Faces of the Priests upon the sight of our 
English
 Merchants, from whom they assured themselves of some Relief, and Release from the Confinement they were un∣der; and with sorrowful Accents re∣presented to them the unhappy Minute they set forward for 
Tunchal;
 but withal, the Hopes they had that their coming on Board would prove favou∣rable to their Misfortune. The Com∣mander, who heard all this, and refle∣cting upon the extreme Inconvenience attending the English upon this occasi∣on,


resolved to send them all on Shore, to remove that Disturbance which he saw was otherwise unavoidable; for he thought the Priests would be as use∣less to him at Sea, as they commonly are at Land, and a Burthen to either Element;
 and so dismiss'd them all to their great Satisfaction.


After this we stood off from Shore, fill'd our Sails, and without any Cere∣monious Adieu, either to the Governour or the Fort, we left the Island. For 'tis easier to depart, than to be admit∣ted into the Harbour.
 Because when any Ship arrives there, two or three of the Inquisitors, who wear the Sacred Garb, are sent to examine it about any Sickness, or other Objection, which might hinder the Liberty of Traffick; and not suffering any Sailer's setting his Foot on Shore till they pronounce the Ship healthful.


By a kind Providence our speedy sailing that Day did occasion a greater Deliverance to us from the French,
 than what the Abbot and Vicar had from us. Within Forty Hours after our Departure, two 
French
 Men of War of good Force arrived in the same


Port, who no sooner dropt their An∣chor, but they weighed again in Chace of our Ship, and shaped their Course directly towards the 
Canaries,
 where some gave out we were design'd. But leaving the Island 
Palmo
 on the East, we steer'd directly to 
St. Jago,
 a Capi∣tal Island of 
Cape Verde,
 whereby we happily defeated their pursuit.


So the 
Cerne Atlantica,
 as the Anci∣ents called it, being in a fortunate Mi∣nute left by us, we arrived with Safe∣ty at this Port. In our way we were entertain'd with an unusual prospect, which to fresh Navigators was very divertive,
 which was several winged Fish, which took Flight in the Air, while their Finns were moist, but dropt into the Ocean as soon as they grew dry, and thereby unactive. Their Wings are always spread while they move in the Air, where they some∣times sustain themselves the space of a Furlong. When they drop into the Ocean, the watchful Dolphins are ge∣nerally ready to devour them, whose Swiftness in the Water equals almost the Flight of the others in the Air. And as timorous Animals at Land


seek for Shelter from Men, when they find themselves in apparent Danger from a merciless Persecutor; so the Fly∣ing Fish will betake themselves to our Ships, and fall upon our Decks and Shrouds, upon a hot pursuit of the de∣structive Dolphin. Here likewise we were affrighted with a Turnado, which,
 without Care and speedy handing of our Sails, might have endanger'd our Ship. It came suddenly, without any previous signs of its approach, till a quarter of an hour before it came. 'Tis a violent surprizing Storm of Rain and Wind; and that which adds to render it more formidable, is its unexpected Rise, at such times as the Weather is sedate and temperate; but its precipi∣tant Motion renders it less tedious, be∣ing as soon a dying, as it is short in it's Growth and Increase.








THE ISLAND OF St. 
JAGO.


THE Islands of 
Cape Verde
 are di∣stant from the Main of 
Africa
 150 Leagues; they extend themselves in a Body from 13½, unto the 19th in Latitude. Ten of these Islands are con∣siderable, tho' not inhabited, and are rang'd in Form of a Crescent; of which the Convex Part regards the Conti∣nent, and the Two points the Ocean.


The Night before we came to an Anchor we espied this Island of St. 
Ja∣go,
 which is the greatest and principal of all the Isles of 
Cape Verde,
 and is dig∣nify'd with a Bishop's Seat in a City of the same Name. They borrow their Appellation of 
Cape Verde
 from the Cape or Prominence of Land in 
Africa,
 which is the nearest Main Land to


them, from whence several 
Africans
 come here to inhabit. These by the Ancients were call'd 
Gorgades
 and 
He∣sperides,
 who feigned the Orchards with Golden Apples, which were kept by a Dragon, were placed here.


In this Island are various Ports,
 the most noted of which we anchor'd in, named 
Praya,
 where, by the Blessing of Heaven, we escaped an eminent Danger,
 which arose from a violent Storm in the Night-time; and was so outragious, that the Ship dragg'd her Anchor; and our Ruine had been in∣evitable, had it been much fiercer; be∣cause we rid so near St. 
Jago,
 which was on one side; and 
Hay Island,
 which lay on the other.


The Island at our approaching it lookt very desolate and naked,
 without any apparent Verdure either of Grass or Leaves. And the reason for this, upon our Examination, was very plain, because in Three Years space before that Day we came thither, they had not been refreshed with one Shower of Rain, which occasion'd an extreme Drought and Stelitity, and gave it the Face rather of the Desarts of 
Arabia,
 than of a plentiful Country.


The Air is neither so healthful, nor the Place so pleasant, as 
Madeira,
 which has so many Houses and delightful In∣closures, that it seems to be a Gar∣den of Pleasure. Neither is it so moun∣tainous as that Island, which makes it apt enough for Plantations; and yet here are but very few Vines, and those incompetent for affording any Wine; most of which that is drunk is import∣ed to them from 
Madeira.


In the Valleys are Grains, Vines, Fruits, Sugar-Canes, Mellons, Bono∣noes, better than those at 
Madeira,
 Dates, Coco-Nuts. They abounded not with Cattle, but of Fowl they had plenty; for which, or for any o∣ther of their Commodities, we traded with them for old Cloaths, and cast Garments, a staple sort of Merchan∣dise with these 
Portuguese,
 whose Hu∣mour, which generally is vain and haughty, will make them vaunt them∣selves like Fidolgoes, when they are on∣ly thus apparell'd. But that which is meaner in them much, than strutting in the over-worn Garments of Sailers and other Men,
 they are strangely ad∣dicted to pilfering and stealth; and one


or two of them will entertain you in Discourse, whilst the third takes off your Hat, or snatches away the Sword from your side. And if they meet any Stranger at a Distance from any Town, they seldem fail of stripping him naked.


They are ignorant here in the Hus∣wifery of making either Butter or Cheese, which are therefore valuable, because rare. And accordingly, a cou∣ple of Cheese, twelve Stock-fish,
 and two Dozen of Poor Jack were kindly received by the Governour of the Town, who was at this time unable to supply us with a Loaf of Bread; which made a Sea-Bisket as acceptable to them, as fresh Provisions, after a long Voyage, would be to us.


A Romish Prelate govern'd the Island,
 and presided in their Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Affairs; and, without that Niceness which is practic'd at 
Madeira,
 admitted the Native 
Africans
 to offi∣ciate in their Oratories and Convents.


Most of the People are Negroes,
 transported from 
Africa
 to settle here, converted to the 
Roman
 Faith. Their Cloathing is a kind of Indian-like


Stuff, turn'd about their middle care∣lesly; the rest of the Body is all bare, save their Breasts and Shoulders, which are covered with some thin Stuff.


Notwithstanding the Penance they were under by the Scarcity of Bread and Wine, the Women were very loose in their Behaviour, and easily led away by the Sailers, whose Immoral Extra∣vagancies have occasion'd this Prover∣bial Speech in 
India,
 That 
in Sailing from hence thither, they leave their Con∣sciences on this side of the
 Cape; 
and in returning from thence to
 Europe, 
they leave their Consciences on the other side the
 Cape. So that except it be in doubling the 
Cape,
 they will scarce allow an 
East-India
-man any Conscience at all.


Near this Island is another called 
Fogo,
 remarkable for its Sulphureous Vapours, which like 
Aetna
 and 
Vesu∣vius,
 it continually emits; which sally forth in such Eruptions, that it annoys all the adjacent parts, by continual vo∣miting of Flames and Smoak; from this burning Mountain such quantities of Pumice-stones are ejected,
 that they swim upon the Main Ocean, and are variously dispers'd by the Currents of


the Water to distant places; some floated as far as St. 
Jago,
 and spread themselves by our Ship's side. The Height of this 
Volcano
 is considerable,
 and its aspiring Top is raised above two Stories in the Clouds, which are rang'd each below the other upon its declining sides. The Head of the Mountain advanced in height in a dou∣ble Proportion to the highest of the Clouds; which were not very long in ripening, but presently put on their Aery Body. The same thing I obser∣ved upon the Table-Land of the 
Cape of Good Hope,
 where the Vapours fa∣shion'd themselves into Clouds imme∣diately upon their Exhalation from the Mountains, and ranged themselves, as they rise, in due Order and Progress through the Air.


Before we had sailed many Leagues from this Shore,
 we were under the Influence of the Trade-Winds, which blow on both sides of the Lines to ma∣ny Degrees distance; and with such constant gentle Gales, that except it be upon occasion of a sudden, violent,
 and stormy Gust of Weather, the Sail∣ers make all that passage Holiday, and


are not forced to hand a Sail in the space of many Days. The Days here are regular, and almost of an equal length, not apt to be infested with Storms, or darkned with Clouds, or overcast with Showers, except it be upon the nearer Approaches of the Sun, who usually skreens his direct scorch∣ing Beams by the Interposition of wa∣try Vapours; and now neither boiste∣rous Winds nor swelling Seas do raise any Fear or Disturbance in the Mari∣ners Breast. 'Tis this kind indulgent Weather that mainly animates Men to the undertaking of this tedious Voyage. For otherwise the length of it would be insupportable, were it all along in∣commoded by the Storms and Dangers of our Northern Seas; the Thoughts of which wear off by degrees, as we recede from them, and fall insensibly into milder Climates; where the calm Face of the Heavens smooths the rug∣ged Aspect of the Men, makes them forget their former rough and trouble∣som Weather, and solace and enjoy themselves in this sweet welcom change of Air.


Great store of Sharks swum now a∣bout our Ship,
 with their Attendants and Adherents the Pilot-fish and the Sucking-fish, which are about four or five Inches long. The Pilot-fish are the same to the Shark, as the Jackalls are to the Lion, direct him in his Course, and find out his Prey, and give him notice of any Danger. The Suck∣ing-fish stick close to the Shark, as some small Fish do upon Lobsters, and suck their Nourishment out of him. This Fish forsakes not the Shark in the greatest Dangers, is his faithful Adhe∣rent in his utmost Extremities; he cleaves to him even when he is forc'd out of his Element, and brought on Board the Ship, attends him to his Fu∣neral, and dies with him. The Under Jaw of the Shark is so much lower than the Upper, that he cannot take his Bait, but by turning upon his Back to receive it with more Facility. They are eagerly voracious, and are furnish'd with Instruments accordingly; with a Sett of Teeth as keen as their Stomachs, which easily lop off the Leg or Arm of a Man, and afford no more than one Morsel to that ravenous Animal. Yet


are they peculiarly tender and indul∣gent to their Spawn,
 and shelter them in the place that gave them Birth: For when ever the Young Ones are in Dan∣ger, they immediately hasten to the Mouth of the Old One, and retire to its inward Parts for Safety. By this I was apt to think, that they spawned their Young Ones at their Mouth, be∣cause we have seen them come out and go in at the Sharks Mouth, and found one Six Foot long in a Sharks Belly. Several Dolphins followed our Ship,
 which surpass all the Creatures of the Watry Element in Beauty and a quick Finn, and is therefore called the Ar∣row of the Sea. They shine the bright∣est, and swim the swiftest, of any Fish in the Ocean; and their lively Colours represent in the Water the shining Wings of some bright Flies. But as they leave their Element, their Beauty fades; and as their Life, so does their Splendour decay; the lightsom Colours begin to fade and mourn at Death's Approaches, and turn quite dark and dusky at their Expiration. It is nei∣ther the Number, nor the Largeness of the Finns, that contribute towards


their extraordinary Swiftness; for they are but few, and very small; two on∣ly near the Jowl, and two small ones under the Belly, and a narrow long one upon the Back. The Head is fa∣shion'd sharp above, and downwards descends broader, almost like the Head of a Hatchet with the Edge upwards. Upon the top of his Tongue he has ma∣ny little Teeth. It is a lovely, neat, and clean Fish, and as like to the Dol∣phin on the Sign-Posts as a Mackrel is to a Flounder. The Flesh of it is white and delicate, which when larded and roasted fresh, no Roman Dainties or Eastern Luxury can out-vie the grateful Food.


After these an infinite number of Porpoises plaid about our Vessel,
 and spread themselves near half a League round our Ship. One of them was caught by the Tail with a running Knot made by the Sailers, whose Liver and Entrails nearly resembled those of an Hog; and the Blood that issu'd from it was thick and red, like that of a Bul∣lock: It strangely detain'd its Blood, after a deep Wound in the Throat, and stopt the Effusion of it for a very


considerable time, before it gave it any vent.


We met likewise with Shoals of Al∣bicores (so call'd from a piece of white Flesh that sticks to their Heart) and with multitudes of Bonettoes, which are named from their Goodness and Ex∣cellence for eating; so that sometimes for more than twenty Days the whole Ship's Company have feasted on these curious Fish.
 Several Vessels in tedi∣ous Voyages, which by contrary Winds have been retarded in their Sailing, have owned the Preservation of their Lives to this kind Providence, which has often supplied them with this sort of Food in the time of their Extre∣mity.


As we sailed along there happen'd an Accident, which made me conclude, that either the Fish do not sleep, or that they subsist much longer without it than other Animals. We struck an Albicore upon the Tail with a Fish-spear, which afterwards made its E∣scape by dropping off the Hock. This very Fish, as we all observ'd, follow'd our Ship daily above a Week, when we sailed at least two Degrees, that is,


an Hundred and Twenty Miles a Day, and never left us all the while. We saw it early in the Mornings, by that time we were able to discern any such thing at that Distance; and till the Darkness of the Evening intercepted our Sight, we never missed it. The peculiar Mark we distinguisht it by, was the large Wound in the Tail, which was lacerated by the Fish-spear, when it fell off, and in constant swim∣ming near our Vessel discover'd it ve∣ry plainly to us; all which time it kept Pace with us, and rested no more than we.


We had not the luck of seeing a Cramp-fish, for an Experiment,
 all the Voyage; but Dr. 
Kempfer,
 in his Pas∣sage through the 
Persian Gulph,
 relates how he caught one, and that it struck the Person with a frightful Tremor, whoever touch'd it with Hand or Foot; but the benumming Quality would not reach to the length of a Line or a Pole, according to the vulgar Opinion, and operated only when it was sensibly struck or handled. But the way of preventing this Trembling and Stupi∣dity of him that felt it, was most wor∣thy


Observation, because unknown, and scarce mentioned by any Writer. For a certain Person on Board, to the A∣mazement of all that saw him, could touch the Torpedo as oft as any, and was never affected by any Insensibility upon it. He was shy of divulging his Receipt, but by Importunities was at length won to declare the Secret, which consisted only in holding in his Breath very hard when he touched it. The rest upon Trial found it true. And the Reason for this (as 'tis supposed) is, that stifling the Breath, and detaining the Spirits, repels the Force of that Narcotick or stupifying Quality which issues from the Body of the Cramp-fish.


At our approaching the 
Aequator
 the Winds grew calm, the Sails flapt to the Mast, and the Face of the Ocean was as smooth as that of a Crystal Mir∣rour.
 This gave an Opportunity to our Commander of sending out his Boat to try the Current of the Water. For even in the Main Sea are sometimes such Streams and strong Tides, and im∣perceptible Currents, as carry a Ship many Degrees in Longitude beyond


the Observation of the expertest Na∣vigator, before ever he knows where he is, if he be not help'd by his Azi∣muth Compass. An Instance of this Nature happen'd while I was in 
India.
 An 
East-India
 Ship bound for 
Bombay,
 was suppos'd by the Master of her to be near that Haven, upon his first sight of Land; but making better Observa∣tion, he found himself driven many Degrees to the Westward, very near 
Mussat
 in 
Arabia Foëlix,
 which lies up∣on the 
Persian
 Gulph. For this no Reason can be alledged, besides the un∣discernible Currents of the Water, which carry the Ships so wide from that place, which by their Course they steered towards: For in one Hours time the Water runs above a League, sometimes in the very midst of the O∣cean. And another Ship bound for the same Port, was upon the first Discove∣ry of Land very near the Coast of 
Per∣sia.
 Therefore the wary Pilots, when the Winds are silent, and the Sea calm, use this Expedient for trying the Moti∣on of the Water, which way, and how fast the Currents set. At Seven Mi∣nutes Distance from the Line, our Com∣mander


mann'd out the Boat, with the chief Mate in it, and ordered it to be rowed about half a League from the Ship. They took with them in the Boat a Basket, into which they put Forty or Fifty Pound Weight of Iron or Lead, which tied to a Line of eighty, or an hundred Fathom length, they dropt into the Sea; by whose Weight the Boat was fixt as immovably and steddy, as if it were at an Anchor. Af∣ter this they cast out the Log-board, which discovers the Tide-way of the Water, and by the Half Minute Glass which they set a running, they know how fast the Stream runs. For at certain Distances of the Line, to which the Log-board is fastned, are cer∣tain Knots, for every one of which that the Board drew off, while the Glass runs, they reckon a Mile. The Tide set here Northward, but not ve∣ry fast. This Experiment of finding out the Swiftness of the Current, and to what Points it runs, is never at∣tempted but in a perfect Calm, when both the Winds and the Sea are peace∣able and still; which is the reason that Mariners, by not meeting with such an


opportunity, are sometimes driven very distant from their designed Port.
 The Sailers at this time let down an empty Bottle into the Water tied to the Basket, with a Cork in the Mouth of it, so very large, that a Mallet could not drive it in further; and yet the Cork was forc'd into the Bottle in its Descent, and the Bottle was drawn up full of Salt Water. Under the Line there is such a constant brooding Heat,
 that the Rain Water which has been receiv'd in Casks, has been full of small Worms in less than four Hours time. Nor can any Care prevent the rusting of the best polish'd Steel or Iron, nor hinder the best temper'd Blade in 
England
 from being apt to stand bent, by reason of the warm in∣sinuating 
Aether,
 which softens its Spring and Elastick Spirit.








THE ISLAND OF 
ANNOBON.


THE first Land we made after our crossing the Aequinoctial, was 
An∣nobon,
 which lies in the Latitude of one and an half, and is reckon'd about Ten Leagues in its Circumference. We were driven unhappily to the Leeward of it, and luffed up to it for the space of two days, but were hindred from fetching it, by its lying directly in the Eye of the Wind. It had the name of 
Annobon
 given it, because it was first discovered upon the first Day of the Year.


The scarcity of our fresh Provisions, which by this time were almost spent, made us beat up to Windward more vigorously, especially when we heard


that they were to be purchased at such easie rates, that a roasting Pig might be bought for a Sheet of Paper.


But tho' we judg'd our selves unfor∣tunate in not being able to reach this plentiful Island, yet we were pleas'd with the Prospect which we had of it, because we had been long Strangers to such a Sight. And it gratified us with the fragrant Smells which were wafted from the Shoar, from whence at three Leagues distance we scented the Odours of Flowers and fresh Herbs.
 And what is very observable, when after a tedious Stretch at Sea, we have deem'd our selves to be near Land by our Observa∣tion and Course, our Smell in dark and misty Weather has outdone the Acute∣ness of our Sight; and we have disco∣ver'd Land by the fresh Smells, before we discern'd it with our Eyes.


The Inhabitants observing our Toil and Industry to stretch into the Har∣bour, made Fires on Shoar to give us Light in the Night time, and sent off to us with some Oranges and Fowls a Canoo or two, that is, a long sharp Boat fashion'd out of one piece of Tim∣ber, which was rowed with Six Oars.


The Islanders that came in it were for∣merly known to some on Board us, whom we conferred with concerning their Belief, and the Religion which they professed. They confess'd them∣selves of the 
Roman
 Faith,
 and were eminent Believers of that Church by the profound Ignorance which they profess'd, in scarce knowing what Mass meant, or the Pope from the great Mo∣gul. They were born in 
Africa,
 and, bating the Name of Catholicks, were as Heathenish, as if they had never come from thence, which they ascrib'd to their want of Priests among them. No Priests! This amaz'd me, and put me to a stand, to consider how those who travel Sea and Land to make Pro∣selytes, to whom neither 
Siam, China,
 nor 
Japan
 are esteemed too remote a Pil∣grimage for making Converts, should yet neglect a place so nigh as 
Annobon,
 overlook a Care so much nearer. Sure∣ly some fatal Disease, some Infectious Air must ravage and lay waste the place, that affrighted those zealous Fa∣thers from inhabiting among them. No, the Air was healthful and serene, the Island fruitful, but very poor;


they know of no reigning Distempers among them, unless we would account Poverty one. They were stor'd with plenty of Provisions, and indigent in nothing but Gold and Silver, of which they had none. Or if they were Ma∣sters of a little of that at some chance time, the first Priest that happen'd to come upon the Island, was certain of draining it by Confessions, whose stay was never longer among them, than the Money lasted, but his Minutes were always spent as soon as their Mites. Now I imagin'd that a place, where was such scarcity of Wealth, should have best suited with those whose Pro∣fession is Poverty; because they seem then to be in their proper Element, and freed from the Temptations of Riches, which they voluntarily renounce. And that the Eastern Nations, which abound in Wealth and Luxury, should be less frequented by Men that pretend to be dead to the World.


Upon this Island,
 as well as upon ma∣ny others, the Road for Ships lieth con∣veniently on the Leeside, as at St. 
Tho∣mas,
 which is under the Line, 
Ascension, St. Helena, St. Jago, Mauritius,
 and many


more, as well in the 
East
 as 
West Indies,
 which are by an All-wise Providence made this way serviceable for avoiding the danger of Shipwrack, which would be inevitable on the Weather-side, when the Winds blew fresh, and the Seas were high. For in these places the Winds generally hang towards one Quarter, which renders the opposite part of the Island calm and safe. And though some few Islands are observ'd destitute of this Convenience in their Harbours, and are not so well accom∣modated with Ports for the securing of Ships, yet are these very rare, and for the most part not very necessary for Navigators to come near them. With such an Infinite Wisdom are all things contriv'd for the peculiar Ends and De∣signs to which they serve!








THE COAST OF 
AFRICA.


NOT long after this we espy'd the Coast of 
Africa,
 a Degree North∣ward of the River 
Congo,
 and coming near the Shoar were becalm'd and dri∣ven backward in one Night's time five Leagues towards the North. But that Misfortune was drown'd by the Plea∣sure we receiv'd in the refreshment of abundance of Rain which fell that Night, a Drop of which we had not seen for at least two Months before. The richest Wine could not please our Palates with half that Delight,
 as this Blessing which descended from Heaven in Showers upon us. For being all this while under the hot Influence of the Sun-Beams confin'd to the Torrid Region, the Provisions, being salt Beef,


and the Water in the Cask so unsa∣voury and corrupt, that to quench our Thirst we must stifle our smelling, and shut our Nostrils when we open'd our Mouths; and of this poor stinking Li∣quor, in all this Feverish Weather, the Allowance being only a Quart a Day, this made a Glass of this fresh Liquor drink most pleasant, and cheer'd our Hearts, as if they had been refresh'd with the noblest Wine. For impatient of letting it fall into the Tubs, which were placed upon the Decks on pur∣pose to receive the falling Water, no Wine was more greedily catcht at by the Vulgar out of publick Conduits on a solemn Day, than the Rain was by the Sailers in their Bowls and Hats. Such a Relish does a starved Appetite find even in course Fare! To such In∣conveniences are Men sometimes dri∣ven by tedious Voyages!


Stretching along this Shoar, a Strand extended in the Semicircle of more than twenty Leagues, presented us with a most delightful Prospect, which re∣ceived in its Bosom 
Neptune
's rowling Waves upon an even and plain Surface. Above this extended Plain were several


gently rising Hills,
 cloathed with Grass and variety of Trees, all in their Sum∣mer Livery. This unexpected Verdure of the Fields tempted us to fancy our selves rather in 
Europe
 again, than upon the Confines of scorcht 
Africk.
 Such was the Beauty of the pleasant Fields and fruitful Valleys, the Gayety of the Woods, and diversity of Inclosures, cut out by Nature, rather than cultivated by Art, that it would almost foil the Pencil of a Painter to outdo the Origi∣nal, but surely it would afford him Ground for an admirable Landskip. The Fertility of this populous Climate, which lies within the Torrid Zone, has quite confuted the Opinion of blind An∣tiquity, which could not discern the Life of either Man, or Vegitable there. I could not behold any great Plenty of Corn or Grain; but this proceeded ra∣ther from the Native Laziness, than from the Penury of the Soil, whose Na∣tive Turf seem'd well prepar'd for Fer∣tility and Production; but it abounds with store of Fruits, particularly Coco-Nuts, and the most fragrant Pine-Ap∣ple, which carries the Precedence from all the rest, whose Excellencies are cen∣ter'd


there, and exert themselves in its incomparable Taste and Smell. A∣bundance of well-grown Deer are ran∣ging in the Fields and Pastures, whose Fatness is very apt to make them al∣most a Prey to a nimble Footman, with∣out the Assistance of any Hound. But Horses and black Cattle are not ma∣ny.


We were not yet come to an Anchor, which continued the scarcity of our Wa∣ter, notwithstanding the former shower; and made us prize it almost equal with our Wine, with which we were well stockt from the fruitful Island of 
Madei∣ra;
 but on a sudden we were more concern'd and affrighted at the sight we had of that Element, than we were re∣fresh'd by it.
 For we espy'd very near us a mighty Mass of Water drawn up into the Air from the Surface of the Ocean, in fashion of a large round Pipe, incircled with a hoary Mist, or grey Cloud; it rose gradually, and for some time hover'd there, till at length it fell in such a Cataract, such a Torrent and mighty Flood, that no Ship was able to sustain its fall, but would sink and founder by its Weight. This Spout,


which is a kind of Aqueduct between the Clouds and the Ocean, put us in a great Fear of its ruinous Descent upon us, had we not industriously steered from it, and kept to Windward. But if there is no avoiding the likelihood of being driven under it, there are two ways prescrib'd for breaking its pendu∣lous resting in the Air before a Ship comes too near it. The first, which is seldom used by any Protestant, pre∣vents its Danger by a kind of Charm. When they espy a Spout at Sea at some distance from them, the Master of the Ship, or any one else a-board, kneels down by the Mast with a Knife in his Hand, which has a black Handle; and reading in St. 
John
 the Verse of our Sa∣viours Incarnation, 
Et verbum Caro fa∣cta est, & habitavit in nobis,
 he turns towards the Spout, and with the In∣chanted Knife makes a Motion in the Air, as if he would cut it in two, which, he says, breaks in the middle, and lets the inclosed Water fall with a Noise into the Sea.
 Another Method for preventing all Peril that might arise from this Mass of Water suckt up from the Ocean, is to fire a Cannon or


two when they are near it, which im∣mediately shakes and dissolves its threatning Suspension aloft, and this softer Thunder and Lightning scatters and dissolves it from its unnatural Po∣sition. What the Quality of this Wa∣ter is, which is thus powerfully exha∣led, whether fresh, or mixt with Sa∣line Particles, those that had the Fate to try, had scarce the Happiness to dis∣cover; but sure the Phaenomenon is very stupendous and unaccountable, that such a vast Body of Water should by a forcible extraction out of the Sea bubble and mount upwards, like a small Rivulet springing up into the Air. And indeed, the Works of the Almigh∣ty are inscrutable, and these may be some of 
his Wonders in the Deep,
 which the Royal Prophet extolled and was amazed at.


Having arrived within four Leagues of the Shoar, Eight 
Negroes
 came to∣wards us in a 
Canoo,
 who stood up∣right as they rowed, and looked for∣ward, contrary to our Proverbial Ob∣servation. The Shaft of their Oars was framed out of a long piece of Timber, and a thin broad square board resemb∣bling


a wooden Trencher, served for the Blade. They had caught in their Boat a Shark,
 of a different shape from the common Fish of that Name, and of a different appellation; for on each side of his Mouth grew a large piece of Fish, six Inches broad, in form of a Shovel, which gave it the Name of Shovel-mouth; and at the extremity of those parts were the Eyes placed, as Centinels at the Out-Guards to pre∣serve the Body. With these came two of the Principal Men of the place, one of them appertaining to the King, the other a Retainer to the 
Mafoucko
 or Ge∣neral. Upon their Heads they wore Caps very Curious and Costly,
 the Work of the Natives, wrought with so much Ingenuity and Art of the Needle, that they are not only valued there, but admired in all the parts whither the 
Europeans
 carry them. Their Expence in Cloathing is otherwise small,
 as the Garb is that they put on, which only consists in a Clout about the middle, to hide their Nakedness; and the Furs of an Hare or some such Animal, which hangs down before them between their Leggs, which they value as the richest


Ermin or Sables. Their frizled Hair was tyed up in a Bunch upon the Crown of the Heads of some of them, others wore it neatly braided behind. Some cut their Hair in the figure of a Cross, others were shaved all bare, excepting a small Tuft above, like a 
Mahometan
 Lock, as each Man's Humour or Fan∣cy led him.


On each side of their Temples, and on their Fore-heads, the Skin was rais∣ed, as if it were with the pricking of a Pin, in Figures of a Diamond cut; which with them is not only a Badge of Honour and Character of Greatness, but is esteem'd a sort of Cosmetick to the Face, and admired as Fucus and Black Patches are with us.


Coral Beads, Coories, or Indian-shels, and Black Jet Beads are wore as Or∣naments about their Necks; and about their Wrists, ten or twelve Wreaths of Brass, Iron, or Copper.


These 
Africans
 are by Nature ap∣prehensive of the least Affront, tho' it proceeds no farther than Ignominious Expressions. Scurrility and reproach∣ful Words are so detestable, that a Pe∣nalty is imposed on all foul and abusive


Language, according to the quality of the Offender, and the Person abused. The 
Scandalum Magnatum
 is in force a∣mong these Heathens. For since Ur∣banity and good Words are things so pleasant in themselves, and so easily at∣tainable, and a pleasant Look and Ex∣pression may as soon be given, as what are Sowre and Offensive, they pity no Man that either loses his Friend, or Fortune by course Behaviour and rude Expressions; since Courtesie and a de∣bonaire Air are like Letters Commen∣datory, which a person may at all times carry about him, to render him grate∣ful unto others, and others acceptable to him.


They Travel no where without their 
Fateish
 about them,
 one of which look∣ed like the small end of a Stag's Horn, with a Bell tied to it, about the big∣ness of a Man's Thumb. But each of them has his own made of such Mate∣rials, as the Priests, or 
Mafouko
 think fit to bestow upon them. To these 
Fa∣teishes
 they ascribe their Security from Peril and Mischief, and believe them∣selves safe from danger, while they car∣ry them about them. They appear to


be to them instead of 
Talismans,
 whose Figures are supposed to act upon Natu∣ral Things, so as to drive away from any place, Rain, Hail, or Wild and Venomous Beasts, by occult and Sym∣pathetick Virtues, which the Ignorant People incongruously ascribe to Ma∣gick, or Sorcilege; such were 
Virgil
's Brazen Fly, and Golden Horseleach, with which he hindred Flies from en∣tring 
Naples,
 and killed all the Horse-Leaches in a Ditch: And the Figure of a Stork placed by 
Apollonius
 at 
Con∣stantinople,
 to drive those Birds thence, in the Year 1660. And that at 
Flo∣rence
 made against the Gout by a Car∣melite, named, 
Julianus Ristonius a Prato.
 Unless you will rather imagin that the Ignorance of these People in these great Secrets of Nature, and their too great Familiarity with the Devil, may make us think their Characters Magical and Diabolical; whose Vir∣tues for the most part depend rather upon a tacit, or express Compact with the Evil Spirit. For I believe in this, as well as other Nations, there are some who have entred into Leagues and Diabolical Associations with Infernal


Spirits, by whom they have been in∣abled to effect things above the com∣mon reach of Human Nature. Upon several occasions the Natives make use of these Inchantments or Images, but particularly in the preservation of their Trees laden with Fruit, upon which while they fix one of these Figures, no Native dare approach to take it. The ancient 
Romans
 were much addicted to these superstitious Vanities, and ascrib'd the safety of their City and Empire to the 
Palladium
 which fell down from 
Jupiter.


A floating Island washed from the Shoar, sailed by our Ship,
 extended a∣bout an hundred Foot in length and breadth, overspread with Grass of three Foot height, tho' it grew so near the Line. We judged it was bore down by the River 
Zaire
 into the Sea;
 for this River has 400 Leagues course, and is very rapid, by reason of the ma∣ny Cataracts, or great Falls which it has from the Mountains. At its en∣trance into the Estates of 
Congo
 (upon which account it sometimes borrows this Name) it inlarges it self much, em∣braces quantity of Islands, and at its


Mouth expatiates into Eight or Ten Leagues in breadth; yet throweth its Water near thirty Leagues farther into the Sea, with so great a violence, that it retains its natural Colour,
 (if not Sweetness) as we observed, without being any more than dasht with the Salt Waters of the Sea. But it forceth its Waters along the Shoar with more ease, and therefore presseth them much farther, as far almost as 
Cape Lopus,
 which is about two Degrees Southward from the 
Aequinoctial.
 But the Saltness of the Springs on Shoar is not less re∣markable, than the freshness of the River in the Ocean, and carrying its Waters uncorrupted at that distance into the Sea; for when in the Sea it is Tide of Ebb, there is a sensible Saltness in the fresh Springs that are near it, but according as the Waters of the O∣cean rise and swell in the Tide of Flood, the sweetness and freshness of the Springs increase and return again.


The places situate near this River, such as 
Loango
 and 
Cabenda,
 are indiffe∣rent Fertile in Grains, afford excellent Fruits, Wine of Palms; breed many Cattle, and all things necessary for


Life are found here: They are well stored with Elephants, in which they abound more than any adjacent Coun∣tries, by which they have quantities of Ivory, but nothing of Gold or Sil∣ver. Those Metals are of no esteem with them.
 They value all Metals according to their Bulk; for a Pewter Bason is preferred with them to one of Silver of less quantity and size, and a large Brass Ring to a small one of Gold. We offered them a Dollar for a Dung-hill Fowl, which they rejected, and exchanged at the same time for half a dozen Needles. For these they thought they might have use for, but our Money was an useless, dead Com∣modity. The Money current among themselves, is small Matts of Grass,
 very thin, about sixteen Inches square; for one of which they buy three 
Kan∣kies,
 or small farthing Cakes, when Corn is dear, and five when it is cheap. They use these Matts in adorning their Bodies, and covering their Pri∣vate Parts.


The Air is very hot and sulphurous,
 as must be expected from a place in this Climate, but the Natives endure it


with ease, are healthful and vigorous, are as well proportion'd, and in their shapes of as exact Symetry, as any in the World; and the Inhabitants are nu∣merous.


Instead of that soft Wool which Cloatheth Sheep, a harsh kind of hair, not unlike that which grows upon Dogs, is the usual excressence; the supple Oily Particles are wasted and dried up by the intense Heat of the Weather, which gives it that rough∣ness and stubborn quality. The like I observ'd in the Sheep that are in the 
Indies.






MALEMBA.


AT 
Malemba
 our Commander sent to the 
Mafouko,
 as a Present,
 a large Cheese with two Bottles of Bran∣dy; which he return'd with a Kidd, a small Calebash of Palm Wine, a Cock, and a little Vessel of Lime-juice; de∣liver'd to us by those who brought them, in the English Dialect, a Lan∣guage to which many of them have in some manner attain'd, by the frequent Traffick and stay of the English in those parts. Among those who were pleased to give us a Visit on board, was the little 
Mafouko,
 or Deputy General, who while he diverted himself with us, espy∣ed among the Negroes, a Native of that Country, who was formerly sold from thence, and falling into the Hands of our Commander, was brought thi∣ther again to attend him in the Voy∣age. The Deputy General disguised his knowledge of him a while, and cast only a negligent Eye towards him, 'till the Negro observing it, approached


him with Ceremony, and gave him the Regards of the Country.
 Their mu∣tual Salutations were after this manner, the 
Cafree
 at some distance bowed his Head, and fell upon his Knees, and rising up a little after, clapt his Hands together four or five times, the 
Ma∣fouko
 then clapt his Hands together likewise four or five times; upon this the Black addressed nearer him, so that they mutually joined their Palms toge∣ther first, and then joined their own Hands four or five times; this ended the particular Ceremony with the 
Mafouko;
 which was repeated by the Negro to every principal Man on board; and then in conclusion, as a token of pub∣lick Mirth and universal Joy for the happy meeting, they loudly clapt all of them their Hands together, and the Salutation ended.
 The inequality of their Condition made them not forget the Complement of a condescending carriage to this Inferiour Slave, who were no way Barbarous in their Beha∣viour, whatever they were in their O∣pinions, but as the access to their Persons was very easie, so was their Humour smoothed with a complaisance,


void of all supercilious stiffness and Mo∣rosity.


Not only the Prince,
 but all others of the highest Figure and Quality are served upon the Knee, by the Atten∣dants that Minister to them. This is the usual manner too of suplicating an Alms, or asking any considerable Fa∣vour; and in this posture one of those on board requested a Bottle of Brandy, a Liquor highly esteem'd by the No∣blest among them.


The more Eminent and Noted wore a sort of Nightrale of Net-work a∣bout their Shoulders,
 very close wrought, either White or Black, made of one entire piece, with a Hole in the middle, of that convenient size that they thrust their Heads thro' it, when they put it on; but some of them de∣light themselves with an 
English
 Dress, if they can purchase it from any of our Nation, but then 'tis never wore but at great Solemnities, and on stated Days. I wish they had used our Language as innocently, as they did our Garments, and that they had been less accustomed to the execrable sin of Swearing by the Name of God,
 and the habitual vent∣ing


of horrid Oaths. This custom they impiously Imbibed by their Conversa∣tion with our Sailors, whose frequent Oaths made them believe them an E∣legance of our Speech, and the most laudable Expressions they could use; and this deadly sin they now digest with as much ease, as the young Maid, whom 
Albertus
 reports, brought her Stomach to live upon Spiders.


The second Person of Eminence who came to visit us, had all his Face be∣smear'd with Red Paint, a thing customary among the Nobler Rank; as in 
India
 this Colour is put upon their Cattle, especially their Horses, and is the usual Paint of their Fruit Trees. This 
Epiphanius
 reports of the 
Egyptians;
 that tho' they had forgotten the Histo∣ry of the Work of God, yet they rub∣bed over their Cattle with a Red sort of Keil, to save them that no Evil should befall them that Year; ignorantly Counterfeiting that Blood Sprinkled upon the Lintels of their Doors, which saved the 
Israelites
 once in 
Aegypt.
 But how this Custom should be derived to these Nations from the 
Israelites
 and 
Ae∣gyptians,
 or whether they practise it up∣on


that Superstitious account which the 
Egiptians
 did, to secure them from Misfortune, I could not learn, I rather believe that they use it as an Orna∣ment, because it looks lively and Gay.


The Diet of the common People is very ordinary,
 and seldom reacheth the Flesh of any Animal, which is not prohibited them by any Law, but their Inability to purchase it. Corn, and Herbs, and Spring Water are their com∣mon Food. Sometimes they Feast with a little Fish, and that with a few Pin∣dars is esteemed a splendid Banquet. These Pindars are sown under ground, and grow there without sprouting a∣bove the surface, the Cod in which they are Inclosed is an Inch long, like that of our Pease and Beans, and they are eat with Beef or Pork instead of our Beans or Pease. Some of these I brought for 
England,
 which were sown in the Bishop of 
London
's Garden, but whe∣ther they will thrive in this Climate is yet uncertain. The Flesh which they eat, they never account Palatable, till it grows unsavory; they expose it up∣on the Roofs of their Houses till the moisture is exhausted, and it looks like


dryed Fish; and sometimes bury it un∣der ground, till it proves tender by be∣ing tainted.
 They Indulge not their Appetites with Excesses, nor force up∣on themselves Diseases by over-loading of their Stomachs, but Eat according to the Rules of Nature, for Health, and not for Luxury, and live according to Nature's Periods, to Seventy, or Eighty Years of Age, Healthful and Sound. They are wiser than to cut short the thread of Life, by that Meat which should prolong it.


The extent of Dominions, and Love of Wealth, are as prevalent with those that are placed in the highest Orbs of Fortune here, as they are with other Monarchs of the Earth. A Native Am∣bition renders those that are Powerful, as well as men of lower Stations, rest∣less and troublesome,
 and sets them up∣on soaring higher and higher, insomuch that a hot War is now on foot between the two Kings of 
Malemba
 and 
Cabinde,
 commenced upon the departure of a Beautiful Woman from the Country of 
Malemba
 to the King of 
Cabinde.
 But the truer Original of this War, is the desire of Conquest for the sake of Sub∣jects,


who as soon as they are Captives are made Slaves, and in the multitude of them the Strength and Wealth of their Kingdoms consist. Arms and Am∣munition are the undeniable Commodi∣ties,
 for which they exchange their Slaves, and in the use of which they grow expert; but Bows and Arrows are their own proper Instruments of War, and the Weapons commonly, and very dexterously used: Their Bow∣strings are made of the Rhine or out∣side of a Cane.


To preserve the Line of their Kings untainted,
 they make choice of the King's Sister's Son, to be always He∣reditary in the Soveraignty, imagin∣ing that the Female Off-spring secures the Succession more than the Male, and in this she is under no Confinement to any single Person,
 but is allowed her Choice out of the whole Kingdom, to satisfie her Desires, and gratifie her Fancy with whom she thinks fit; and thus without any Censure or Blemish to her Character, she takes her liberty with Subject or Foreigner, 
African
 or 
European
 at her will; imitating in this the 
Lacedemonians,
 a 
Wise and Grave


People,
 who permitted their Wives, for the Procreation of a generous Progeny, to be familiar with any Stranger, whose company they hop'd might Im∣prove the Off-spring. And thus like∣wise upon the 
Malabar
 Coast, the first Nights lodging is allowed the 
Bramin,
 when the King Marries any person; and therefore the Sister's Sons, as in 
A∣frica,
 and not the King's, are Heirs to the Crown, because the Blood Royal runs certainly in their Veins. And the King's Sisters are also indulged here the freedom of bestowing their Virginity on whom they please.


The Natives of 
Malemba
 retain a∣mong them the use of Circumcision, and of admitting Children into their Religion by that Ceremony, which one among them, dedicated to that Of∣fice, performs upon them. Neither are they unmindful of a due Venerati∣on to the great Creator of all things, nor so far lost to all Sacred Thoughts, as to neglect a constant Homage to him, and a stated Exercise of solemn Wor∣ship;
 and in this they exceed what Christianity prescribes, and for our Se∣venth, appoint every Fifth Day Sacred


for Religious Duties; on which Day they convene their People, who unani∣mously assemble in a Publick Con∣gregation. On this Day some Person of Years and Discretion, of Repute for Sobriety and Civil Converse, en∣tertain the Youth and those of green∣er Years with strong Disswasives from the customary Vices of Stealth, Im∣purity, Adultery, and Murther; and with all the Rhetorick which Na∣ture taught him, and Zeal inspires him with, disclaims against those Criminal Practices, and raises his Invectives against Vice and Folly, and whatever is odious and prohibited among them. For all the hainous Vices are under a Proscription with them, as well as us, and are only committed by daring Pro∣fligates. The Terror of immediate Punishment is not the only Restraint from these Commissions, but the sage Admonisher affrights their Conscien∣ces with a future miserable state, in the dreadful Society of 
Benimbe,
 that is, the Devil, if they obstinately per∣sist in Wickedness; and encourages them with the Promise of being here∣after happy with 
Zammampoango,
 which


signifies God, if they carefully advert to,
 and practise his Instructions. These Ignorant Heathens have not yet lost the Notices of the Soul's Immortality, and the Impressions of future Rewards and Punishments are fresh and undefaced among them. I enquired of them what their Sentiments and Notions were of their 
Zammampoango?
 They told me that he inhabited above. Then I further asked, whether they meant by that, the glorious Lights above, the Sun, the Moon, or the Heavens? They answered, No, but he who had Dominion over them, who made them by his Power, and this visible World we stand upon.


They generally affirm'd that 
Benim∣be
 is frequently in the Fields cover'd with Mists and thick Darkness, where he sometimes exercises his Infernal Au∣thority over infamous and lewd Per∣sons, in the milder Chastisements of some, and severer Treatment, even as far as the loss of Life, of others. There∣fore they are terrified from walking abroad in dark and gloomy Weather, because they expect nothing but Hor∣ror and Misery from that Spirit of


Darkness. This Infernal Spirit in all his wild Insults and Frolicks over them, is careful to preserve his Appearance as dark as the place he chuses to revel in, scarce assumes any lasting Form, and is known by nothing so much as the plentiful effects of his Stripes and seve∣rer Strokes upon their Bodies. He con∣ceals the Deformity which he usually makes of his Figure, whilst he exer∣cises the Malignity of his Temper. Some die of the Bruises they have re∣ceived from him, and others have been confin'd to their Beds, as they assured me several times, and therefore they avoid the Fields in rainy dull Weather, that they may escape the force of his Malice, who is ashamed to appear a∣broad by Light, but chuses these me∣lancholy Seasons for inflicting his Ven∣geance, to which he seems to have most right, as he is a Spirit of Darkness.


Walking along the Shoar,
 we were arrested by a very deplorable Spectacle, a lusty Negro stretched Dead upon the Sand, who, after the manner of Im∣paling, had a long Stake thrust up his Fundament, which by a sharp Passage through his Bowels forced its way up∣wards towards his Head. The dread∣ful


sight at first moved us to condole the sad Object, till we were inform'd of the execrable Villanies which brought him to this lamentable and painful end, and made us applaud the Justice of those who were the Executioners of this Vengeance upon him. For no Se∣verity was able to match those Crimes wherein he had been a long and skilful Practitioner; even this Destiny, tho' so horrid and severe, will yet be thought Indulgence, and an Act of Clemency. This Miscreant being possess'd with a Spirit of Cruelty, and actuacted by Malice, had successfully contriv'd the Death of near twenty Persons about this place, by mixing a deadly Poyson with the Palm Wine, which he season∣ably offer'd for the refreshment of their parched Palates. This deadly Liquor was not subject to any suspicion of being mortal, because the Juice of the Palm, with which it was intermixt, was a Liquor so common and inoffen∣sive, and their best and most pleasing Drink. The King therefore, upon the Information of this Fellow's treache∣rous dispatching of his Subjects by such poysonous Draughts, immediately de∣creed


a Punishment, and sentenc'd the Criminal to this torturing Death, pe∣culiar only to such barbarous Villans. The News of which made him seek a Refuge among the Desarts and the most inhabitable parts of the Country; but the pursuit after him was so vigorous, that no Thickets could shelter or secure him, the whole Country hotly pursued him, and chased him as a common Ene∣my, till at length he fell a Victim to their just Rage upon this Shore; where his noisom Carcase, being under an In∣terdict of being Interr'd (the ordinary manner of burying among them) be∣came as loathsom and offensive as his Life had been, and was left a Prey to the Savages of the Wilderness, and the wild Beasts of the Field. The unusual manner of tormenting this Malefactor, by exposing his Body to the Inclemen∣cy of the Weather, and the Beasts of Prey, was wisely design'd by the King as a Terror to such abominable flagi∣tious Practices, and to retain the Peo∣ple in their Duty.


The Art of Poysoning is what these 
Africans
 do very commonly exceed in,
 and to which they are generally pro∣pense


upon any occasional Quarrel or Abuse. They seldom discover a gene∣rous Resentment by an open Challenge, or disputing it in the Field by the Dint of the Sword, or the force of a Bullet; their dark Complexion inclines them rather to vent their Anger by clande∣stine Courses, to destroy by the swift effects of Poyson, and mortal Infusions of the Juices of Herbs, in which they in∣dustriously acquire a Skill, that in their Designs against a Man's Life, they may be ready and prepared to put their Re∣venge in Execution that way. Their sly and crafty Natures keep them from endeavouring to right themselves at the hazard of a publick Vindication; but that inhumane Rage and Animosity which is excited in them by a prece∣ding Provocation, being commonly ac∣companied with Cowardise and sordid Fear, puts them upon avoiding all Dan∣gers incident to themselves, and con∣triving the Ruin of those they hate, by some covert Method, and after an obscure way. Doing herein what 
Asi∣nius Pollio
 did to 
Plancus,
 against whom he writ a Libel, but deferred to publish it, till after his Death, because he was then secure from all sharp Replies.


They practise this Diabolical Art with as much Secresie as Skill; so that it is neither easily discern'd when they are about it, nor is it always discover'd by any visible immediate Effects. They qualifie the violent poysonous Qualities with some mitigating Ingredients, and the lurking Operation will by that means sometimes not discover it self in a Month's or a Year's space, as some of our English have affirm'd. Which cautions the more wary 
Europeans,
 who traffick with these People, from treat∣ing them with any Indecency or Of∣fence, and keeps them always very circumspect and abstemious in eating and drinking with them, lest some un∣known Miscarriage might expose their Lives to their Hatred and Discontents. For they know that all Degrees of An∣ger are least dangerous, when most seen, and then most pernicious when they lurk under a Disguise and dissem∣bled Temper.


This inhuman Practice is not less customary among the 
Indians,
 who by this detestable Vice have been very fa∣tal to the free Conversation of 
Christi∣ans
 among them. For in 
India,
 where


Punch of 
Arak
 is the ordinary chearful Entertainment, it too often happens, that the Black Wench, whose constant Employment is the making this Belo∣ved Mixture, will, upon a Disgust, or slight Affront, contrive the Bowl fatal to him that abus'd her, with Safety to all the rest of his Companions. For ha∣ving infus'd the Poison into the Bowl prepared for the Person that offended her, after presenting it to him, she has been often known, when the next was taking it, to dash it all upon the Ground, by a designed, but pretended Inadvertance. And it rarely fails, but that all that taste it for ever quench their Thirst, and seldom long survive the mortal Draught. This is frequent∣ly the effect of the rudeness of unpo∣lish'd Sailers, who shewing a Freedom peculiar to our Northern Nations, but unagreeable to the Niceness of those Eastern Dames, have lavisht away their Lives by a frank innocent Kiss, or railing Expression, and inevitably pe∣risht before they were aware.










THE ISLAND OF St. 
HELENA.


WIthin less than a Month after that we loosed from the Coast of 
Africa,
 we with much Difficulty weather'd the Island of St. 
Helena;
 which was taken formerly from the 
Dutch,
 belonging to the 
East-India
 Com∣pany, by a Grant from the Crown of 
England,
 situate in about the Sixteenth South Parallel, and as distant from any main Land, as any Island in the World.
 Hither we brought with us several Re∣fugees from the Tyranny and Persecu∣tions of 
France,
 who found a compe∣tent Subsistence and Relief from the Bounty of the Company upon this Island; some of whom were placed in the more eminent Stations, and ad∣vanced to Posts of Dignity and Trust.


They were highly sensible of the comfortable abode they enjoy'd in this distant Region, which was made their Sanctuary in their Miseries; and how much the Misfortunes of their Lives were sweetned by the Kindness they receiv'd from their new Masters. But could not without melancholy Resent∣ments, and hearty Sorrow, recount the various Hardships and Difficulties they strugled with, in making their Escapes from the Rage of their Natural Prince, by whose Commands so many Massa∣cres and Butcheries were acted upon their Fellow Christians, and such fre∣quent bloody Tragedies were lately visible in 
France,
 fomented by those whose Sanguinary Principles ventila∣ted all those publick Calamities; and who stimulated their Prince by suspi∣cious Chimera's of a possible Conspira∣cy, to punish his Innocent Subjects by Anticipation, for Crimes of which per∣haps they never might be guilty. By which State-Artifices they pursu'd a Self-interested Revenge, under the bar∣barous Disguise of curing untimely Jealousies, and preventing unthought of Insurrections, from which the Pro∣testant


Subjects were as free in their Principles, as they had evidenced themselves to be in their Practices; and hoped in God that these unnatural Mischiefs may at length be curbed, these severe Cruelties, which have kept no stand, be at length restrain'd, to their Comfort.


Among those who fled to this Island from the outragious Insults of their Superiours, was one Captain 
Porier,
 stript of all but the Freedom of his Thoughts and the Serenity of his Mind; who by the Favor of his Patrons was seated in the richest part of the Island, and allowed there a Maintenance for Three Sons and Five Daughters which escaped the Persecution.


The Land here is very mountainous, and raised to that Height above the Valleys, that we had a sight of it at 25 Leagues distance at Sea. I question whether 
Tenerif
 will afford a more di∣stant Prospect.


It enjoys an Air temperate and se∣rene, to that degree,
 that the Sky is sel∣dom clouded or overcast, which pro∣duces a general Clearness in the Na∣tives. And tho it lies so near the 
Aequi∣noctial,



and the Sun was then in the 
Ze∣nith,
 yet was the Heat so temper'd and allay'd by the gentle Winds that flew along the Land, that the Northermost parts of the Island, especially after the Sun's Descent, made an artificial Warmth very convenient, when the natural was withdrawn. Whereas both 
Moscat
 in 
Arabia,
 and 
Gombroon
 in 
Persia,
 which are at a much remoter Distance from the 
Aequator,
 are at some Seasons of the Year so intensely hot, that the Lungs being destitute of that due Frigidity which is necessary for Respiration, are suffocated by the ex∣cessive Ferment of the Air, by which both Man and Beast expire. Mr. 
Cook
 has often reported, that in the time of his abode in 
Persia,
 a certain Person approaching his Apartment, met with such a hot Breath of Wind at the en∣trance into his Chamber, that he stag∣ger'd upon the Floor, and fell down upon it just expiring.


But the Inhabitants of St. 
Helena
 are not liable to such Casualties, the Clemency of the Weather they are under subjects them not to the most common Diseases, even that of the


Small-Pox, but gives them a Com∣plexion fresh and beautiful, equal to that of celebrated 
England.
 The Po∣verty of the Place may be likewise thought another Ingredient of its Health; since Physicians tell us, that most Diseases arise rather from Reple∣tion than Emptiness; from too Luxu∣riant, than too spare a Diet. And here they are not too much cloy'd with Va∣rieties. For were the Plenty of the Island equal to its Health, did the other Conveniencies of Life match the Plea∣santness of the Air, it might fairly in∣vite the Wealthiest, as well as the most Indigent, to inhabit it.
 But the Peo∣ple are confin'd to Poverty by a so∣lemn Restraint they are under to the Traffick of all Foreign Countries, by being permitted no single Vessel of Burthen, or what's fit for Trade; and are destitute of all Cloaths, but what are transported from 
Europe,
 or brought by accident; which makes the Island (to speak the Truth) abate much of the Pleasure of its Habitation, and much more to those who want Op∣portunities of leaving it when they please.


Yet at our Arrival it was well stockt with Inhabitants of both Sexes, whose numerous Progeny shew'd little of Ste∣rility among them, how barren soever the Island was otherwise. This put me upon the Curiosity of enquiring from the Women, how such Plenty of them came there? The Decoy, they told me, was worth my Attendance to hearken to it; and it would not appear strange to see such a number of them there, when they discover'd the Means that brought them thi∣ther. For at their first setting out from 
England,
 a Colony for this Island, the current Report that then prevail'd was, that all the single Persons upon the Island were either Commanders, or Lords Sons, of whom they might have Choice upon their Arrival. This made them eager for imbarking for the Voy∣age, and was Charm enough to make them set forward with full Sail for the remote Island, tho' the Distance had been farther. No Curse was like a contrary Wind, to check the speedy sight of those gallant Gentlemen that awaited their coming; the ravishing Thoughts of whose Embraces kept


them in Life and Alacrity all the way, and inriched their Fancies with the Hopes of being immediate Mistresses of great Fortunes, and rais'd so far a∣bove their Native Birth, that nothing now but Pleasures and Respect should succeed in the room of their former ser∣vile state. The long'd-for Island was at length espied, and now fresh Springs of Love and Delight appear in every Eye and Countenance. The joyful Maids begin to ransack all their Stores for an Ornamental Dress, in which though they cannot much exceed, how∣ever they fancied themselves Trim and Gay; and she that could not outvie the other in point of Attire, endeavours to outdo her in Nature's Ornaments, in Chearfulness and Mirth, in a Nuptial Look and taking Air. Thus they stept on Shore, full of the Thoughts of a stately Reception, and of the sight of those Gentlemen they had heard so much of. When, alas! all these Blan∣dishments of Fancy, which were so sweet in the Voyage, carried a Sting in the end of them, which imbitter'd all their Joys. For instead of that Hero∣ick Address which they expected from


Men of Wealth and Honour, they were saluted only in the plain Courtship of Men employ'd in Agrieulture, and or∣dinary Mechanick Arts. However, the pleasing Expectation they had, gave them this Advantage over the tedious Passage, that whereas the boisterous Waves and impetuous Winds, the Fu∣ry of the Sea, and the Dangers of Rocks and Sands, are apt to render so long a Voyage very dreadful, their aie∣ry Hopes made them take Courage, and defie the Power of Storms, and gladly encounter all the Perils that at∣tend such a forlorn Passage.


The fruitful Soil is capable of pro∣ducing the Increase of many Hundreds for one Grain of 
Indian
 Corn injected in the Ground, but then it requires se∣veral Inches of Ground for its Growth. Yet were it never so prolifick,
 the Rats and Vermin so infest the Land, that all their Hopes are quite devoured by them before they arrive to any ma∣turity; which reduces them to their last Refuge, to Yams and Potatoes, the only staple Increase for Meat and Drink which the Island produces.


The 
East India
 Company are upon a Project for Planting Vines,
 and there∣by rendring the Product of them ser∣viceable, both to the refreshment of the Sailers, and of the Inhabitants; and will be a very seasonable relief to the abject Condition of such as are wil∣ling to forget their Poverty, and re∣member their Miseries no more.
 The Soil is qualified for their Expectation, could they guard it from the destru∣ctive Vermin, which do every where make great waste of all things tender and delicate; and is therefore made fitter for nourishing Fruit Trees, whose stubborn and well fortified Bulk defies the onset of those small rapacious Ani∣mals, and is not a proper Food for them. I have observ'd among some of those Trees that bear Fruit, especially upon an 
English
 Apple-tree, transplant∣ed thither from hence, at the same time Apples that were Ripe, others Green, and others in the Blossom. For the genial Heat of the Sun-Beams, to which the Island is happily expos'd, hastens the maturity of the Fruit, by a constant quick attraction of the semi∣nal Juyces from the Root to the upper Branches continually.


Instead of the common Grass of the Fields, those here are covered with Mint and Purslain, and are the ordina∣ry Food of the Beasts of the Field, whereon they Feed deliciously them∣selves, and are made themselves more Luxurious morsels to such as eat them. The whole Island is in this respect, as it were a spacious Garden of Herbs.


The management of Affairs is in the Hands of a Governour, a Deputy Go∣vernour, and Store-house-keeper, all maintain'd by competent standing Salaries from the Company; besides the allowance of a publick Table, spread with plenty of Provisions, to which all Commanders, and Mates of Ships, and Passengers of note are freely receiv'd. These Govern the Concerns of the Island, and are steer'd in their Councils by the directions they receive from their Masters in 
England.
 The Results of their Consultations are some∣times called Impositions by the Natives, and their Determinations are branded with infamous Characters of severity, especially when they appear less favou∣rable to the Ease and Interest of the Publick; and from which,


if there be any Relief from the Compa∣ny, yet the unavoidable delays in re∣turning a Redress to that distance, puts sometimes a tedious hardship upon the Adressors. And I believe were not the convenience of its Situation so very ser∣viceable to the furtherance of the 
East-India
 Voyages, particularly to the Ships homeward bound, the constant trouble and Expence which do seem to ballance all the Advantages, would tempt the Company to quit all Claim and Propriety in the place, and aban∣don it to the Power of the first Design∣er.
 For tho' 'tis furnisht with conveni∣ences for Life, yet with no Commodi∣ties as yet proper for the profitable Ne∣gotiations of a Merchant. And there∣fore as the Kings of 
Portugal
 did for∣merly Enact, that none should remain to Inhabit the Place, except some sick persons for the restauration of their Health, that the Fleets might be plen∣tifully furnisht with great variety of Grains, of fresh Victuals, Fowls and Water; so would the Company, I imagine, be willing to remit their Right to those Original Proprietors, did not they rather consult the Con∣venience


of their Ships, than any other private Interest in keeping it.


The first Discoverer of this Island, was 
Juan da Nova,
 a 
Portuguese,
 on St. 
Helen
's Day,
 being the 21st of 
May, An.
 1502. whose Country-Men in a short time stockt it plentifully with Hogs, a thriving Cattle at Land, and the most hardy for enduring a long Voyage at Sea; and likewise brought hither Geese, and Hens, Partridges, Feasants and Guiney Cocks from 
Eu∣rope;
 and of late, the Increase of Tur∣kies has been so numerous, that the smallness of their Rates will scarce en∣courage their Care to look after them.


In the Woods grew formerly Ebony and Cedar, and infinite store of Oran∣ges, Lemons, Limes, and other sorts of Fruit; and now in the Governour's Garden, and some others of the Island are quantities of Plantins, Bonanoes, and other delightful Fruits brought from the 
East.


The Soil is of a Red Colour, and in some places is friable, and resembles Ashes, and in very many places lies un∣cultivated and bare.


And the minds of the Inhabitants are


generally as Uncultivated as the neg∣lected Soil,
 their Intellects as ordina∣ry as their Qualities, but what is infi∣nitely worse, the pravity of their Man∣ners compares them with the rankest Soil, productive of nothing but noxi∣ous Herbs, untractable to all the Arts of Husbandry or Improvement. For tho' the Company have not spared the En∣couragement of a Minister, by the sta∣ted Sallary of an Annual Allowance of an Hundred Pounds, besides Gratuities from the Inhabitants; yet are the Sa∣cred Administrations but ineffectually, for the most part, used towards the re∣claiming their Enormities, and reduce∣ing the Lives of the Inhabitants to So∣briety and a Religious Behaviour.
 The looseness of which may in a great mea∣sure be deriv'd from the Poverty of the place, which affords but slender En∣couragements to live there. And where there are no Rewards for Piety, but present inward Tranquility, and the lively Hopes of a Happy Futurity, where nothing is visibly attainable but barely Peace of Conscience, attended with the expectation of a better State hereafter; these to a Man, the depen∣dance


of whose Life is upon his daily Pains, and who is continually sollicited with anxious Thoughts for his secular Concerns, appear too thin and airy Diet to his gross Mind, which is un∣accustom'd and unprepar'd, and not at leisure to relish it. For sensible Al∣lurements do soonest gain upon Vul∣gar Spirits, and Temporal Motives do most easily strike the Fancy of less Spi∣ritual and refin'd Minds, therefore has the Wisdom of Providence designedly annext the Promise of many Worldly Felicities to our Duty, and made our present Enjoyments a powerful Bait to entice us to the security of the Future. And for this cause Modesty and Tem∣perance are as much Strangers here, as Wealth and Honour.


While we Anchor'd here, there came into Harbour,
 a Ship Laden with Negroes from 
Madagascar,
 be∣longing to 
New York:
 who acquainted us with three Pirates which she left Rendezvouzing in St. 
Augustin
's 
Bay,
 a Port belonging to that Island. Two of the Ships were 
English,
 and the o∣ther 
Dutch,
 and were all richly Laden with store of Silks, which they had ta∣ken


in the 
Red Sea,
 from the 
Asian
 Merchants that traded from 
Mecha
 to 
Suratt,
 and other Coasts of 
Indostan.
 Their Rigging was much worn and Weather-beaten, and for want of a New suit of Sails, they were forced to employ double Silk instead of Canvas, and proffer'd that Exchange to this Commander. They had spent so much time in the Naval surprizes of the 
Moors,
 and loading themselves with the Rich Booties which were easily ta∣ken in the 
Red Sea,
 that their Ships be∣came almost useless and unfit for Na∣vigation, which brought them thither for Recruits. They were Prodigal in the Expences of their unjust Gain, and quencht their Thirst with 
Europe
 Li∣quor at any rate this Commander would put upon it; and were so frank both in distributing their Goods, and guzling down the noble Wine, as if they were both wearied with the pos∣session of their Rapine, and willing to stifle all the Melancholy Reflections concerning it.


This St. 
Augstuin
's 
Bay
 is the Harbour generally frequented by the 
European
 Pirates,
 when the approach of the 
Mus∣souns




souns
 threatens their Navigations any longer in the 
Eastern
 Seas, where Fif∣teen or Twenty 
English
 or 
Dutch
 will, without peril of either Ship, or Men, attack and board the largest 
Moor
 Ships that commonly Sail in those Seas.
 
Madagascar
 is a very large Island, and affords plenty of Provisions for the Ships that put in there. It is govern'd by several Kings, Independant, and Hostile to one another, designing con∣tinually upon each others Territories, being possessed with that restless Spirit of Ambition, which allows as little Ease to a Man's self, as it does security to his Innocent Neighbour. And here too, as well as in 
Africa,
 where we landed; they compute their Wealth by the Numbers of their Slaves, and wage their Wars upon their accounts. The value of Gold is yet unknown to them,
 that Sun of the Earth, as an Ancient called it, amazes them not with its Lustre, nor fires their Hearts with an ardent desire of it; Steel and Iron are their darling Metals, whereby they perform their generous Exploits by o∣pen Violence, and not by the treache∣rous Persuasions of Gold. Therefore


this Commander purchased here a Ball of Gold of 80 Ounces weight for a Trifle of no value, only it pleased the Spectators Eyes.


And because these Pirates have been a publick Scandal, as well as Damage to our Nation, and both the 
English, French
 and 
Dutch
 at 
Suratt,
 have suf∣fer'd in their Fortunes as well as Re∣putation from the 
Moors
 by the Vio∣lence and Rapine of these Men; there∣fore I might here insert a Relation of their Sufferings, did it not fall in more properly with the succeeding Account of the 
English
 Factory at 
Suratt,
 and of the hardships the 
English
 underwent there.


Within three Weeks after we loosed from St. 
Helena,
 we reached 
Cape bone Esperanse,
 in the doubling of which it blew so violent a Fret of Wind, and the high-wrought Seas were so tem∣pestuous, that unless that extraordinary Providence which sets Bounds to its proud Waves, had not likewise re∣strain'd their outragious Swellings, we had all perisht in the merciless Surges. The Commander who was a stout and expert Mariner, and who had past nine


times to the 
Indies,
 confest a severity in this Tempest beyond whatever he was ingag'd in before. The Fiery Mete∣ors which arise from the impetuous clashing of the Elements, fixt them∣selves upon our Masts and Shrouds, and with ominous appearance shew'd us the eminence of our Danger; and though they gave us Light, 'twas less desirable than the thickest Darkness; and the Thunder and Lightning which were very frightful and amazing, ad∣ded yet a deeper Accent to the com∣mon Calamity. But what was most lamentable, the immediate Hazard of their Lives made little Impression up∣on the Sailers, nor did the apparent Apprehensions of Death, and of ano∣ther World, make them either bewail their unhappy Fate, or summon them to a review of their past Actions; but as if they seemed to vie with the Noise of the Waves, the more boisterous they grew, the lowder were their Oaths and Execrations. Till the miraculous Divine Goodness, uncall'd upon, and thus provok'd, freed them by a won∣derful Deliverance from the imminent Danger.


We were just recover'd from the Thoughts of this,
 when there arose another as inevitable a Danger, by which we had suffer'd an inavoidable dismal Fate, had it escap'd our Notice a little longer. For sailing between the Main of 
Africa
 and 
St. Lawrence,
 we were carried unexpectedly by a Current nearer this Coast, than con∣sisted either with our Designs or Safe∣ty, and had thereby been driven di∣rectly upon a Shelf of Rocks that lay off from the Shoar, had not the watch∣ful Sailers upon the Decks espied Break∣ers, and all amazed cried out at the im∣mediate Hazard of our Lives that we all were in. It was about Four in the Morning, and the faint Glimmerings of the Moon shed an imperfect Light, just enough to give us a sight of our Danger, and of avoiding it before we were upon it. We lost no time in turning about our Ship, and steering off some other way, and within a few days gain'd the sight of that Land we look'd for, the Island of 
Johanna.








THE ISLAND OF 
JOHANNA.


THE Island of 
Johanna
 is one of the Four Isles of 
Comora,
 their Names are 
Comora, Monilla, Johanna,
 and 
Mayotta. Johanna
 lies near the Foot of St. 
Lawrence,
 between that and the Main Land of 
Africa,
 in about 12½ of South Latitude, by our Observati∣ons we made no more than 12 and 6 Minutes. 'Tis guessed to be stretch'd in Length about Thirty Miles, and in Latitude half the number. Its Ferti∣lity invites all the 
Europe
 Ships tending towards 
Suratt,
 and the Northern parts of 
India,
 to refresh themselves there. Here are Plenty of Black Cattle at ve∣ry low Rates, and Goats so well flesht, and of so large a Size, that they are


valued one third above the others. A Bullock may be bought for two Dol∣lars, when three are expected for a well-fed Goat.


The Island abounds with Fowls and Rice, with Pepper, Yams, Plantins, Bonanoes, Potatoes, Oranges, Lemons, Limes, Pine-apples, 
&c.
 most of which sort of Fruits grow wild, and are al∣lowed any Sailer to gather Grain at his pleasure. They have store likewise of Honey and Sugar-Canes; and the Cli∣mate and Soil are well prepar'd for o∣ther Productions, as Grapes, Tobacco, Cotton. The Island is free for any Native to make his Election of any Plantation, he likes best, and all the Fruit is common, except that of the Coconut-Trees,
 in which they cha∣lenge particular Properties, and debar the common Liberty of plucking them at Pleasure.


The Women are in some measure servile,
 and chiefly employ'd in labo∣rious toiling, and in planting the Ground, whilst the Men indulge their Ease, and enjoy the Fruits of it. For the Orientals generally keep their Wo∣men under a severe Discipline, and


bind them more absolutely to the Laws of Obedience and Subjection, than is practis'd among those of 
Europe.
 They require an Attendance from them, and expect the Preparation of the Victuals they eat from their Hands, and forbid∣ding them the Privilege of their Com∣pany at Table, think it sufficient for the Wife to begin her Entertainment when the Husband leaves off. Which Servility comports very ill with that Tenderness and Regard, which Mar∣riage should be presum'd to create in their joint Interests and Affections.


The Native Turf here is rich, and the Productions so very numerous, that the Island affords a most pleasant and plentiful Habitation to the Natives. Yet have they formerly tender'd it to the 
English
 to build upon it,
 to Plant, and to accept of as a place of their uninterrupted Abode and fixed Resi∣dence; where some, I am sure, may en∣joy more Ease and Plenty than they do at home.


At our Landing we met with the late King's Brother of the Island, who after his Decease acts in some measure with Royal Authority, though the Su∣preme


Power is really lodged in the Queen Dowager, upon whom the So∣veraignty devolves after her Husband's Death. He was seated upon the Ground under the shady Boughs of a large Tree, near a small Rivolet,
 at∣tended by half a Dozen of his Nobles, all round him in that familiar humble Posture. We were told of his Know∣ledge in the 
English
 Tongue, which in∣vited us to address to him in our own Dialect, in which likewise he replied and entertained us. His Equipage was very slender, and unsuitable to the Greatness of his Person; for here were no Arms to defend him, his Innocence was his only Guard, and a Tuft of Grass his Chair of State. The Leaves of the Trees were his only Canopy, and the Herbage of the Field was all the Carpet that was spread under him. We had a very free Access to his Pre∣sence, without the usual Formalities of Address, or Punctilio's of approaching,
 which prevented all need of a Master of Ceremonies to introduce us. And he was as frank and open in his Kind∣ness, as he was easie of Access, allow∣ing us the same Liberty which he took


himself, by inviting us to sit down near him. Now tho' the Accommodation was not extraordinary, 'twas recompens'd however by the Favour of a Royal In∣vitation. The Freedom he had taken with himself, and given to us, made us at first amazed, not expecting to meet with a Person of that Eminence and high Character, much less with such Civilities from him; but they em∣bolden'd and led us on to a little more Assurance, than we could have other∣wise taken in a Prince's Presence. We were doubtful of finding any fit Food,
 or ready Accommodations for Stran∣gers among the Natives, and there∣fore brought with us a little homely Diet of Bread and Cheese, which we humbly offer'd to his Princely Conde∣scentions to taste, and partake of: For we found that Ceremonies were not much in Fashion, by his plain and un∣affected Appearance, by his familiar Admission of us to seat our selves near him upon the Ground, which we thought encouragement enough for our offering this ordinary Refection. The making Cheese or Butter is an Art,
 which his People have not yet attain'd


to, which made the Novelty by good luck recommend it self more gratefully to their Palates; and both the Prince and his Court thought themselves high∣ly regaled by that, which an 
English
 Peasant so little esteems of.


While we were thus banquetting our selves upon this course Fare,
 the Prince was pleas'd to enquire kindly of our Affairs at home, and of the Welfare of his Brother the King of 
England?
 Un∣der whose auspicious Government, I told him, we were not only entitled to a Blessing, but he was visibly such to the Nations that were round about him. That he was raised up by the Arm of the Almighty, as a publick Defence of his own Territories, and to put a stop to the Tyrannical Incroach∣ments upon the Dominions of the Neighbouring States; and was caressed by his loving Subjects as their true Patriot, whom he protected not only by a mild and peaceable Government at Home, but by a frequent exposing his Royal Person to the utmost Perils for their Safety abroad, so that his Brave and Generous Mind shunned no Dan∣gers to preserve them; as if he thought


it a glorious Martyrdom to die in the Defence of his Kingdoms. But we hoped the Almighty, who had all along protected his Sacred Person, would fa∣vour him with a long Life and Series of Years, blest with continual Health and Victory over all his Enemies. This Relation he hearkned to with Attenti∣on and Delight, which I endeavour'd to heighten by a grateful Present, very suitable to the Discourse, which was, the Picture of our Gracious Soveraign K. 
William.
 He received it with a Smile, and a Countenance full of Sa∣tisfaction, and was resolved to lay it by in Safety in remembrance of its great Original.


When he had a while consider'd the Strength and Power of the English Arms, and the Native Valour of our Puissant Prince, he heartily wished he had been happy in a nearer Neigh∣bourhood to his Dominions, that by securing an Alliance with him, he might engage his Arms in crushing a troublesom offensive Enemy,
 who had sometimes made Incursions upon his Island, and slaughter'd some few num∣bers of his Subjects, that is, the King


of the adjacent Island, 
Moheila.
 Mul∣titudes indeed could not well be mow∣ed down by their Martial Weapons, which were neither Sword nor Spear, only Hand-stones taken up in the Streets, and thrown at their Enemies, as they had skill to aim them. Iron, and such like hostile Instruments of Terror they were unacquainted with. The King's Armory was furnisht with another kind of Weapon much as harm∣less as these, 
viz.
 Two Guns with bro∣ken Locks, and one Pistol, whose Touch-hole was near half as large as its Bore. These in skilful Hands might have done some Execution by the force of their Barrels.


The peaceable Inhostile Temper of this Prince,
 and the quiet submission of his Subjects, who pay him a profound Veneration, makes his Happiness equal to that of the greatest Monarchs, and infinitely superiour to those, whose Fo∣reign or Domestick Enemies create per∣petual Feuds and Tumults. Were no more Arms necessary for the Defence of Princes, than what he possesses, we might enjoy a Golden Age again, and triumph more in the Blessings of an


Universal Peace, than in all the Lau∣rels and Acclamations that wait upon victorious War. And as the Resigna∣tion of the Dominions of 
Charles
 V. shewed a greatness of Mind much su∣periour to all his other Conquests, that sought for Quiet in a private Cell, which it had long in vain searched af∣ter in Palaces and Camps; so the con∣tented Obscurity of this Prince raises his Felicity to the rivalling that glori∣ous Heroe in the nobler Instances of his Life, by affording his Mind as ample a Satisfaction in his narrow Territories, as that potent Prince enjoy'd either in his exalted or inferiour State.


The Queen here, as the Queen at 
Achen,
 is never exposed to the view of Strangers, but is kept from their Sight by a thin piece of Silk, when she con∣descends to speak with them; and ve∣ry rarely vouchsafes to put forth her Head. When she is Chamber-sick, or by urgent occasions invited abroad, she is then kept private and unseen by a Sett of Curtains hung about her.


This present Prince is blest with se∣veral Daughters, one of which was match'd to an 
Arabian
 Master of a


Junk,
 and was Portion'd with Five Hundred Dollars by her Father, which was thought the third part of the Mo∣ney he was computed to be worth; to this was made some Addition of Slaves and Cattel to increase the Dowry; and in these the greatest part of their Wealth did consist, before the 
Europe∣ans
 brought in of late the use of Dol∣lars among them. They maintain a small Commerce from hence to 
Patta,
 whither they export Rice in a sort of Vessels call'd Junks,
 which are framed all of Wood, without one Ounce of Iron in them.


The first coming hither has been ve∣ry fatal to such as sleep upon the Ground,
 and carelesly expose their Bo∣dies to the cool nocturnal Mists, which by Damps that arise from the Earth, and a disuse to those moist Vapours, are frequently as pernicious to their Health, as lying abroad in the Fields in the Northern Climates would be. But those 
English
 who had fortunately made their Escape hither after a Ship∣wrack, were by a due Care and Regi∣men vigorous in their Constitutions. The Natives, after the loss of their Ship at Sea, received them all very


kindly, condoled their Misfortune, and supplied their Exigencies with a Generosity extraordinary. One of the 
English
 was honoured with a piece of Silk from the Bounty of the Queen, and was offer'd by her Directions Diet and Lodging while he pleased. Their Cordial Affection to the 
English
 readily kindled their Liberality, that was ex∣pressed without Reluctance, or any signs of a repining Humour, and is in∣creased into so dear and intimate a Kindness, that 'tis a common Proverb now among them, 
Johanna-man, English-man,
 
all one.


Neither the 
French,
 nor other Nati∣ons,
 meet with half that Welcom from them which the 
English
 receive; be∣cause of the exact Justice that we main∣tain with them in our Traffick, which very much surpasseth the Equity of the Commerce in others; and all Men, even such as rudely treat others, de∣sire their Society most of all who are kindest and most just to their Affairs. But above all Nations they have the least Friendship for the 
Danes:
 For a large 
Danish
 Ship touching here at such a time, as they were sore infested by a


War with their Neighbouring Island 
Moheila,
 was hired in their Defence,
 and prevailed with to take on Board several of their Men to assist in the Conquest of their Enemies; and some hundreds of Dollars were rais'd by a Contribution, and given as an Encou∣ragement and Reward to the Under∣taking. But the 
Danes
 vanquisht their Expectations, instead of conquering their Enemies; and instead of putting them to flight, fled themselves with both their Men and Money, so that to this Day they were never heard of. These Cheats and gross Impostures fix that Infamy upon Christianity,
 which it rigidly disclaims, and make it look like a very formidable Profession to the Native Simplicity of these People, whose pliable Tempers would readily prompt them to its Entertainment, were they not debarred by an Invinci∣ble Antipathy to such Injurious Trans∣actions.


The Buildings of their Country Vil∣lages are slight and without Ornament,
 but 
Kings Town
 and 
Queens Town,
 which are the Capital upon the Island, have some Structures more polisht, and


made strong by Stone-Walls and Tim∣ber Roofs. The former is the usual Residence of their Kings, where they keep their Court, at 25 Miles distance from the Harbour. The Inhabitants of this place enjoy some peculiar Pri∣vileges above the rest of the Natives of the Island, because of their being seated so near the Royal Palace, which defends them from those Injuries to which those that dwell at a Distance are sometimes exposed.


They are all of them industrious in concealing their Wealth from the no∣tice of their Prince, whose Avarice and Injustice cause all their Goods and E∣states to be seised to his own proper Use, when they die; whereby many times the Widow and Children are re∣duced to the lowest state of Misery, when once the Natural Death of the Husband has made the King Heir to his Wealth and Fortune. Which is an Oppression very unjustifiable even a∣mong the Mahometan Princes, and those Arbitrary Governours of the East; but could never be bore with any Pa∣tience, by a People secur'd in their E∣states by the same Laws with those


which confirm that of their Prince, and who like us are freed from all Royal Violences, by a tame Resignati∣on of our Possessions.


In 
Queens Town,
 which is a Mari∣time Village, many of their finest Houses stand uninhabited, almost half of them, because some of the People were formerly killed in them by the Islanders of 
Moheila,
 and their Blood∣shed polluted the Habitation. The Death of the Master and Mistress, and one or two more of the Family, does the same; as if they mistrusted, that upon the Destruction of the Root, the Natural Branches would, without a Transplantation, wither and decay. And the Death of any Person whatso∣ever so far defiles the Purity of the Dwelling, that it hinders the Dressing of any Meat there for the next Month or two succeeding.


The Coco-nut,
 upon which the ge∣nerality feed, supplies them not only with Meat, but Drink, and serves in∣stead of a Cup to drink out of; and, with the Tree upon which it grows, is so variously serviceable to Navigation, that a Ship may both be built, and


rigg'd, and victuall'd, and freighted by them. A little Rice and this Nut together, without any other Food, do generally allay the Hunger of the Common People.


The Entertainments prepar'd by the King, and those of the best Note, are very large and hospitable, at which a whole Town will be at one time treat∣ed, and all the Inhabitants invited as Guests. At these Feasts the Increase of the Island is serv'd up in Plenty, but eat with Moderation, and without much studied Niceness in the Prepara∣tion; boil'd Meat and Rice do gene∣rally cover all their Tables.


Strong Drink is not so much their Aversion, as Restraint, being kept from it by their Obedience to the Mahome∣tan Law, contrary to their eager De∣sires. Yet here, as in places more Ori∣ental, they warm their Spirits by the smoaking of Tobacco; and Beetle∣nut and Chinam are very rarely out of their Mouths.
 Beetle-nut fortifies the Stomach, and comforts the Brain; it preserves the Teeth, and cures or prevents a tainted Breath. The Beetle-nut resembles a Nutmeg, and is shaved


into thin pieces.
 Chinam is Lime made of Cockle-shells, or Lime-stone; and Pawn is the Leaf of a Tree,
 wherein the other two are wrapped up. These they take and chaw between their Teeth, till they squeeze out their Moi∣sture, which is spit upon the Ground. Upon this two effects follow. First, It leaveth a red Tincture upon the Teeth and Lips, which is esteem'd with them very Ornamental; and then it chears and heats their Spirits, even almost to the Intoxication of such as are unaccu∣stom'd to it. Thus they commute for the use of our prohibited Wines. The Rheum which is hereby raised in the Mouth, is spit generally into a Hole in the Room, design'd for that purpose, which serves instead of a Pigdan, or Spitting-pot. The Floor where the Prince entertain'd us was so uneven and full of these Holes, as if the whole Room had been contriv'd for that pur∣pose.


In the middle of 
Queens-Town
 is a Mosque daily frequented by the Peo∣ple,
 into which we were admitted with this necessary Respect of putting off our Shoes upon the entrance into it.


But this was an Instance of Civility rarely allowed us Infidels by the Ma∣hometans. Near the Porch of the Mosque is a Draw-well for the wash∣ing the Hands, Face, and Feet, of all that enter, or come out of it. They take Care to preserve it neat and clean, with Mats spread upon the Floor for the Convenience of such Men as pray, for the Women are not much con∣cern'd to frequent it. In repeating their private Prayers they make use of Beads, as the Romanists do, and com∣monly with the same neglect, inter∣mixing their Secular Conference with the handling of them.


The Women are Courted sometimes at Seven or Eight Years old, and mar∣ried when they come to Maturity, which is about Eleven or Twelve in these warmer Countreys; at which time they prepare a publick Feast for the space of Seven Days, as they do at their Funerals, and entertain all that are pleas'd to come.


The Woman contributes to the Maintenance and Support of her Hus∣band, and upon some Occasions can leave him. They are kept secluded


from the Society of Strangers, and that freedom of gadding abroad; which they so eagerly desire, which they sometimes unlawfully venture upon, to the hazard of their Lives upon Disco∣very. The Orientals are all of them generally jealous, and very circum∣spect about their Wives; and seldom fail of punishing their Infidelity, if it come to light. And particularly, the Laws of 
Tunquin
 are very severe against Adulteresses,
 who upon Conviction are cast to an Elephant bred up for that purpose, who tosseth them in the Air with his Trunk as long as he finds any Life in them. And thus in 
Japan
 Adul∣tery is punished in the Women only; tho' Deflowring of Virgins, Coinage of false Money, and some other Vices, are punished as well in their Relations, as in the Persons of the Criminals.


They make great Lamentations at the Death of their Friends,
 for whose Sepulture they have no particular pla∣ces set apart, but lay them often any where in the Fields. Their Mourning Apparel is plain and simple, and of in∣considerable Expence, made up of a few Leaves of Trees, tied about the


middle, in fashion of a Hanging Fringe. Which is as strange in its kind, as the Colour is to us at 
Tunquin,
 where the new King and all the Princes of the Blood mourn in Robes of White Sattin, instead of the Dark Colours used in 
Europe.


Seven Months after the Birth they name their Children, at which time is a publick Feast celebrated for their Friends. If the Child chance to die before that time, they are perswaded of the Efficacy of their Prayers in contri∣buting to its future Felicity.


Their Idea's of Religion are very dark and superstitious, increas'd in them by the constant Apprehensions of the Devil's frequent appearance among them. They give him here the Name of 
Gregory,
 and affirm, that they often meet him in the High-ways, and in the Streets, and in the Evenings especially, by the Water-side. The Dread of him confines them to their Houses when it thunders, for then they say 
Gregory
 is abroad, and no Mortal dare stir out of his Dwelling. As the City of 
London
 had a Custom of burning the Pope every Year,
 so here they commonly


burn the Devil. At an appointed time of the Year all the Dirt of the Country thereabouts is laid in an Heap upon a Black Rock, lying between 
Queens-Town
 and the Harbour, which by the Neighbourhood is put into a Flame till all be consumed.
 But the malicious Spirit returns this Affront in a very spightful manner; and for the imagi∣nary Injury done to him, inflicts a real and grievous Punishment on them, by the private Stealth of one of their Chil∣dren every Year, which is yearly want∣ing upon the Island, against all their Vi∣gilance and Care, which with melan∣choly Countenances they often con∣firmed to us.


Many of the Natives affect a Fami∣liarity with this Evil Spirit,
 are addict∣ed to the Invocation of him, by their Skill in Negromancy; and have often recourse to him upon any Emergencies of Consequence; the obsequious Devil never failing of being their Oracle, when once the Ceremony of Invocati∣on is over. By Advice from him they assur'd us of some 
English
 and 
French
 Ships which would soon be in the Har∣bour, and accordingly happen'd. For


the 
Herbert,
 an English Merchant-man belonging to the 
East-India
 Company, was in a short time after our Departure set upon in this Road by three or four 
French
 Ships, and after a vigorous Re∣sistance of their united Force, was un∣fortunately blown up, when she was almost ready to give them Chace. However we, by a careful Providence that preserv'd us, left this Island before this Danger, and on 
May
 the 29th, 1690. fortunately arriv'd at the Island of 
Bombay,
 which is unquestionably one of the most convenient Harbours in the 
Indies.








THE ISLAND OF 
BOMBAY.


THIS Island has its Denominati∣on from the Harbour,
 which al∣lows the safest Rideing for Ships of any in these parts, and was originally called 
Boon Bay, i. e.
 in the 
Portuguese
 Language, a Good Bay or Harbour. By 
Ptolomy
 it was describ'd under the Name of 
Milizigeris.
 And before it fell into the Hands of the 
English,
 was under the Dominion of 
Portugal,
 from whence it was translated to the Crown of 
England,
 upon the Marriage of the 
Infanta
 of 
Portugal
 to King 
Charles
 the Second, 
An.
 1662. And is now put in∣to the Possession of the 
East-India
 Com∣pany, for the convenience of their Ships and Traffick.


Before we espyed the Main of 
India,



several Snakes of different sizes came swimming round our Ship near the sur∣face of the Water,
 by which we knew we were not far from Land, because they are never seen at any great di∣stance from the shore; they were wash∣ed from it, I presume, by the violence of the Rains in the times of the 
Mus∣souns,
 which I shall afterwards describe. This was seconded by another sign of our approaching the Land, 
viz.
 by a multitude of Locusts,
 which came fly∣ing upon our Masts and Yards, when we were distant from it Thirty Leagues, as we found by our Com∣putation afterwards. They were a∣bove two Inches in length, and their reaching us at that distance from the Shore, argued their great strength of Wing to flie to us so very far; by which they mounted aloft, after they had rested themselves a while, and took their Flight directly upwards. While I was at 
Suratt,
 the President and some more of us observ'd for seve∣ral succeeding Nights, an Infinite num∣ber of these Creatures Flying over our Heads for several hours together, in such numerous Armies and vast Bodies,


that they cast a Cloud over the Moon, tho' it then was at the Full. They direct∣ed their Course towards the 
South,
 but some of them called by the way, and lighted upon a Field of Corn near the City of 
Suratt,
 and in one Nights time devour'd it all. The Poor Husband∣man bewailed his Loss to the Gover∣nour of the City, who was invited forth as a Spectator of the sudden de∣vastation, that he might be more sen∣sibly moved to repair the Damage, and relieve the Man.


It was just the Season of the 
Mus∣souns
 when we fell upon the Coast of 
India,
 which generally is extreme dan∣gerous, because they break out for the most part in such Thunder and Rains, and impetuous Winds, that if the Ships are not laid up and in Harbour before that time, they incur the hazad of be∣ing lost. This made our Commander wish himself an hundred Leagues from Land, tho' we were then in sight of it;
 because that all his Care and Skill had scarce secur'd him from being driven by the Violence of the Storm upon a Lee-Shoar, by which he saw he must inevi∣tably perish. But in 24 Hours space


the Danger was well spent, and the joy of our Safety commenc'd about the same time that the fear of our Ship wrack did begin, according to the Ma∣xim and Observation among Mariners,
 
That a Tempest ceases about the same time generally that it does arise.
 And because I am fallen upon this Subject, I shall, before I enter any farther upon 
Bombay,
 give a brief Account of the Nature of these 
Mussouns
 in 
India.


This is the only proper Season of the Year for Rain, which falls here with such violence, and on all the Coasts of 
Malabar,
 that it hinders all Navigation, and puts a general stop to all Journeys by Land: For during this time, all the Land Carriages cease, and all the Ships both 
European
 and 
Indian
 are laid up in Harbour: It continues in these parts for the space of three or four Months,
 from the latter end of 
May,
 'till the middle of 
September;
 but in 
June
 and 
July
 do fall the most plen∣tiful Showers, and that sometimes with∣out intermission, for ten or fifteen days together,
 intercepting the appearance of either Sun or Star all that while. The whole Hemisphere then is most


sullenly Dark, and the Sky over-cast with the thickest weighty Clouds, so that the Earth seems rather inclosed within a huge Ocean of Water, than only a few watry Clouds, whose black and lowring Aspect is so very melan∣choly, that it gives the fairest repre∣sentation imaginable of the terrours of a second universal Deluge. Sometimes in Three or Four Hours time, such Showers fall from these full Clouds, that the Currents run along the Streets, swelled to that height, that they are scare fordable on Horse-back. After this Excess in 
July
 the Showers gradually decrease, the Horizon clears up like the first dawning of the Day, 'till at length the Heavens are all over Bright, and the benighted Sun dis∣plays his vigour and banish'd Rays a∣gain.
 Then do the 
Bannians
 endea∣vour to appease the incensed Ocean by Offerings to its inraged Waves, and in great plenty throw their gilded Co∣co-nuts into the Sea to pacifie its storms and Fury, and render it peace∣able and calm. And after these Cere∣monious Oblations are past, the Ora∣culous 
Bramins
 declare safety to the


Ships that will venture upon the O∣cean, before which not one of them will offer to weigh an Anchor. The Young Boys are much delighted with this Custom, for whatever Coco-nuts are thrown into the Water, they im∣mediately swim in and fetch them out.


The 
Mussouns
 are the only Season for watering of their Fields, their Meadows, and Arable Land. And for the preservation of this Element, wherever they sow their Rice, they endeavour to reduce the Ground to a Level, that nothing of this Heavenly Moisture may be lost.


The Sun's approach to the Natives of 
Europe
 promiseth them the fairest Weather, and here the fowlest. The reason of which is his Vertical Exal∣tation, which with great violence Ex∣hales the Vapours of the Earth, and returns them as plentifully again. There∣fore both under the 
Aequator
 and the 
Tropick,
 when the Sun has been in the 
Zenith,
 I have perceiv'd the Air has been more temperate, and the Wea∣ther cooler, than at ten or twelve De∣grees distance from it: And that a∣bundant moisture which is always


powerfully drawn up, near the 
Aequa∣tor,
 from which the Sun is never very far distant, abates that scorching Heat of his Influence, which otherwise would be scarce tolerable to either Animal or Plant. And therefore in the middle of 
May,
 before the 
Southerly
 Winds set in, which bring the Rains along with them,
 the Air at 
Surat
 is so very dry, that it licks up the Moisture in the Pen, before we are able to write it out; and so intensly Hot, especially about 3 in the Afternoon, that we cannot well endure the standing for any long time upon the Grass, where the Sun's Beams have their full force. This causes our sprinkling the Floors of our Chambers frequently with Water,
 to create a kind of 
Fresco
 in them, du∣ring this Season, and makes us Employ our Peons in Fanning of us with Mur∣chals made of Peacocks Feathers,
 four or five Foot long, in the time of our Entertainments, and when we take our Repose.


Now, as in other Countries, the pe∣riods of the variety of Weather are un∣certain, the Fair and Foul succeeding


one another with great variety and al∣teration; and as in 
India
 they have stated and fixt times without any doubtful vi∣cissitudes; so likewise even there they do not observe throughout all places the same Months.
 For upon the 
East
 side of Cape 
Comorin,
 on the Coast of 
Co∣romondel,
 from 
April
 to 
September
 the Weather is Fair, and in the other Months is the Winter-like Weather; whereas on the Coast of 
Malabar,
 which lies to the 
West,
 the Fair Weather be∣gins in 
September
 and ends in 
May.
 So that in passing over-land from one Coast to the other, the Travellers, who are unacquainted with it, are at a stand to find two different Seasons of Winter and Summer in 20 or 30 Leagues distance. The Rains like∣wise come from different Quarters in these different Regions;
 some from the 
South,
 some from the 
West,
 and some from the 
East.
 And at the 
Mal∣dive
 Islands, which are reckoned 12 Thousand, the Rains follow the Course of the Waters from the 
West,
 which are carried by an impetuous Current for six Months together to∣wards the 
East,
 that is, from 
April
 to



September;
 the other six Months are Hot and Calm, with the Winds set∣led from the 
East.


The 
Mussouns
 are rude and Boiste∣rous in their departure,
 as well as at their coming in, which two Seasons are call'd the 
Elephant
 in 
India,
 and just before their breaking up, take their farewell for the most part in very rug∣gid huffing weather. As if they were constrain'd to force their Entrance, and Combat the fair Seasons, before they could make way for their admittance; and were likewise resolv'd to try their utmost effort, sooner than tamely re∣sign their Empire, and quit the Coast. For Nature must needs be under great Conflicts and disorder, by such a sud∣dain Change from an uninterrupted Sun-shine to such constant Rains.


When once the 
Mussouns
 are past,
 the other Months are under the se∣renest influence of the Heavens, with∣out one Fertile Cloud for several suc∣ceeding Months visible in the whole Firmament, but the chearful Sun, from six to six, is never veil'd with gloomy Meteors, or Eclipsed with dark and Melancholy Exhalations


from the Earth: But all the Animal Generations bask themselves in his warm Rays, without any fear of Rain, or Tempests, or chilly nipping Weather. And now the Vegetable Race below, Trees and Corn, Flow∣ers and Herbs grace the World with infinite variety of delightful Forms, and pleasant Colours, being re∣fresh'd by Nature's Seminal Juice, the plentiful Showers that descended in the time of the 
Mussouns:
 Where∣in several Trees, by quenching their Thirst with such a large Draught at that Season, maintain a flourishing Verdure all the Year round.
 And what is more remarkable, some of those Trees will yield each Night a Quart of 
Tary
 or 
Toddy,
 tho it be at eight Months distance from the falling of the Rains; the greedy Soil imbibed at that time such a quantity of this pure Liquor when it fell upon the Earth. This gives 
India
 the lovely Aspect of those Blessed Seats, which are sweetly described by the Poet,

Quas neque concutiunt venti, neque nu∣bila nimbis


Aspergunt, neque nix acri concreta Pru∣ina


Cana cadens violat, semperque innubilus Aether


Contegit, & late diffuso lumine ridet.


But at 
Bombay, September
 and 
October,
 those two Months which immediately follow the Rains, are very pernicious to the Health of the 
Europeans;
 in which two Moons more of them die, than generally in all the Year besides. For the excess of earthy Vapours after the Rains ferment the Air, and raise therein such a sultry Heat, that scarce any is able to withstand that Feverish Effect it has upon their Spirits, nor re∣cover themselves from those Fevers and Fluxes into which it casts them. And this the 
Indians
 remark concerning the excessive Heats at this time,
 that they say, 
'Tis
 September
's Sun which causeth the black List upon the
 Antilope
's Back.


Thus I leave this Description of the Season and Nature of the 
Mussouns,
 and return to 
Bombay,
 which is only a small Island, situate in about Nineteen De∣grees of North Latitude, not eminent for any thing so much as its Fort and Harbour.


They have here abundance of Coco-nuts, which bring some Advantage to the Owners, but very little either of Corn or Cattle, but what is imported from the adjacent Country; and these not in great Plenty, nor of very good Growth. A Sheep or two from 
Suratt
 is an acceptable Present to the best Man upon the Island. And the Unhealth∣fulness of the Water bears a just Pro∣portion to the Scarcity and Meanness of the Diet, and both of them together with a bad Air, make a sudden end of many a poor Sailer and Souldier,
 who pay their Lives for hopes of a Liveli∣hood. Indeed, whether it be that the Air stagnates, for the Land towards the Fort lies very low, or the stinking of the Fish which was used to be applied to the Roots of the Trees, instead of Dung; or whatever other Cause it is which renders it so very unhealthful, 'tis certainly a mortal Enemy to the Lives of the 
Europeans.
 And as the Ancients gave the Epithet of 
Fortunate
 to some Islands in the West, because of their Delightfulness and Health; so the Modern may, in opposition to them, denominate this the 
Ʋnfortunate



one in the East, because of the Antipa∣thy it bears to those two Qualities.


We arrived here (as I hinted before) at the beginning of the Rains,
 and bu∣ried of the Twenty Four Passengers which we brought with us, above Twenty, before they were ended; and of our own Ship's Company above Fifteen: And had we stay'd till the end of the next Month, 
October,
 the rest would have undergone a very hazar∣dous Fate, which by a kind Providence ordering our Ship for 
Suratt
's River-mouth, was comfortably avoided. A fortunate Escape indeed! because nei∣ther the Commander, nor my self, were in any Hopes of surviving many Days: neither Temperance, the most Sove∣reign Medicine, nor the safest Prescrip∣tions in the Physical Art, could restore the Weakness of our languishing de∣cay'd Natures. And that which tho∣roughly confirm'd to us the unhealth∣fulness of the place we had lately loosed from, was the sudden Desertion of our Diseases, and return of Health,
 before half the Voyage to 
Suratt
 was finisht: In the middle of which Passage we manifestly perceiv'd in our Bodies as


evident an alteration and change of Air for the best, as our Palates could distin∣guish betwixt the Taste of Wine, and that of Water.


The Deputy-Governour, Mr. 
George Cook,
 a pleasant and obliging Gentle∣man, sollicited me upon the account of my Function to reside with him upon 
Bombay,
 and invited me with all the Proposals of a frank and generous Civi∣lity, to wave my Voyage, and con∣tinue with him there, because they were then destitute of a Minister. And indeed the Deference I bore to such kind Expressions, and to the Duty of my Calling, were invincible Arguments for my Stay, had I not been satisfied of the immediate infallible sad Fate I was under, like that of my Predeces∣sors; one of whom was interred a Fortnight before this time, and three or four more had been buried the prece∣ding Years: Which common Fatality has created a Proverb among the 
Eng∣lish
 there,
 that 
Two Mussouns are the Age of a Man.
 This is much lamented by the 
East-India
 Company, and puts them upon great Expences for supplying the Island with fresh Men, in the room of


those that are taken away, and provi∣ding able Surgeons, furnish'd with Drugs and Chests from 
Europe,
 to take care of the Infirmaries, and all that are sick.


But there seldom happens any great Defect in the Natural World,
 without some preceding in the Moral; and the Springs of our Miseries and Misfor∣tunes rise higher than meerly from Se∣cond Causes. For I cannot without Horror mention to what a Pitch all vi∣cious Enormities were grown in this place, when the Infection was most outragious; nor can I but think that the Divine Justice interposed, and for∣warded these fatal Infelicities, which are not wholy imputable to an impure Contagion of the Air, or the gross In∣fection of the Elements. These were made use of as Fatal Instruments of the direful Excision, but the true Cause of the Malady lay deeper. Their Prin∣ciples of Action, and the consequent evil Practices of the 
English
 forwarded their Miseries, and contributed to fill the Air with those pestilential Vapours that seized their Vitals, and speeded their hasty passage to the other World.


Luxury, Immodesty, and a prostitute Dissolution of Manners, found still new Matter to work upon. Wickedness was still upon the Improvement, and grew to such a Perfection, that no Vice was so detestable as not to be extreme∣ly vicious; whereby Satan obtain'd a more Despotick Authorty in the Hearts of the Christians, than he did among the Gentiles in the Pageantry of Heathen Worship. And when the Seeds of Avarice and Prophaneness, of Envy and Injustice, and a thousand o∣ther black Infernal Vices grew up and flourish'd, and were made the Ambiti∣on of every Individual; we need not then admire, if the pure Luminaries of Heaven should set themselves against their Impieties, and dart their mortal Poysons on the Earth; if the Planets should wisely shed their venomous A∣spects upon profligate Men, and there∣by in Vengeance produce the mortal Fruits of Death.


The Prodigious growth of Vermin, and of venomous Creatures, at the time of the 
Mussouns,
 do abundantly like∣wise demonstrate the malignant Cor∣ruption of the Air, and the natural


Cause of its direful Effects upon the 
Eu∣ropeans.
 For Spiders here increase their Bulk ot the largeness of a Man's Thumb, and Toads are not of a much less size than a small Duck; whereby 'tis easily seen by these venomous Crea∣tures, what encouragement these infe∣ctious and pestilential Qualities meet with in this place, and under what a contagious Influence all the Inhabitants must consequently be seated. This in∣duc'd a Gentleman one time in the Go∣vernours and my Company, and some other Persons of Note, to affirm, that he believ'd it rain'd Frogs; because he espied upon his Hat small Frogs, a∣bout the bigness of the end of one's Finger, when he was at a great di∣stance from any House or Covering, from whence they might drop.


All Wounds and Contusions in the Flesh are likewise very rarely healed here; and if they are,
 'tis with Diffi∣culty and extraordinary Care; they happen generally to be very dangerous, and the Cure admits of more Delays and Hazards in the healing, than what is usual in other parts. But the Cor∣ruption of the Air has a more visible


and immediate Effect upon young 
Eng∣lish
 Infants,
 whose tender Spirits are less able to resist its Impressions; so that not one of twenty of them live to any Maturity, or even beyond their Infant days. Were it otherwise, the Island might in time be peopled with the 
Europeans
 transmitted thither, as the Western Islands are, which belong to the Crown of 
England:
 For the Company allow Marriage to their Fa∣ctors,
 and Liberty to young Women to pass thither to gain Husbands, and raise their Fortunes. But so very few of their Children live, and of those that do, so many of them are sent for 
England,
 that fresh Colonies from thence are very necessary for support∣ing the Government and Affairs of the Island. A Modish Garb and Mien is all that is expected from any Women that pass thither, who are many times match'd to the chief Merchants upon the place, and advance thereby their Conditions to a very happy pitch. And considering what trouble attends the Passage, especially of Women▪ consi∣dering the Hazard, as well as length of the Voyage, with some other Casu∣alties






that sometimes happen on Board, a modest Woman may very well ex∣pect, without any great Stock of Ho∣nour or Wealth, a Husband of Re∣pute and Riches there, after she has run all this Danger and Trouble for him.
 And indeed the fond Indulgence of the Husbands, as well their Wealth, is another valuable Recompense to Wo∣men for the Toil and Trouble of the Voyage.


The Island lies in about Nineteen Degrees North, in which is a Fort,
 which is the Defence of it, flanked and Lined according to the Rules of Art, and secured with many Pieces of Ordi∣nance, which command the Harbour and the parts adjoining. In this one of the Companies Factors always re∣sides,
 who is appointed Governour to inspect and manage the Affairs of the Island; and who is vested with an Au∣thority in Civil as well as Military Matters, to see that the several Com∣panies of Soldiers which are here, as well as Factors and Merchants, attend their various Stations, and their respe∣ctive Charge.


The Island is likewise beautified with several elegant Dwellings of the 
English,
 and neat Apartments of the 
Portuguese,
 to whom is permitted the free Exercise of their Religion,
 and the Liberty of erecting publick Chappels of Devotion; which as yet the 
English
 have not attain'd to, because the War with the 
Mogul
 interrupts the finishing of a stately Structure which was going on for their publick Church. For want of this a particular Room is set apart in the Fort for Publick Service twice a day,
 at which all are en∣joyn'd to be present; and for perfor∣mance of which, and other Sacred Of∣fices, a Salary of an 100 
l.
 annually, besides the convenience of Diet and Lodging, is allowed to the Minister by the Company.


The Gentiles too, as well as Chri∣stians, are permitted the Freedom of their Religion, and conniv'd at in their Heathen Worship. I accidentally once entred into one of the Gentiles Chap∣pels, but durst not stay for fear of di∣sturbing the 
Bramin
 with the Visit.
 The smallness of it would scarce ad∣mit of above Nine or Ten to enter in∣to


it. At the remotest part of it was placed the Pagod upon the ground, which was only a Face form'd of Tin, with a broad flat Nose, and Eyes lar∣ger than a Crown Piece. On the right side of this Image hung a small Purse for the Peoples Oblations; on the left, very near it, lay some burnt Rice, which the Bramin had sacrificed; and at the entrance of the Door stood a Trumpet, which sounded all the while he was a sacrificing.


The Island by the War with the 
Mogul
 was much Depopulated and Im∣poverished,
 both by destroying the 
English
 Inhabitants, and wasting the Fruit of the ground, especially of the Coco-Trees, whose Nuts are the sta∣ple Income upon it. And whatever the Original of this unhappy War was in other places, or upon what other Grounds soever it was commenced here, the 
English
 had some just Cause of murmuring and Complaint,
 from the Treatment they had from the 
Mo∣gul
's Officers at 
Suratt,
 very differnet from what they might in Reason and Equity expect. For at the first settling a Factory there, it was agreed upon


between the great 
Mogul
 and our Pre∣sident, to have a permission of free Trade for Two and an half 
per Cent.
 for all Goods Imported or Exported; which were without any Reason arbi∣trarily advanced to Four 
per Cent.
 be∣yond the Bounds of the first Agree∣ment. And upon this very occasion the late Honourable President 
Bartho∣lomew Harris
 has urged to me often this Case, that he thought it no Inju∣stice to evade the payment of as much Customs for the 
English
 Goods, as they were injur'd in them above two and an half 
per Cent.
 by the 
Mogul.
 But this was not the only Severity the 
English
 were,
 and still are treated with; but before the Eruption of this last War, the very Plate Gold Buttons which the chief Fa∣ctors wore upon their Cloaths, were demanded to be paid Custom for, as often as they cross'd the River of 
Su∣ratt.
 This, to the Purser Marine par∣ticularly, was insufferable, whose Em∣ployment engages him frequently at 
Sualy,
 to which he must always pass the River; inasmuch as in a short time the very Intrinsick Value of his Gold Buttons would be spent in Custom.


And we are all sensible how hard these violent Despotick Proceedings bear upon 
English
 Spirits, totally unac∣custom'd to such Servility, and bless'd with such Paternal Constitutions, as appoint the meanest Subject Absolute Monarch of his petty Free-hold, ex∣empt from all Impositions, but what are voted by the Assembly of the whole Kingdom, in its Representatives.


These, with other things,
 made a Rupture; and after some small Di∣sputes at Sea, at which the 
Indians
 are never vigorous, the 
Mogul
 attempts the sending a Land-Army upon 
Bombay,
 whose 
Siddy
 or General having receiv'd Intelligence of Sir 
John Wyburn
's Death, who was Governour of 
Bombay,
 and a Man bred to War, immediately prepares to land his Men upon the Island, and storm the Fort, and totally rout the 
English
 upon it. For now the 
Siddy
 expected great Success in his At∣tempts, because he challeng'd our Ge∣neral at that Weapon, in which he knew he was not skilled. Sir 
John Child,
 who was bred a Merchant,
 and created Baronet-by the King, and ap∣pointed General of the 
English
 Forces


in 
India
 by the Company, was, he knew, a General, but no Souldier; and better skilled at his Pen, than his Sword; and more expert at casting an Account, than in martialling and conducting an Army.
 And accordingly, his neglect of fortifying the Island till the 
Siddy
 was upon it, tho the Company had frequent∣ly requir'd it from him, and his vain Ex∣pressions, 
That he would bring the
 Mogul 
to consent to his Proposals of Peace, and blow the
 Siddy 
off the Island, if he ever came up∣on it;
 were all inconsistent Frailties with his station, whose Province and Employ∣ment would have looked with a better Character, had he foreseen the Danger to which the Island was exposed, and timely applied his Prevention. But the Merchant was unfit for that great Post, and grew unweildy with too much Ho∣nour. The 
Siddy
 therefore in the Year 1688. landed with an Army of Twen∣ty Five Thousand Men,
 to encounter which the General commanded only Twenty Five Hundred; so that the Enemy was just Ten to One. Not∣withstanding which Odds the 
English
 kept them warmly in Play,
 and for all that Disadvantage, repuls'd them with


such Vigour, that for some Months they were unable to approach the Fort, though they landed not very far from it. The 
English
 were bouyed up with a strong Opinion of their own Valour, and of the 
Indians
 Pufillanimity, which carried them on to such bold Adven∣tures, that they promised themselves Victory in the most dubious Engage∣ments; and had they not been be∣tray'd by Renegades, who discover'd their Weakness, and smallness of their Numbers, might have hoped to have repelled that numerous Host, with that weak Force they had to resist them. But the Enemy being taught th
 Art of mineing, and sheltering themselves in their Trenches and Bas∣ket-works, (which they learnt from the Deserters) came at length so near, that they Bombarded our Fort with massie Stones instead of Iron Bullets,
 whilst our Shot from thence was scarce able to annoy them, they were so defended by the Moulds they had cast up. Our Fort was well flanked with Bastions, having the Sea on one side, and encom∣passed on the other with a broad and deep Ditch, and had mounted on all


sides very large Guns: But the Decay of Powder and Ammunition, which the constant Firing had produced, and the 
Mogul
's Army close investing of the Fort,
 made it advisable in our General to think on a Peace, which was in a little time concluded upon; upon which the 
Siddy
 left the Island.


The General, before the Terms of Accommodation were agreed upon, dies; by a too deep Concern, as its presum'd, for suffering the 
Siddy
 to in∣vade the Island; and for fear that such Proposals in a Firmaun as might suit with the Honour of his Masters the 
East India
 Company, might not be hearkned to by the 
Mogul.
 He was a quick and expert Merchant, and to∣tally devoted to his Masters Service: Tho' the Factors in 
India
 charge him with Partiality to his Relations, in ad∣vancing them to Stations above their standing, to the Prejudice of those who were their Seniors, and better qualified for such Promotions.
 They accuse him likewise of a penurious Temper, and injuriously depriving them of the Com∣fort of 
Europe
 Liquors, which the Company's Bounty yearly bestowed,


that he might the better ingratiate with his Masters for sparing their Ex∣pences, though it were a Diminution both to their Credit and their Factors Health.


He amassed abundance of Wealth during his stay,
 which was more than Twenty Years in 
India;
 the least Con∣jecture which is made of it is 100000 
l.

His Lady, whom he left behind him, who is fam'd for Piety, Charity, and an agreeable Behaviour, is since mar∣ried to Mr. 
George Weldon,
 fit to suc∣ceed him in his Fortune and his Bed. He is a Gentleman well descended, of easie and obliging Converse, extreme temperate and circumspect, and man∣ages the Affairs of the Island, wherein he now as Deputy-Governour presides, with the universal Esteem and Appro∣bation of all upon it. The Wealth which the General's Lady and Chil∣dren do possess, demonstrates to what height of Fortune the Companies Ser∣vants may advance, when their Dili∣gence and Fidelity engage the Bounty and Countenance of their Masters to encourage them.


I shall remark but one thing to en∣tertain the Reader, and conclude this part of my Discourse. As he whose Title is 
most Christian,
 encouraged him who is its principal Adversary to in∣vade the Rights of Christendom,
 so did Senior Padre 
de Pandara,
 the principal Jesuite in an adjacent Island to 
Bombay,
 invite the 
Siddy
 to exterminate all the Protestants there. To facilitate which pious Design, he allowed the 
Siddy
's Army all the Revenues belonging to himself to aid and support the Work that was to be carried on. But with this Proviso, that when the 
English
 were beaten off, their Possessions, and of all the Churches belonging to the 
Portuguese,
 should be restor'd to him, for his own Benefit and Use. This 
Pa∣dre
 likewise, when the 
Siddy
 had inva∣ded the Island, plentifully supplied his want of Provisions, and with great Li∣berality took Care to have them sea∣sonably convey'd to him and his Army. But the 
Siddy
 being beaten off, these and such other perfidious Actions have forfeited all the Right of the 
Portuguese
 to those Lands and Estates, which the Favour and Civility of the 
English
 al∣lowed


them to enjoy upon the Island; and therefore this 
Padre
 and his Asso∣ciates are more likely to suffer a dissei∣zing of what they had, than the 
Eng∣lish,
 as they design'd. This breeds no small Heat and Fury in the Breasts of the turbulent Jesuites, who upon this have rais'd some strong Commotions; it has excited their Revenge, and makes them sometimes threaten in a passionate Rage the retaking of their Lands by Force. Few Men can enjoy very peaceable Lives,
 who have any fair Pos∣sessions near the Convents of these men: For even in the 
Indies
 they have gain'd that Ascendant over the Tempers and Estates of the People, that a pleasant Seat, and a fruitful Plantation, can hard∣ly escape their gaining: Which renders that Society a Burden insupportable to all the rest of that Religion, who are seated there. The Incomes of that Church, whereof this 
Padre
 is chief, shews in some measure their growing Wealth; for they are said to amount to the value of a Pound of Gold a Day.








THE ISLAND OF 
ELEPHANTA.


AT three Leagues distance from 
Bombay
 is a small Island called 
Elephanta,
 from the Statue of an 
Ele∣phant
 cut in Stone, in equal proportions to one of those Creatures in his full Growth. This Figure is placed in the middle of a Field,
 conspicuous to any Passenger that enters upon that part of the Island. Here likewise are the just dimensions of an Horse Carved in Stone, so lively, with such a Colour and Carriage, and the shape finisht with that Exactness, that many have rather Fancyed it, at a distance, a li∣ving Animal,
 than only a bare Repre∣sentation. These Figures have been










Erected not barely for displaying the Statuary's Skill, or gratifying the Cu∣riosity of the Sight, but by their ad∣mirable Workmanship were more like∣ly design'd to win upon the Admirati∣on, and thereby gain a kind of Religi∣ous Respect from such Heathens as came near them.


But that which adds the most Re∣markable Character to this Island,
 is the fam'd 
Pagode
 at the top of it; so much spoke of by the 
Portuguese,
 and at present admir'd by the present Queen Dowager, that she cannot think any one has seen this part of 
India,
 who comes not Freighted home with some Account of it.
 A 
Pagode
 is the Heathens Temple, or a place Dedica∣ted to the Worship of their False Gods, and borrows its Name from the 
Per∣sian
 Word 
Pout,
 which signifies Idol; thence 
Pout Gheda,
 a Temple of False Gods, and from thence, 
Pagode.


At the Ascent of an High Hill upon this Island 
Elephanta,
 is therefore a ve∣ry large 
Indian Pagode,
 cut out of the very Heart of a hard Rock, whose Di∣mensions are about an Hundred and Twenty Foot Square, and in Height


about Eighteen; besides several Out-Rooms appertaining and adjoining to it. At sixteen Foot distance from one a∣nother are sixteen Pillars of Stone, Cut out with much Art and Ingenuity, whose Diameters are three Foot and an half, design'd as it were for the Support of this weighty Building, whose Roof is a lofty Broad Rock. Out of the sides of this 
Pagode,
 thus Beautified with these lovely Columns and curious Arches, are Figures of For∣ty or Fifty Men,
 each of them Twelve or Fifteen Foot High, in just and ex∣act Symetry, according to the Dimen∣sions of their various Statures. Of these Gigantick Figures, some had six Arms, and others three Heads, and o∣thers of such vast Monstrosity, that their very Fingers were larger than an ordinary Man's Leg. Upon some of their Heads were Ornamental Crowns, neat and Artificially wrought, whilst others near them held Scepters in their Hands, and above the Heads of others are multitudes of little People repre∣sented in a posture of Devotion; some I observ'd leaning upon Women, and others upon the Head of a Cow, an


Animal most venerable in 
India.
 Here are some taking an Amiable Charm∣ing Lady by the Chin, and there the horrid Prospect of others hewing in pieces little Children; and generally above the Heads of all, are abundance of diminutive Folk hovering in the Air, represented with chearful Aspects, and in lively Figures. This variety of pleasant and monstrous Images, I lookt upon as no other than the seve∣ral Objects of the Gentiles Worship, as each Adorer's Fancy led him to his several God, either of Terror or De∣light.


There is nothing of Beauty in the Frontispiece of this 
Pagode,
 or of Or∣nament at the Entrance into it. The Figures of these Gigantick Men, to which the Heathen have paid a pro∣found Veneration, and Reverenc'd as Heroes or Demi-Gods formerly, (for this Island is at present in the Possession of the 
Potuguese
) are the representation of the first Race of Mortals, which, according to the Account of their Chronicles, were all Gyants, but dwind∣led by degrees into lesser proportions, and at length, thro' the degeneracy of


Manners, which caused an Universal decay of Humane Nature, they shrunk into these small proportions in which they appear now in the World. So that the present smallness of our Sta∣ture, according to them, derives its de∣clension and Decay from the Excess of Vice, and the small remains of Vertue that are left. And because the Form∣ing of a Temple out of such hard Matter, requir'd Incredible endless Pains, therefore they would Insinuate that these Giants here expressed, were only capable of such Performances, which seem now to exceed that ordi∣nary strength we have now to go thro' with such a Work.


About the middle of 
September
 1690. when the 
Mussouns
 were broken up, we were order'd for 
Suratt,
 which was very agreeable to all on Board. In our Passage we met with a puny sort of Pirates called 
Sanganians,
 who find∣ing us a Ship of Force, durst not at∣tempt upon us. But a Fortnight be∣fore this time,
 a small 
English
 Ship of no Countenance, was encounter'd by two of these 
Sanganians,
 and Boarded by them. This the 
English
 Master


scarce resisted, because he had fitted his Ship for a close Fight, and therefore withdrawing his Men from the Decks, prepared them with small Fire-Arms, and put the Powder Chests in order, on purpose to receive them. The 
San∣ganians,
 who fancied all their own easie Purchase, were so warmly entertain'd, that as soon as they entered, they were repulsed, and speedily withdrew, be∣taking themselves to the Water, to e∣vade the fury of the Fire on Board.


In a little time we happily arriv'd at 
Sualy-bar,
 and the Tide serving,
 came to an Anchor very near the 
Shoar.
 Here the 
Europe
 Ships are permitted to ride, but no 
Indian
 Vessel is allowed that freedom, they are ei∣ther all of them to enter the River of 
Suratt,
 or to Anchor at the Mouth of it; which is distant from 
Sualy
 two Leagues, as 
Sualy
 is from 
Suratt
 four. Here the Ships load and unload their Goods, which are kept in Yards and Ware-hou∣ses, to be ready to be shipp'd off upon oc∣casion. When the 
Benjamin
 had Un∣loaded her Cargo here, after a long Voyage at Sea, the Commander Or∣der'd her to be clean'd; and thereupon


he found a multitude of large, well-tasted Oysters, which grew upon the bottom of the Ship, with which he feasted his Sea-men, and all the 
Eng∣lish
 at 
Suratt.


Within less than half a Mile from the Sea are three 
Choultries,
 or Convenient Lodgings made of Timber, for the 
English, French,
 and 
Dutch
 Factors, at a Bow-shoot distance each from other; and made fit for their Reception by variety of Apartments; at such times as they are called down to look after the Ships Cargoes, or to recreate them∣selves in the Country Air, and with fresh Breezes from the Sea. Here therefore we came on Shore, and met with an agreeable Reception and kind Entertainment from the 
English
 Fa∣ctors: And the 
Sualy Marine
 being the first Land we set Foot upon be∣longing to the Great 
Mogul,
 I shall in the first place speak something parti∣cularly concerning that Mighty Mo∣narch, and then proceed to a larger Account of the City and Inhabitants of 
Suratt.








OF THE Great 
MOGUL.


ASIA
 we know was the first Stage of Mortals,
 which both for Riches and Extent, is the most con∣siderable part of our Tripartite Con∣tinent, and enjoys a temperature of Air, by its convenient position, equally superiour to both. And as it was the first Original of Mankind, by a pecu∣liar Favour from the Supreme Author of the World; so was it likewise of Nations and Kingdoms, of Monarchies and Empires, whose Laws as well Sa∣cred as Civil, were formed here; and those Diviner Mysteries of the 
Jewish,
 as well as Christian Religion were first explain'd. But what adds the great∣est Glory to the place, is, that the Sa∣cred Author of our Faith here drew his Breath, and Restor'd lost Man∣kind by his Death.


Magasthenes
 Reports, that 122 se∣veral


Nations were the Old Inhabi∣tants of 
Asia,
 which was first Invaded by 
Semiramis,
 afterwards by 
Bacchus,
 accompanied with 
Hercules,
 who taught them the use of Wine, (which now they have unlearnt,) of Oil, and Ar∣chitecture. And indeed all Humane Arts and Sciences, as well as Archi∣tecture had their Rise, and were first taught here, which gives it a just cause of Challenging a precedence to all other parts of the World. 
India,
 which is one of its Chief Kingdoms, in latter Days was Discover'd by the 
Portu∣guese,
 in the Year 1587, by doubling the 
Cape
 of 
Good Hope;
 and since by the 
English
 and the 
Dutch,
 who make a greater Figure now than those more Early Discoverers, are possessed of some of their principal Forts and Factories, and daily out-do them in carrying on a vigorous Beneficial Negotiation in all parts.


And as the Riches and extent of 
Asia
 surpass the other Quarters of the World; so has it rais'd its Monarchs to a point of Grandeur equally glorious and Renown'd. And that spacious Bo∣dy which is awed by the 
Indian
 Scep∣ter,



is reputed to to be one of the most Famous and Greatest, not only of all 
Asia,
 but of all this Globe of Earth besides. And if we consider the Dia∣monds and other Stones of value, the Gold and other Metals, the Spices and Druggs, the Silks and Cottons, and the vast prodigious quantities of all those rich Commodities and precious Stones, with which 
India
 abounds, we cannot deny it that Transcendency which its Monarch pretends to, of being Superior to other Nations of the Earth, and that it yields the Palm to none besides.


The 
Indian
 Emperour, commonly stiled the 
Mogul,
 deduces that Title from the last Conquerors of 
India,
 who were White of Complexion; which is the name of a Potent People inhabiting a vast Country in the Confines of 
Tar∣tary,
 from whom they derive their Name and Descent; and tho' the Na∣tive 
Indians
 are all of an Olive Taw∣ny Colour, yet these are all White and Fair, and of the same Belief with their Emperour,
 which is the 
Mahome∣tan:
 Because 
Emmaupaxda,
 the se∣venth Descendant from 
Tamerlane,
 be∣ing


once much distressed by the 
Par∣thians
 or 
Tartars,
 was driven to sue for Relief from his Neighbouring Po∣tentate the Emperour of 
Persia,
 which was harken'd to upon these Terms, that he should Convert to the 
Persian
 Faith, and submit himself and Fol∣lowers to that Religion.


Tamerlane
 (that is Lame, because one of his Legs was shorter than the other) was the first of the Kings of 
India,
 from whom his Successors boast their Original. He was Born in 
Sa∣merchandia,
 a place in 
Tartary,
 and liv'd about the Year 1398, in the Reign of 
Richard
 the 2d. And that we may not defraud this Mighty He∣ro of his Valour and Renown, the glory of his Conquests has certainly far out-done the noblest Exploits of any of the 
Roman Caesars,
 and the Fortune of his Arms has gone beyond the Succes∣ses of 
Alexander
 the Great. So that all the Registers and Archieves of Ancient Heroes, and all the Annals of 
Grecian
 or 
Roman
 Atchievements, cannot fur∣nish us with Memoirs of this nature. For he extended his Conquests from 
East
 to 
West,
 and carried his Trium∣phant


Banners from 
China
 to 
Poland,
 whereby he made all 
Asia
 tremble; which was a Victory exceeding the actions of the Bravest and most Fortunate Cap∣tains of former Ages. From him 
Au∣reng-Zebe
 is the Eleventh, who posses∣seth the Crown of 
India;
 and well may this great Emperour exalt his Pedigree, and value his Descent from so fam'd and Glorious an Ancestor, when that Wise and Powerful Nation of the 
Romans
 built so much of their Honour and Renown upon two such Ancestors as 
Romulus
 and 
Remus.
 The mighty Deeds and renown'd Exploits of 
Schah Abbas,
 the 
Persian
 Emperor,
 have likewise imprinted Eternal Cha∣racters of Fame and Honour upon his Name, which is now by vulgar use made the signification of any thing extraordinary or Miraculous; so that when any thing surpassing Excellent, or wonderful, is either done or spoken, the 
Indians
 presently say of it, 
Schah-Abbas!


But had 
Aureng-Zebe
 been more In∣dustrious in imitating the Virtues of his Progenitors,
 than in raising him∣self to a long and proud series of their










Titles, and less Cruel in his Bloody Accession to the Crown; this would have added more Splendour to his Throne, than all that matchless Gran∣deur with which it is adorn'd by Dia∣monds, Emeralds, Topazes and Pearls, and would have given a truer and more lasting Nobility to his Name, than to have gain'd it with Infamy and repea∣ted Murther. The 
Roman
 Histories inform us, that while that People was Just and Temperate, and Religious Ob∣servers of their Laws, their Empire was establisht in its Glory, and Success at∣tended their Arms and Designs. And concerning the 
Chinese
 History, 'tis affirm'd to us, that Virtue alone form∣ed that great Empire, and that nothing concurr'd to its Confirmation more than the Virtuous Lives of their Em∣perours; in so much that Forty four Kings enamour'd with the Virtue of 
Venvam,
 submitted to his Laws. But few of the 
Eastern
 Kingdoms besides, are qualified for such a boast as this.
 Their Emperors generally sheath their Swords in the Blood of all that stand Competitors for the Soveraignty, tho' they be the Sons of the same Parent,


and obliged by a natural Tenderness and Compassion to the mutual Offices of Humanity and Love. For divest∣ing themselves of these Principles, and being whetted with an innate Ambiti∣on for Empire and Command, and led by the in-bred Laws of Self-preserva∣tion, they persue their Claims to the Royal Dignity, either by open Vio∣lence, or secret Machinations, by pri∣vate Treachery, or publick Hostility; not sparing the slaughter of their Bre∣thren, or whomever else they find Can∣didates, or Pretenders to the Crown. This is the Inhumane method pursu'd not only by the 
Ottaman,
 but 
Indian
 Kings, from which 
Aureng-Zebe
 did not decline, in his Cruel and Treacherous Ascent to the Throne For his Father 
Cha-Jehan
 he Imprison'd, till he died: The Head of his Eldest Brother, 
Dara∣cha,
 he commanded to be cut off; his second Brother, 
Sultan Sujah,
 he put to Flight, who was slain in his Retire∣ment; and his youngest Brother, 
Mo∣rad-Bache
 had the same ill Fate with the Eldest, was Beheaded too. Nor was this enough to satiate his Cruelty, or stop his Revenge, but tho' he saved



Rauehenara-Begum,
 his Favourite Sister for assisting his Designs; yet the o∣ther, 
Begum-saheb,
 fell a Victim to his Fury, and was presum'd to be taken off by Poison,
 for her Fidelity to her Fa∣ther in his Distress. Thus a Father and four Children were sacrificed to the Jea∣lousie and Malice of a Victorious Bro∣ther, who by Policy and profound Dis∣simulation gain'd the Crown, and pur∣suing his good Fortune with Success, was seated and Established in the Throne of his Fathers; and notwith∣standing all those execrable Villanies, he liv'd a long time full of Years, a standing Monument of the Divine In∣finite Clemency and Forbearance.


The Crown of 
India
 is not Intail'd by Primogeniture on the Sons, but is ravisht by Force, or carried by Craft of such as do stand in competition for it, who to facilitate the access to it, in∣gratiate with the 
Omrahs
 and Gran∣dees at Court, with the Governours of Provinces, and Principal Ministers of State, to fortify their Pretensions, and secure Parties to themselves both in the Cities and the Camp, against the time they begin to skirmish for the


Royal Inheritance, and try their Wit and Valour for the 
Indian
 Diadem in the Field. And as the 
Japanners,
 in laying the Foundation of a Palace, rip up their Bowels with a Cric, or Dag∣ger, and so sacrifice themselves, ima∣gining that such voluntary Victims are necessary to render both the Own∣ers of the Building and the Habitation Fortunate; so is it the Misfortune of the 
Eastern
 Courts, that they think not the Throne, to which they are advanc'd, secure, or settled, without laying the Foundation of their Reign in the De∣struction of all Rivals to the Crown, and in the Blood of their nearest Rela∣tives, that can pretend to the Imperial Dignity; and make such barbarous Sa∣crifices necessary, for repairing and se∣curing their own undisturb'd Tran∣quility and Ease.


'Till he was possess'd of the Arms and▪ Treasure of his Brother 
Morad-Bacche,
 whom he betray'd by fair Pre∣tences of Friendship, the kindest Ca∣resses and Expressions of Endearment; 
Aureng-Zebe
 pretended himself devoted to Austerity, and that he would rank himself among the Religious 
Faquires,



or 
Derviches
 of the Kingdom, to spend his days in Poverty and Abstinence, and a private retir'd Life; by which new strain of Policy, and the Mask of extraordinary sanctity, he gain'd up∣on the Credulity of the People, as an holy undesigning Prince; 'till by this pious Design he craftily undermined the Opposers of his Honour and Em∣pire, and making use of Religious In∣trigues, and the help of the Planet 
Mer∣cury,
 he soon became Victorious, and got 
Mars
 the Ascendant of his better Fortunes: And by these pretensions to uncommon Holiness, he made way for the perpetration of such execrable 
Crimes,
 as are not very commonly heard of. But if we may measure our Opinions by his,
 and the Maxims he has laid down for Empire, his proceedings will not appear so very black and criminal, since he has perswaded him∣self that Princes are exempt from seve∣ral of those Laws which bind their Subjects, and that Soveraign Heads are not so severely Accountable for the Ju∣stice of their Actions, as the inferiour rank of Men. As if the despotick So∣veraignty he exercis'd on Earth,


gave him a Priviledge and Charter for the same Arbitrary Proceedings with Heaven, and that he might in some measure act as absolutely with the Su∣preme Lord of the Creation, as he does incontroulably with his own Subjects.


The unnatural methods he pursued in wresting the Crown from the Head of his Father, cautions him from giving the least opportunity for such Rebel∣lious practices in his Sons, and to pre∣vent all occasions for such bold and bloody Enterprizes.
 Only 
Cha-Egber
 his fourth Son, who was born of a 
Res∣bout,
 whose Sect among all the rest of the 
Indian
 Inhabitants are justly reputed the most valiant, was encouraged by them to attempt the Crown, and de∣pose his Father from the Soveraignty. These 
Resbouts
 were engaged in an u∣niversal Revolt, formed a formidable Army, and placed 
Cha-Egber,
 who was descended from them by his Mother, at the head of it, that they might raise him betimes to the Monarchy of 
India,
 lest his eldest Brother should get the start of him, and succeed in the Go∣vernment of that vast Empire, after his Father's Death. 
Aureng-Zebe
 not dream∣ing


of such an Attempt, lay very open to surprisal by this Barbarous Design, for want of Forces at that time to guard and secure him. And therefore upon his Son's advancement to the Capital City,
 betook himself to Strata∣gem instead of Arms, and penn'd a Let∣ter in his Son's Name, directed to him∣self, to this effect, 
That he was too sen∣sible of his Duty, to dare to proceed in that disturbance, which the
 Resbouts 
had raised against his Person and his Kingdom, and therefore he led the Ring-leaders and the rest of the Offenders towards the Capital City, to be seized on by the Guards within, that they might be deliver'd up to Justice, and condign Punishment, according to their demerits, which would prove an unquestion∣able Argument to satisfie his Father of his Fidelity.
 This Letter was sent by a faithful Servant of 
Aureng-Zebe
's into his Sons Camp, who pretended to come from him to his Father, but was there stopp'd, and the Letter open'd and read; and the 
Resbouts
 upon it were so inrag'd, that all the Protestations 
Cha-Egber
 could make were impossible to appease them, or perswade their En∣gagement of themselves any longer in


his Service. Some therefore left him, and others refused to advance a step forwards, 'till 
Aureng-Zebe
 had time given him to unite his strength, and muster his Forces; whereby he van∣quisht the Enemy, and forc'd his Son to a speedy flight. In this disgrace and haste he fled to 
Persia,
 where he was honourably entertain'd by that Em∣perour,
 with all those Lords that attend∣ed his Flight; and is since married at that Court to the Emperour's Daugh∣ter. He daily waits for some favou∣rable Revolution when he may return to 
India
 again, whither he hopes to be recall'd by his Father's death; and with the powerful Alliance and Aid of 
Persia,
 and the united Interest of his Friends in 
India,
 he expects to gain the Crown he unfortunately lost, and esta∣blish his glory in that Kingdom, to which he is now forced to continue on Exile.


Whenever the 
Indian
 Emperour is pro∣claim'd, 'tis with Publick Jubilee,
 with Songs and Musick, Mirth and Revel∣lings, with Fireworks and gawdy Shows in all parts of the Kingdom; on this day their Ships hang out their


Flags and Ensigns, and expose their Pendants not only at the Top-mast∣head, but deck the Shrowds with ten or twenty more. The Crown he wears is of invaluable price, and the Throne he ascends is reckon'd at 300 
Lack
 of 
Roupies.
 Each 
Lack
 is one hundred thousand 
Roupies,
 which with us is 11250 
l.
 Sterling, reckoning a 
Roupie
 at 2 
s.
 3 
d.
 Neither are these Solemni∣ties observ'd upon an Anniversary day only, according to 
European
 Customs, but in Cities, Garrisons, and places of note, it obtains a weekly Celebration, not with extraordinary Illuminations, and publick joyful Feasts, but with something of Mirth and Musick more than usual. 
Sunday
 is the day of the Inauguration of the present 
Mogul,
 and solemnized with the Musick of the Trumpets at 
Suratt
 in the Castle there; I wisht when first I saw it, that they had converted the Civil into a Religi∣ous observation of that day.


There is another day in 
India,
 as well as 
England,
 which is eminently remarkable, the 5th of 
November.
 This day the great 
Mogul
 is weighed, and if it's found that he has increas'd in bulk,


above what he weighed the preceding Year,
 this adds excess of Mirth and Joy to the Solemnity; but if he prove lighter in the Scales, this diminishes their Triumphs, and damps their chear∣ful Entertainments. The Grandees and Officers of State prepare for this Feast, two Months before its approach, what costly Jewels and curious Rarities they can any where meet with, which they present to the Emperour at this Cere∣mony; either to secure his Favour, or to ingratiate with him for a more ex∣alted station, or Honourable Employ. The 
Moguls
 are sometimes weighed a∣gainst Silver, which has been distribu∣ted to the Poor.


When any 
Indian
 Subject stands so fair in the Eye of his Prince,
 as to be raised to some advanc'd degree of Trust or Honour, he acquires at the same time a new Name, according to the Prince's Fancy; according to what we read in 
Dan.
 1.7. Thus the preceding Governour of 
Suratt
 was named 
Muck Teer Chan,
 i. e. 
Lord after my own Heart;
 the present is stiled 
Anamat Chan,
 or, 
Conscientious Lord,
 because of his Fidelity and Integrity.


For all the Lands of 
Indoston
 belonging intirely to the 
Mogul,
 the 
Omrahs
 there cannot derive their Titles from their Earldoms, Lordships, or Mansion-Hou∣ses (as with us) because they are none of their Propriety, only Tenants at will, during the 
Mogul
's pleasure; and there∣fore the 
Mogul
 confers upon them such Names of Dignity, as by their personal Conduct or Accomplishment he thinks they merit. And as he bestows Titles proper to his Generals, of 
Invincible,
 or 
Victorious;
 so to his 
Nabobs,
 or Gover∣nours, he bethinks himself of Names suitable to their Stations, or his Opini∣on of their Excellencies and Endow∣ments. This is a common thing pra∣ctis'd likewise in other Kingdoms of the 
East,
 as at 
Siam;
 the King there gives Names not only to his Domesticks and 
Mandarins,
 or Nobles, but to his very Elephants. Tho his own Name is in∣dustriously conceal'd, lest his Enemies by some Enchantment might work up∣on it. Thus 
Pharaoh
 called 
Joseph
's Name 
Zaphnath-Paaneah, Gen.
 41.45. and 
Job
 called his Eldest Daughter 
Je∣mimah, i. e.
 clear as the Day: The 2d. 
Keziah, i. e.
 Pleasant as 
Cassia,
 or sweet


Spice: The 3d. 
Keren-happuck,
 that is Horn, or strength of Beauty.


The dependance upon the Prince's Favour makes Obsequiousness fashion∣able,
 and Flattery practis'd in all the Courts of the 
East:
 So that tho' they require an account of their Affairs, and expect to be informed; yet they think it a diminution to their Grandeur, to be acquainted with any thing that may disgust, or told any thing that looks displeasing. Except among the 
Chinese,
 with whom the liberty of Ad∣monishing their Emperour was esta∣blished by a Law,
 which impowred them to use importunate Applications to him upon any failure, and caus'd them instantly to remind him of taking care of his Life and Actions, and that the virtuous Pattern of his Royal Be∣haviour, was the best and only method for deriving Justice, Integrity, and Loyalty upon his Magistrates and People. They likewise admonished him, that if he deviated from the transcen∣dant Virtues of his Ancestors, his Sub∣jects would inevitably digress from their Duties of Allegiance and Fidelity to him. For it is a receiv'd Maxim a∣mong


those People, 
That the Subjects are like Ears of Corn, wherewith a Field is cover'd, and the Morals of their Em∣perour are like a Wind, which inclines them which way it pleaseth.


But the 
Indian
 Emperours are incon∣troulable in what they say, as well as in their Actions; so far, that it is an al∣lowed Maxim in this Court,
 
That if they say at Noon-day it is Night, you are to answer, Behold the Moon and the Stars!
 This flattery of their Subjects has made them fancy themselves more than De∣mi-Gods, and vaunt themselves in the most exorbitant swelling Titles. Thus the Emperour of 
Japan
 calls himself Son of the Sun;
 and for this Reason, when the Imperial Diadem is upon his Head, will never after appear in the sight of the Moon, for fear of deba∣sing his Gratness, and because he thinks it would Eclipse his Glory. Thus the present 
Mogul
's Father stiled himself 
Cha-Jehan, i. e.
 King of the World: and the Name of 
Aureng-Zebe
 imports the Ornament of the Throne; are no less Extravagant than the rest, they are these,
 The Husband of good Fortune, the God of great Provinces,


King of the greatest Kings, the Lord of Horsemen, the Master of them which cannot speak, Emperour of three Empe∣rours, Conqueror of all he sees, and Keeper of all he Conquers, Dread∣ful to the Eight Coasts of the World, Vanquisher of the 
Mahumetans,
 and Lord of the 
East, West, North, South,
 and of the Sea, which now Ruleth and Governeth this World.


Thus they exalt their Pomp and Vani∣ty by these proud and Swelling Titles, and expect there an Obeysance little less than of Adoration from their Sub∣jects and Adressors. The 
Tailim,
 or deep 
Salem,
 which is the usual Salu∣tation to the 
Mogul,
 is, First to kiss the Ground with the Hand, then to touch the Breast with it, and afterwards raise it to the Head; and all this thrice re∣peated, when any person approaches his Imperial Presence. The ordinary 
Indian
 Salute, is only the lifting up of the Hand to the Fore-Head, and if it be to a Person of Eminence or Supe∣riority, to bend the Head too when 'tis touched. The 
Salem
 of the Religious 
Bramins,
 is to join their Hands together, and spreading them first, make a mo∣tion


towards their Head, and then stretch them out; and the 
Salem
 of greatest Respect, is to take hold of the Feet, and touch them with their Head; and if this is occasion'd by the commit∣ting of some Offence, laying the Hands upon the Supplicant's Back is a sign of Pardon; and the Offender generally holds fast the Feet, till he feels it upon his Back. The 
Chineses
 give their Prince nine Prostrations, accounting that Number sacred and lucky. And the King of 
Sciam
 requires not only a flection of the Body, but a profound Prostration before him.
 This Respect a surly 
English
 Sailer being unacquaint∣ed with, neglected to give him when he came before him, and when he was threatned by the Attendants for not yielding to this submissive Obeysance, he boldly replyed, 
That he esteem'd his own Prince as Great and Powerful as any, and to him he never gave more observance, than bowing his Body, and uncovering his Head, and he was resolv'd never to shew a greater Civility to any Prince in the World than to his own.


There are different Opinions con∣cerning the number of Kingdoms which


are reduc'd to the 
Indian
 Scepter, some reckon Thirty Nine, or Forty. 
Boterus
 affirms there are Forty Seven, a later Author affirms the number of Provin∣ces in 
Indoston
 to be only Twenty; who tells us likewise, that the Annual Reve∣nues amount to above three hundred and thirty 
French
 Millions, which does more than double the Incomes of any the most Potent Monarchs on Earth.


The vast Tract of Land to which this large Empire is extended,
 reaches near 2000 Miles in length, some say more; which makes it necessary for the 
Mogul,
 whose Territories are so large, to employ a numerous Army to awe his Infinite multitude of People, and keep them in an absolute Subjection. Seve∣ral hundred thousand Soldiers are the least that are maintain'd in Pay; some affirm he allows Pay for one Million of Horses,
 and for every Horse and Man about eighteen pounds, whose Wages seldom run on beyond a Month or two, because by them they have their only Subsistence. And did he not constantly clear their Arrears, and keep on foot continually such a Potent Army, he could never be able to command the


turbulent 
Rajahs,
 nor prevent their Plotts and Insurrections; who notwith∣standing frequently molest his Govern∣ment, pretend a right to their Con∣quer'd Dominions, and raise Armies a∣gainst him with that Tribute which they refuse to pay. But sure it were better, instead of all those needless re∣peated Conquests, he could assure him∣self of fixing an Empire in the Hearts of Loyal, tho' less numerous Subjects.


The frequent Revolts in 
India
 render those parts very miserable,
 and reduce the Inhabitants to a very distressed State. For hoping to retrieve their Li∣berty, and regain the Kingdoms they have lost, they often declare for a 
Ra∣jah,
 which is a Native 
Indian
 Prince, and stand by him till the 
Mogul
 over-powers their Forces, defeats their Re∣bellion, stints their Progress, and re∣duces them to a tame Obedience again. So that one while the 
Mogul
 comes upon a City,
 and demands the Contri∣bution of so many Thousand Gold Moors, or else he threatens the Rase∣ing its Foundations, Pillaging the Hou∣ses, and converting them into Smoak and Flames. When he is retreated,


the 
Rajah
's Army flies upon them with Fury and Hunger, and storms their Towns, and threatens them with Fire and Sword as their inevitable Fate, if they offer to delay the pay∣ment of so many thousand Gold Rou∣pies more. Or if these formidable Threats are not listned to, they take that by Rapine, which was civilly de∣manded, ravage the Country, and load themselves with Plunder and Spoil. Which makes Fear and Distress, Poverty and Famine the universal Air and Genius of those unquiet Abodes. This was the unhappy condition of 
Su∣ratt,
 An. 1664. when 
Rajah Sivagy
 plundred it for Forty Days together, carried off in Gold, Silver, and Jewels an Infinite Sum, without sparing any part of it, but the Habitations of the 
English
 and 
French,
 and the Castle, who defended themselves with their Ca∣non.


Sometimes the Conquest of one part of the Kingdom is the loss of another, for that 
Rajah
 who without reluctancy submitted to the 
Mogul
's Power, while his Camp was near, immediately dis∣claims it, when he knows it at a di∣stance;


which Commotions bring on the 
Mogul
 endless Troubles and Ex∣pence.


A mighty 
Rajah
 is now abroad, in his Expedition to the Coast of 
Choro∣mandel,
 where he expects Recruits of Men and Money; he has secur'd a strong Party upon the Coast of 
Mala∣bar,
 and it's believ'd will in a short time appear in the Field with very Potent Forces. If his Martial Arms be proportionably as extensive as his Natural, they will certainly reach very far, and stretch his Authority far∣ther than any Potentates in the 
East;
 for they are so long, that as he stands, his Hands reach down below his Knees. And may be the 
Indians,
 who upon this account are apt to harbour Superstiti∣ous Thoughts concerning him, may be the easier won to his Alliance and De∣signs; if this be not a feign'd Report.


The 
Mogul
's Army are pursuing their Conquests with all vigour towards Cape 
Comeron,
 the Southermost Pro∣montory of 
India,
 where are several Inferiour Princes not yet attempted up∣on, the Conquering of whom take up


the thoughts, and is the main Object of 
Aureng-Zebe
's Ambition.


Besides the vast Army which is al∣ways Incamped, and ready for any Expedition and onset, the several 
Na∣bobs
 and Vice-Roys are obliged to keep continually in Pay considerable Forces, for maintaining their own Port, and the Peace of the Provinces where they preside. Soveraign Princes do not exceed some of these in point of State and Income. The 
Nabob
 or Gover∣nour of 
Bengal
 was reputed to have left behind him at his Death,
 twenty Courous of Roupies: A Courou is an hundred thousand Lacks, a Lack is an hundred thousand Roupies, a Padan is an hundred thousand Courous, a Nil is an hundred thousand Padans; Lacks, Courous, Padans, and Nils, rise by a gradual advancement of an hundred thousand higher one than another.


Aureng-Zebe
 seldom leaves the Camp,
 but both he and his 
Haram
 keep their Tents Winter and Summer in the Field. His numerous Army has a dai∣ly supply of all Provisions and Neces∣saries from all parts of the Empire,
 in as great plenty and order as any of


its Cities can afford them; and whatever the Kingdom yields, may be with as much ease purchased here, as in any publick Fair. So that there is always in the Camp a multitude of People brought thither, as large almost as the Army, who come thither, some out of Curiosity, others out of Friendship and Relation, but the most for Sale of their Goods, which the Soldiers take off, by whom they live, and from whom they have their Subsistence.


Where-ever the 
Mogul
 removes his Camp, the Generals and Officers, as well as private Centinels, still pitch their Tents in the same Position and Place in respect to his, and one another, as they formerly were posted in; so that he who once knows where such a Captain had his standing, may readily be directed to it, though he has decamped from the place he left an Hundred Miles. For all are obliged to the same distance, and to the same Station and Quarter in relation to one another, and the Emperour's Tent, in whatever Ground they pitch their Tents.


Before the 
Mogul
 begins to move his Camp, to set out upon a Progress,
 or undertake any small Journey; and be∣fore any Omrah, or Person of Note sets forward to Travel, the way they must pass is measured out by Line, by a Ser∣vant appointed for that Trouble; and a just account both of the distance and number of Miles is brought to them, before the Journey is begun: And so exact are they in maintaining this piece of 
Indian
 State, of measuring the Road, that though they have travell'd that way often, and are sufficiently know∣ing in all its Paths, yet without this Ceremony they are loath to stir.


Besides the Army,
 and the several Nabobs and Governours of Provinces and Cities, of Towns and Castles, which drain his Treasure, and put him upon immense Expences, the 
Indian
 Emperour maintains daily at least Four or Five Hundred Elephants, with Ca∣mels, Mules, and other Beasts of Burthen; some for the War, and others for his Women and Attendants, his Carriage and Provisions in the Field. The prin∣cipal of all his stately Campaign Ele∣phants has a stated extraordinary Al∣lowance


of Sugar mixt with his Pro∣vender, and Jaggary Rack, which is a kind of 
Aqua Vitae,
 with his Water; which consume the 
Mogul
 Five Hun∣dred Roupies every Month, that is, near Sixty Pounds Sterling.


These mighty Animals are in high esteem in all the Oriental Kingdoms, especially at 
Siam,
 whose Soveraign is renown'd for his Respect to the White Elephant, upon the Perswasion he has of its being inspired with the Soul of some supreme Prince. And from the Bulk and Strength, the Sensibleness and Docility of that Creature, they infer commonly, that nothing less than the Soul of some Illustrious Prince, or migh∣ty Heroe, can animate it, and be re∣ceiv'd into a Body so stately and large. The 
Achen
 Elephants are most looked upon for their Teeth,
 because that Ivo∣ry they say, maintains its Whiteness, and turns not Yellow, as other does. They say that it's thirty Years before the Elephants come to their full growth.


The wild Elephants, which the 
Mo∣gul
 and other Princes keep tame, are taken different ways. Sometimes by digging Pits in the Ground, and co∣vering


them with false Earth, in the Paths frequented by the Elephants, which walking upon it deceives their Weight, and suddenly they drop down. But if the unweildy Animal chances to evade this Covert Contrivance, he grows very vigilant ever after, and wa∣rily with his Trunk examines all su∣spected Ground he is likely to tread up∣on. Sometimes they decoy the Male with a Female Elephant bred up for that purpose, which leads him into a narrow Passage, hedged in so strongly on both sides with Trunks of Trees, and many pieces of Timber, that he can neither turn about his monstrous Body to step backwards, nor remove with all his mighty Strength the Obstacles that inclose and barracade him, till he is chafed and spent, and thoroughly in∣tangled. After this he is taken and led home between two others that are tame, and his Wildness presently wears off, and in less than a Fortnight's time he quietly submits to Discipline, be∣thinks himself, and grows familiar. The Female Elephant receives the Male lying upon her Back,
 contrary to the Custom of other Animals; and the


Male is said to carry his Testicles be∣tween his Ears. After they are taken they seldom Ingender, tho' sometimes they burn with a lustful Heat, which is not extinguished but by Fire brought near them, or the Blood of the Riders, if they chance at that time to be upon them.


The Princes of 
Indoston
 who attend the Court, and all the 
Omrahs
 and Prin∣cipal Officers of the Crown, observe always a due Respect, and keep a con∣venient Distance to the awful Person of the Emperour. So that whenever he thinks fit to ascend an Elephant, and mount himself on that lofty Creature to take the Air, the 
Omrahs,
 in a lower Order, ride only upon Horses. When he seats himself in his Palanquin, then do they walk in a lowly Posture on Foot after him; shewing in all things a submissive Deference to his Greatness, and profound Respect to his eminently August Majesty: And till he gives the Word, no Man dares mount before him. And as if the Words of his Mouth were Oracular, no Sentence of moment proceeds from the Emperour, but the 
Ormahs
 greedily catch it, and


cry out, 
Karamat! Karamat! Wonder! Wonder!
 And if any Person of Note in 
India
 is seen by an inferiour at a di∣stance, both on Horseback, the meaner Person lights from his Horse, and there stands till his Superiour passes by him.


The Mahometan Religion, of which the 
Mogul
 is a zealous Professor, is that which is spread very far, and is chiefly countenanced in 
India;
 the 
Mogul
 ne∣ver neglecting the Hours of Devotion, nor any thing, which in his Sense may denominate him a sincere Believer; in∣somuch that there spread a Report, a little before I left 
Suratt,
 that his ar∣dent Zeal had carried him to design a long Pilgrimage for 
Meccha,
 to visit the Venerable Shrine of their False Pro∣phet. His eldest Son Sultan 
Mozum
 was to be left Inheritor of the Throne, to secure his peaceable Possession; yet would not this defend the Claims from the Royal Brothers, who are ready to dispute it with their Wit and Courage, with all the Force and Art of War. And 'tis not unlikely,
 whenever the Crown becomes vacant, and is under a Contest, but that 
Cha-Egber,
 Son-in-law to the 
Persian
 Emperour, will in


that Martial Lottery gain the Prize, and defeat the other Pretenders. Which if it should happen,
 and the 
English
 should be assisting to his Designs at that time, either by accommodating him with Ships from 
Gombrone,
 or befriend∣ing him at 
Suratt,
 they might expect very considerable Advantages in their Trade and Customs, both in 
India
 and the 
Persian
 Gulph.


The 
Mogul
 delights much in Prose∣lyting all the 
Rajahs
 he conquers,
 and bringing them to the Mahometan Faith, which has much exasperated those Grandees, and the Gentile Sects of his Kingdom. And he was so sen∣sibly taken with a Horse presented to him by an 
English
 Merchant,
 that he commanded him to be fed near his own Apartment, and to be frequently brought forth before him, to delight his Eyes with the daily pleasant Specta∣cle; for no other Reason, but because he observ'd him match a Horse which 
Mahomet
 was wont to ride, and nearly resembled in Shapes and Colour, as he somewhere read, a stately Steed of the Grand Prophet's.


The whole Kingdom of 
Indoston
 is intirely the Possession of the 
Mogul
's,
 who appoints himself Heir to all his Subjects; so that neither the Widow, nor Children of a General, can per∣emptorily challenge one Piece after his Decease, without the Emperour's boun∣teous Indulgence. He that tills the Ground, and spends his time in Agri∣culture, is allowed half the Product for his Pains, and the other Moyety is re∣serv'd for the King, which is collected by Under-Officers, who give in their Accounts to the Superiours in the Pro∣vinces, and they discount to the Publick Exchequer. Only for the Encourage∣ment of Trade in Cities and Maritime Towns, he dispenses with the Mer∣chants building their Houses, and the Propriety of them descending in their Families; very few are allowed Pater∣nal Inheritances; but even all this is the extraordinary Grace and Favour of the Prince, and revocable at his Plea∣sure. His Will likewise is the Law,
 and his Word incontestably decides all Controversies among them. So that he is the main Ocean of Justice and Equity, and from him all the smaller


Rivulets of Wealth flow,
 and to him they all pay Tribute, and return again. He generally determines with exact Justice and Equity; for there is no pleading of Peeridge or Priviledge be∣fore the Emperour, but the meanest Man is as soon heard by 
Aureng-Zebe
 as the chief 
Omrah.
 Which makes the 
Omrahs
 very circumspect of their Acti∣ons, and punctual in their Payments; because all Complaints against them are readily adjusted, and they never want jealous Rivals at Court who are willing to bring them into Disgrace with their King for any Fault.


Since the Conquest of 
Viziapour,
 the Diamond Mines are claim'd and pos∣sess'd by the 
Indian
 Emperour, who for some time since thought fit to shut them up.
 They formerly paid to the King of 
Golconda
 so much hourly for the liberty of digging, whether they were fortunate in finding any Diamond or no; a Pagod, which is a piece of Gold valued there at Nine Shillings, was the stated Price for an Hours time. We have an Account, that he reserv'd ano∣ther Diamond Ground in his Country for his own Use, which yielded him


daily several Ounces, whenever he im∣ploy'd his Labourers to work, which were reckon'd to be near Six Thousand, whose very Wages consum'd a great part of the Gains.


Those that dig the Ground are nar∣rowly look'd to,
 and examin'd at their Departure, that nothing be privately convey'd or stole away; and yet they sometimes escape all Discovery, by slipping a Stone into their Mouths, or thrusting it upwards in their lower Parts, or by bribing of the Overseers. By this means we sometimes meet with large Stones very valuable. Two I saw at 
Suratt,
 the smaller was a sort of Table-Diamond, rated at Twelve Thousand Pounds; the other was lar∣ger, and exceeded the Price of the o∣ther almost Eight Thousand Pounds. All Stones of such a Size are Royalties, and Sacred to the Crown; and who∣ever finds them, or wheresoever they are heard of, they are presently seized, and taken for the use of the 
Mogul.
 Therefore the Owner of these Noble Diamonds solemnly engaged our Secre∣sie, and bound us to Silence, before we were permitted a sight of them. The


Stones of 
India
 are not so rich, or of equal Repute with those of the Island 
Borneo,
 whose Sparkling and Bright∣ness gives a glorious and surpassing Splendour. The Diamonds are found rough, cover'd with a Coat or Shell, which is taken off, and then the Dia∣mond is polish'd, and cut in such Fi∣gures, as the natural Shape of the Stone, or the Design of the Lapidary inclines to.
 The Art of discerning the excellence of Diamonds by the Eye, is very curious; because there is such an Affinity between the Brightness of Stones, that some eminent 
Indian
 Jew∣ellers have been impos'd upon by false ones brought from 
Europe;
 because they shot such Rays, and the Lustre with which they shin'd was so ex∣traordinary. But the Hammer and Scales discover'd that Fallacy, which the Eyes could not; they were softer than a genuine Diamond, and lighter than one of the same size: For no Stone comes near a Diamond in hardness; nor, of the same magnitude, in Weight. Diamonds take their Estimate from their Magnitude,
 Splendour, Figure, and Water; for some Persons value a


Diamond of such a Water much more than of another; and some are pleas'd with such a sort of Cut, beyond any else. Thus a fair Rose-Diamond of Black Water and Diamond Cut was of general Esteem with some 
Europeans
 at 
Suratt,
 whilst a White Water gain'd a Repute with the 
Dutch,
 and Table-Diamonds were with them of best E∣steem. The 
Moors
 exalt the Rate of such a Diamond, whose Surface is cut in very minute Figures, much less than what the 
Europeans
 affect, though in all things else the Diamond was equally good and valuable. For as the use of a Diamond, and all other Stones, is very inconsiderable, in respect of that high Value which the Fancy of Man and common Custom has put upon them; so are their Rates too very va∣riable and uncertain, as this Instance of a Rubie will make out. A Rubie,
 which in Perfection is a Stone superiour to a Diamond, made this gradual Ex∣altation of its Rates in 
India.
 It was sold at first at the rate of 400 Roupies,
 afterwards at 600, then at 800, then at 1200; from this it rose to 1600, thence to 2000, after this it mounted


to 2400, then to 2800, from which it was sold for 3000, and lately for 3200. Thus the Fancy of the Purchaser ad∣vanc'd it at length Seven Hundred 
per Cent.
 beyond the Original Price it was first reckon'd at. There perfect Rubies are scarce attainable, those of a deep clear Colour are rarely seen, which put Men upon a hot Chace after them when they are heard of, and inhaunces their Va∣lue and Esteem.


Notwithstanding all these Diamonds and immense Treasure, of which the 
Mogul
 is Absolute Master, yet is not his Mind satisfied, nor his Desires abated by his Accessions, they rather stretch and swell the more, and push him on to aspire to that real Character, which his Father assum'd, of being 
King of the World.
 So little has either Increase of Wealth, or Extent of Power, heal'd his restless Faculties, or compos'd the unruly Turbulence of his Spirit. How∣ever, had 
Aureng-Zebe
 laid his Schemes of Victory only towards the 
Indian
 Princes, and those potent Neighbours, from whose Conquest he might expect to reap some Glory; this methinks would have carried with it a greater


Air of Majesty and Grandeur, than that meaner Action which is recorded of him in 
India,
 of stripping the 
Faquires
 of their Wealth and Jewels.


It seems this Prince was minded to compass a little Treasure somewhere, and the only Method he pitch'd upon for it, was to make a Booty of the 
Fa∣quires.
 These 
Faquires
 nearly resem∣ble the 
Romish
 Mendicants in some things, their Character I shall expati∣ate upon hereafter. The Emperour therefore causes Proclamation to be made through all the Provinces of his Kingdom, 
That all
 Faquires 
should make ready to repair to a splendid Entertainment, which he design'd to prepare for them.
 The News of this Royal Banquet was e∣steem'd so honourable an Instance of Condescention in the Emperour to these poor Men, that without any further Summons or Invitation they instantly prepar'd and flockt from all the re∣motest parts to come and receive it. When they were come, and had satis∣fied themselves with the sumptuous Feast, and overjoy'd at the Thoughts of being Guests to such a Noble Ban∣quet, to which they had been called by


the Person of their Emperour, they now address themselves to him with grateful Acknowledgments for his Bounty in those Royal undeserv'd Fa∣vours, so far beyond what the Mean∣ness and Poverty of their Condition would suffer them so much as to think of. And withal wishing him, that Glory and Success might be the distin∣guishing Characters of his prosperous Reign for many Years, they humbly craved Liberty of departing to their proper Dwellings. To which the Em∣perour reply'd to this Effect, 
I would not have you think that I have yet forgot the Kindness I had for you and your Pro∣fession, in my former Years. 'Tis not the being seated upon the Throne of
 India, 
that can make me overlook the Consideration of your Poverty, or the Relation I had to you, e'er Fortune and your Good Wishes rais'd me to the Glory of my Ancestors, and the Soveraignty I now enjoy. And therefore as you have thought fit to taste of my Banquet, and express your selves pleas'd with the Entertainment; so I expect from you likewise the acceptance of some Raiments I have provided for your Ʋse, to prevent your Return in that ragged Dress; and that


the World may see after your Departure hence, what Kindness I had for you, in conferring these more lasting Favours upon you.
 At this they unanimously voted for their old Cloaths, as more agreea∣ble to their Condition, and that he had sufficiently honour'd them by his splen∣did Repast. But the Servants, who stood by, immediately unstript the 
Fa∣quirs,
 and brought forth fresh Garments for their old, in which were found a∣bundance of Jewels, Gold, and Pre∣cious Stones, enough by far to overpay the Expence; as 
Aureng-Zebe
 by his former Acquaintance and ancient Inti∣macy with them could well discover. This Relation which I had from a Gen∣tleman at 
Suratt
 agrees very well with 
Auren-Zebe
's Policy; but methinks it suits not well with his Honesty and Greatness.


The Insolence of the 
Portuguese,
 as well as 
Rajahs,
 gives likewise some Di∣sturbance to this Prince, and has drawn down his Arms against their Forces, which has driven several of them from the adjacent Islands to repair for shelter to our Island of 
Bombay.
 The 
Mogul
's Army has made several Inroads into


their Country, plunder'd some small Towns, and threatens 
Basseen.
 For the 
Portuguese
 Governour of that Town inticed from a 
Rajah
 that lived near him a very beautiful Woman of the 
Bramin
 Cast, which was after a while sent for by the 
Rajah,
 and remanded back again by twenty or thirty Soldi∣ers. But the Lady's Charms blinded his Reason, and biassed both his Justice and Civility, made him refuse to dis∣miss her, and treat the Messengers with such Violence, that the 
Mogul
 in Vindication of the 
Rajah,
 encourag'd his storming of the Town.


Other Reasons are used for the 
Mo∣gul
's present infesting the Country of the 
Portuguese,
 and for sending three several Parties of Men, pillaging, burn∣ing and destroying all before them. One is,
 that the 
Portuguese
 burnt for∣merly a 
Cogee
 at 
Goa,
 who is a Person skill'd in their Law. Another Reason is, because the 
Portuguese
 proselyte the Children of all Persons deceas'd among them, whether their Parents are 
Moors
 or 
Pagans,
 and seize their Estates into the Church; which raises a loud Cla∣mour against them, and grievous Com∣plaints


to the 
Mogul.
 Some ascribe the Hatred and Hostility of the 
Moors
 at this time to these two insufferable Acti∣ons of the 
Portuguese.
 Besides all this, the Religion of the 
Portuguese
 is very offensive to this Emperour,
 who carries such an invincible Antipathy to Idola∣try, and all sort of Adoration of Ima∣ges, that he has now suppressed the greatest part of all the Pagodes of his Dominions, where his Pagan Subjects incens'd and invok'd the Idols. Nay, this is such an Abomination to the Ma∣hometan Belief, that the 
Moguls
 allow not the Representation of any Creature that has Life, even upon their Tea-Cups and China Ware, nor admit the Figure of any Animal upon their At∣lasses or other Silks. Therefore the 
Portuguese
 Religion being grosly tainted with this manner of False Worship, has render'd them very detestable to this sort of Men, as well as other things have made them odious to the 
Arabians
 at 
Muscat.
 They that were formerly the Glory and Terror of the Eastern Seas, who flowed with Wealth,
 and all the Riches of the 
Indian
 and the 
Persian
 Gulph, are now as low and de∣clining,


as they formerly were power∣ful and in a splendid state. The 
Mus∣catters
 daily increase their Naval For∣ces, and prevail against them inconte∣stably at Sea, by fitting out against them Ships both of Burthen and Strength, and manning them with skilful, bold, and adventurous Sailers. Only two years since they built in the River of 
Suratt
 a very comely stout Ship of above a Thousand Tun, which carried at least an Hundred Guns.


The 
Mogul
 is now past Eighty Years of Age, but yet administers the weigh∣ty Affairs of his vast Kingdom, and re∣tains a Vigour in his Discerning Fa∣culties.
 Whatever he eats is first ta∣sted by his Daughter, and passes un∣der the Chops or Seals of three or four principal 
Omrahs;
 and his Drink is the Water of the River 
Ganges,
 which is reputed Sacred throughout all his Kingdom, and is said to sanctifie the Natives, whether they drink, or bath in it. I fancy the Native Purity of the Water may give it this Credit and Re∣putation, because they say it has that singular Quality of our River 
Thames,
 that it never remains corrupt long;


and a Quart of it is lighter by much than any other Water. This Water is dearer to him, than if he had drunk 
Europe
 Wine; for it is brought to him over Land in Copper Jarrs, tinn'd with∣in, upon Mens Shoulders, or upon Beasts of Burthen, several Hundred Miles. Thus the ancient Kings of 
Persia
 drank no other Water, than that of the River 
Elaeus
 or 
Chospes,
 because of the Esteem they had of its Excellence.


Whenever his Health requires Phy∣sick,
 he expects the Physician should lead the way, take Pill for Pill, Dose for Dose, of the same which is admi∣nistred to him; that he may see the O∣peration upon the Body of the Physici∣an, before he will venture upon it him∣self.
 He never violates his Obligations to Abstinence, by tasting the Juice of the Grape, which the 
Omrahs
 dispense with, and are fond of, and buy it up at any rate, if they can by any private Method be accommodated with it in the Camp.


He formerly admir'd the Fair Sex; but Old Age, and the Decay of Nature, keep him at a farther Distance at pre∣sent from his 
Haram.
 His Women are


all closely guarded, not visible to any, but himself and his Eunuchs, whose Virile Parts are cut off smooth,
 to pre∣vent the least Temptation from the Sex; so that whenever there is need, they are forced to the use of a Quill in making Urine. And all the Women of Fashion in 
India
 are close penn'd in by their jealous Husbands, who for∣bid them the very sight of all Stran∣gers. However the Watch is neither so careful, nor their Modesty so blame∣less, but that they sometimes will look abroad for Variety, as well as their ro∣ving Husbands do. A Passage of which I shall here insert.
 A Gentlewoman, viciously inclin'd, contrives one Day to get abroad, with a trusty Familiar of her Acquaintance, though totally a Stranger to her new Husband. She freely imparts her lewd Intentions, earnestly requests her Fidelity, and withal desires she would vouchsafe to take the Message upon her self, and walk into the Bazar, and there espy what comely Person she could meet with, proper, lovely, young, and handsom, and conduct him privately to such Apartments as she had provi∣ded.


The Friend, thus instructed, goes abroad, views, and culls out from the rest in the Bazar the most amiable Per∣son she could meet with, and intreat∣ing him to step aside, discovers the In∣triegue, and then conducts him to the place appointed. The Gallant it seems was Husband to the Gentlewoman that expected him, who seeing him come near the Gate, was all in Confu∣sion, and quite confounded at the sight of his unfortunate Approach. But she found it was no time to dally, or de∣lay her Resolutions, and therefore in∣stantly summon'd all her Thoughts, and after a little Pause, threw her self directly upon the Cot or Bed that was by, and put the Covering over her Face. Her Husband, ignorant whom she was, and knowing for what Intent he was sent for, begins immediately to disturb her, and by and by endeavours to uncover her Face. At which she rose up in a seeming Rage, and told him, 
For shame, Sir, I have often heard of your Pranks and loose Intriegues abroad, but my Charity made me willing to unbelieve it, till this Minute has given me an invincible Argu∣ment, for assuring me of the Truth of what


was spoken. I sent on purpose to find you out, and plac'd my self as a Stranger here to entertain you; and hither you came, I find, with dishonest Resolutions, and treach∣erous Designs to our Nuptial Bed. Can you pretend to so much Tenderness and Af∣fection for me, and yet listen to the least Temptation that courts or calls you from me? Was I ever unfaithful, or cool in my Affection, that might thereby drive you from my Embraces, to follow Strangers you never heard of?
 At this rate she turn'd the Argument upon himself, made him the only Person guilty of these wanton Amours, and with a gargled Mouth endeavour'd to wipe off all the Defilements of her Thoughts, and to render her Innocence as clear as her Excuse. She knew that a Conjugal Affection is very apt to grow jealous upon any apparent suspicion of mutual Fidelity, and that nothing sooner ex∣cites and ferments the Rage of a Man, than the apprehension of a Partner in his Bed. But yet this Jealousie is much extinct among the Inhabitants upon the Coast of 
Malabar,
 where the Hus∣bands, even the prime Nobility, to compleat the Welcom of their Enter∣tainments,


offer the Familiarity of their Wives; and esteem the rejecting this Civility as an Affront. Two 
English
 Merchants some time before I came to 
India,
 were invited abroad, and after Dinner were tempted with this kind of Treat; but the Piety of one of them kept him from it, whilst the immodest Frolicks of the other intic'd him on to the use of an unlawful Pleasure. And many of their Women by their usual Custom in these cases, quite contrary to that of other Nations, have gain'd the Name of 
Malabar Quills.








THE CITY OF 
SURATT,
 AND ITS INHABITANTS.


THE City of 
Suratt
 lies in 21 De∣grees, and some odd Minutes of North Latitude. 'Tis by 
Ptolomy
 call'd 
Muziris,
 and is situated upon a River Ten or Twelve Miles distant from the Sea. The Name of the River is 
Tap∣py,
 or 
Tindy,
 which rises from the Mountain of 
Decan,
 and from thence falls down through 
Brampore,
 and by 
Meanders
 from 
Suratt
 glides down gent∣ly into the Ocean. The Circumfe∣rence


of it, with the Suburbs, is be∣tween two and three 
English
 Miles, tending somewhat in its Position to the Form of a Semicircle or Half Moon, because of the winding of the River, to which half of it adjoyns. It is for∣tified with a Wall, which is flankt at certain Distances with Towers and Battlements, occasion'd by the frequent Incursions of the Enemies; but its greatest Strength is in the Castle, which commands not only the Ships and Boats in the River, but likewise guards the City by Land.


The Castle is built towards the South West part of the City,
 having a River to defend it on one side, and a Ditch on the other. It is built square, and fortified at each Corner with a large Tower, containing various Lodg∣ings, and furnish'd with all Conveni∣ences fit for accommodating the Go∣vernour, and has several Canons moun∣ted upon the Walls.


The Entrance into the City is by six or seven Gates,
 where are Centinels fixt continually, requiring an Account, upon the least Suspicion, of all that en∣ter in, or pass out of the City.


The Houses are many of them fair and stately, tho' unproportionable to the Wealth of the Inhabitants, who are always concern'd to conceal their Riches, and therefore never exceed in any Luxurious Furniture, lest it should prove too powerful a Temptation to the Avarice of the 
Mogul.
 They are flat roof'd, or rather made a little shelving, after the manner of the Build∣ings in 
Spain
 and 
Portugal,
 cover'd with Tiles, and the Walls are made of Brick or Stone. The Windows are without Glass, and kept open for the Convenience of the fresh Air; and the Floors both of the lower and upper Stories are all Terrass'd to make them cool. But the poorer sort, and such as inhabit the Skirts of the City, live much meaner, in Houses, whose Walls are only Bambous at a Foot distance, with Reeds wove through them; and their Covering is only Cajan, or Palm-leaves of Trees, which gives them the common Name of Cajan-Houses.


The Streets are some too nar∣row, but in many places of a conve∣nient breadth; and in an Evening, e∣specially near the Bazar, or Market-place,


are more populous than any part of 
London;
 and so much throng'd, that 'tis not very easie to pass through the multitude of 
Bannians
 and other Merchants that expose their Goods. For here they stand with their Silks and Stuffs in their Hands, or upon their Heads, to invite such as pass by to come and buy them.


In the midst of the City is a spacious vacant place, called 
Castle-Green,
 be∣cause of its nearness to the Castle, on which are laid all sorts of Goods in the open Air, both Day and Night, ex∣cepting the 
Mussoun
 time. And here the 
English, French,
 and 
Dutch,
 with the Natives, place their Bales, and prepare them as Loadings for their Ships.


The Governour of the Castle is ap∣pointed by the 
Mogul;
 and his Autho∣rity seldom stretches beyond the space of three Years, in all which time he is a real Prisoner under the appearance of a high Commander, and under a se∣vere and strict Engagement never to pass without the Walls of his Castle; but to be continually upon his Guard, in a constant readiness for any Emer∣gence


or Surprize, all the time he is in the Government.


Suratt
 is reckon'd the most fam'd Emporium of the 
Indian
 Empire, where all Commodities are vendible, though they never were there seen before. The very Curiosity of them will engage the Expectation of the Purchaser to sell them again with some Advantage, and will be apt to invite some other by their Novelty, as they did him, to venture upon them. And the River is very commodious for the Importa∣tion of Foreign Goods, which are brought up to the City in Hoys and Yachts, and Country Boats, with great Convenience and Expedition. And not only from 
Europe,
 but from 
China, Persia, Arabia,
 and other remote parts of 
India,
 Ships unload abundance of all kinds of Goods, for the Ornament of the City, as well as inriching of the Port.


It is renown'd for Traffick through all 
Asia,
 both for rich Silks, such as At∣lasses, Cuttanees, Sooseys, Culgars, Allajars, Velvets, Taffaties, and Sat∣tins; and for Zarbatfs from 
Persia;
 and the abundance of Pearls that are


brought hither from the 
Persian
 Gulph; but likewise for Diamonds, Rubies, Sa∣phires, Topazes, and other Stones of Splendor and Esteem, which are ven∣dible here in great quantities: And for Aggats, Cornelians, Nigganees, Desks, Scrutores, and Boxes neatly polisht and embellisht, which may be purchas'd here at very reasonable Rates.


The Gold of 
Suratt
 is so very fine,
 that 12 or 14 
per Cent.
 may be often gain'd by bringing it to 
Europe.
 And the Silver, which is the same all over 
India,
 out-does even the 
Mexico
 and 
Sevil
 Dollars, and has less Allay than any other in the World.
 I never saw any Clipt Money there, and 'tis rare if either the Gold or Silver Coin is fal∣sified. The Gold Moor, or Gold Rou∣pie,
 is valued generally at 14 of Sil∣ver; and the Silver Roupie at Two Shillings Three Pence. Besides these they have Foreign Coyns, but not in that Plenty; and Pice,
 which are made of Copper, Sixty of which, sometimes two or three more or less, are valued at a Roupie. Lower than these, bitter Almonds here pass for Money,
 about Sixty of which make a Pice.


All strange Coyn, whether Import∣ed or Exported, pays to the 
Mogul
's Officers. Two and an half 
per Cent.
 and other Goods pay more. In some other Nations of the East, as in 
China,
 they take other Measures in their Customs, not according to the Value or Quantity of the Goods, but according to the Burthen of the Ship, which is measur'd and examin'd upon her first Arrival; and upon this such a Custom is charged upon her, without any Consideration of her Cargo. When this is paid, there is Liberty granted of fraighting upon the Ship what Goods Men please, those of the richest as well as the meanest Value. An 
English
 Ship there of 400 Tuns, paid for its Custom 1000 Dol∣lars.


Whatever strange Coyn comes into the Hands of the 
Mogul
's Officers, 'tis 
lted down, and converted into Rou∣pies, which are stamped with the par∣ticular Characters of the Emperour then Reigning. After the Emperour's Death the value of it abates,
 may be a Pice or two in a Roupie, because of its Antiquity, whereby, they say, so much of its Worth is wore off; and only the


new Coin passes currant without any Diminution.


The Silks and Callicoes vendible here,
 are either sold by the Piece, or by Cobits, which is a Measure contain∣ing 27 Inches.


Their Rice and Corn,
 and other Commodities which are sold with us by Concave Measures, are with them sold by Weight. The common Weight is a Sear, which weighs 13⅓ Ounces Avoirdupoise; and also the Maund, which contains forty Sear.
 Pecks and Bushels I never heard of. For as their Kingdoms, so are their Customs in these Kingdoms quite opposite in many things to ours.
 The Teeth of their Saws, for Instance, are made quite contrary to ours; their Locks are fa∣shion'd and open quite different ways; and the very Dispositions of some Ir∣rational Creatures vary from the Geni∣us they retain with us; as at 
Tunquin
 the vigilant Dogs watch all Night to devour the Rats and Mice,
 which are there very large and troublesom; as our Cats do with us.


Goods are brought to 
Suratt
 from 
Agra,
 their Capital City, from 
Dehli,


Baroch, Amadavad,
 and other Cities no∣ted for particular Commodities, which are sold off in great quantities to the 
Europeans, Turks, Arabians, Persians,
 and 
Armenians,
 who above any of the rest Travel the farthest, spread themselves in all parts of 
Asia,
 as well as 
Europe,
 and are as universal Merchants as any in the World. The 
Armenians
 are Ci∣vil and Industrious, their Language is one of the most general in all 
Asia,
 and they have spread themselves in vast Colonies very far, in 
Anatolia, Persia,
 the 
Holy Land, Egypt, Russia,
 and 
Polo∣nia,
 and range by private Persons and Families, like 
Jews
 into all parts, and like them are as subtle and diligent in their Traffick. For they have al∣ways had a celebrated name for Mer∣chandise; and near them in ancient times, that is, at 
Phasis
 in 
Georgia,
 was kept the Golden Fleece, which was likely nothing else but a Rich and Pro∣fitable Trade of Wool, Skins, and Furs, which the Northern People brought thither, and to which they now drive a Trade of some resem∣blance in their costly Tapestries, Gro-grains, watered Chamlets, 
&c.
 And



Jason,
 and the Greeks being the first Discoverers of the Fleece, above all the rest of 
Europe,
 and encountring many Hazards and Dangers in the first Navigation; it was said to be guarded by Furies, Bulls, and an horrible Dra∣gon, that is by men bold and well Armed.


For the Carriage of their Goods, the 
Indians
 seldom make use of Horses, they are generally employed in the 
Mogul
's service in War; but bring them to 
Suratt
 in Waggons,
 upon Dromedaries, Asses, and Camels: The strength and hardiness of the Camels qualifie them extremely for the weight of Burthens, and the length of the Roads.
 They dispatch their Journeys with some quickness, and have this ad∣vantage in making short the way, in that they are observ'd to have a Joint extraordinary in their hind Leg, which hastens and assists their Motion, by the large reach which it gives them in their walking. They cannot walk upon slippery places, and are therefore best fitted by Nature for Sandy Earth.


At the time that the Camels Couple, the Female takes the burthen in her


Womb in the same posture she receives the Load upon her back,
 for they both lie down upon their Bellies and gene∣rate backwards, because the Genitals of the Male are placed behind. When they are in case for Copulation, the Keepers are constrain'd to muzle them, and keep a severe hand over them, they are so rampant, furious, and un∣lucky; and at these seasons the lustful inflam'd Animal will subsist, they say, Forty Days together without Food.
 The Heat and vigour of their Spirits keep them sprightly and alive without any Aliment. Some of the Camels go with their young above a Year.


The 
Dutch
 supply 
Suratt
 with all kind of Spices, saving Pepper, in which the 
English
 share with them. The Cinnamon is brought hither from 
Cey∣lon,
 and is cut off from a Tree cloath∣ed with three Barks, two whereof are stript off, which are the Cinnamon, the third and most inward, which incloses the body of the Tree, is never toucht, because an Incision in it kills the Tree. After three Years time the two extreme Barks are renew'd, and cover the bo∣dy of the Tree again, and are fit to


be pulled off. If the 
Dutch
 are under any apprehension of glutting the Trade of 
Europe
 with this fragrant Spice, and of abating its value by sending home too great an abundance,
 they lay it on an heap and burn as much of it as they imagin useless for their service, which Spicy Mountain sends out its fragrant Exhalations for many Leagues into the Sea.


The Cloves and Nutmegs are con∣vey'd hither from some Islands towards 
Malacca,
 whither the 
Dutch
 send their Exiled Criminals to perpetual Slavery. Upon the Out-side of the Nutmeg is the Mace,
 which is cover'd again with a very thick Coat, like a green Wall-Nut; this Covering preserv'd is taken as a high Cordial, and eaten as a Re∣storative with pleasure.
 They relate a passage somewhat strange and sur∣prizing concerning the nature of the Nutmeg-Tree, that it is never Planted, and if it be it never thrives; but such of them as Fructifie and arrive at per∣fection, arise from a ripe Nutmeg swallowed whole by a certain Bird in those Islands, which disgorges it again without digesting it, and this falling


to the ground with that slimy matter it brought along with it, takes root and grows an useful Tree: But this may be a subtle contriv'd story of the 
Dutch,
 to keep Men from endeavour∣ing to transplant them.


The Cloves grow upon a Tree, and before they come to maturity, are of a very delightful Colour. Before they are cleans'd, they are of such a spungy attractive quality, that they drain any Liquids that stand near them,
 and ex∣cept the Master of the Ship, in his con∣veyance of them from the Islands, takes care to keep them at a conveni∣ent distance from his Liquors, a quan∣tity of them will in two days time extract and dry up a Hogs-head of Wine or Water.


Those that Sell the Spices are not al∣ways very fair and honest in disposing of them.
 For sometimes they extract a quantity of Oyl, or Essence, or of Spirits from the Cloves, Cinnamon and other Spices; and after this, confident∣ly expose them for choice untainted Commoditits, and raise their Rates to that pitch, as if they were fresh, and never robb'd of their Spirits: Some


in 
Batavia,
 their Capital City in the 
East,
 whither the greatest quantity of Spice are brought, have large Yards fill'd with them, and kept there on purpose for this Design, first to drain them of their Essences and purer qua∣lities, and afterwards sell them for sound Goods. For which reason we sometimes meet with several sorts of Spice that are very dry and insipid, of little Smell or Taste, pillaged of all their Oyl and Substance.


Besides their Governour of the Castle of 
Suratt,
 who is always confin'd a Pri∣soner within its Walls, there is ano∣ther of the City, to whose manage∣ment and Care is committed the Trust of all Civil Affairs. He receives Ad∣dresses from the Principal Merchants and Men of Note, and all Applications of moment from the Inhabitants are made to him. He generally keeps at home for dispatching the business of his Master, or the People under his Care; and if he goes abroad, he some∣times takes the Air upon an Elephant, seated in a Chair of State upon his back; and besides the Keeper of the Beast, carries along with him a Peon,


or Servant to Fan him, and drive away the busie Flies and troublesome Mus∣ketoes: This is done with the Hair of a Horse's Tail fastned to the end of a small stick of a Foot length,
 a very homely Fan, but yet the only one in esteem with the Grandees, and even the Emperour himself. To maintain the dignity of his Post and Station, he maintains several large Elephants, and keeps in constant pay and readiness ma∣ny Souldiers, both Horse and Foot, to guard his person at home and abroad, and to be ready for his dispatches.


He does not peremptorily Arbitrate in Cases of moment, but when any matter of consequence is brought before him, he seldom determines it without the Consultation and Concurrence of other Officers of the City, the 
Cogy,
 the 
Vacanavish,
 and 
Catoual.


The 
Cogy
 is a Person skilled in the Municipal Laws, acts as Judge, and is consulted in matters relating to the Civil Customs of the Empire.


The 
Vacanavish
 is the 
Mogul
's publick Intelligencer, and is imploy'd in giving a Weekly Account from 
Suratt
 to the Court of 
India,
 of all occurrences here of Truth and moment▪


Next to him,
 and somewhat like him, is another Officer called the 
Har∣carrah,
 who harkens to all kind of News, whether true or false, listens to every thing that happens, whether of moment or of no account and re∣ports to the great 
Mogul
 whatever is done or spoke of; but with so soft a Pen, that nothing may offend, consi∣dering the profound veneration due to such a powerful Prince, whose Frowns are mortal.


The 
Catoual
 is another Officer in the City,
 somewhat resembling a Justice of the Peace, in endeavouring the sup∣pression of all Enormities in the City. For which reason he is oblig'd to ride the streets for prevention of Disorder, thrice in the Night, at 9, 12, and 3 a Clock, 'till 5 in the Morning, at which Hours the Drums beat, and a large long Copper Trumpet sounds aloud. The 
Catoual
 is always attended with several Peons and Souldiers arm'd with Swords, Lances, Bows and Arrows, and some with a very dreadful Weapon,
 a Rod of Iron about a Cubit's length, with a large Ball of Iron at the end, which is able with ease to dash out the


Brains, or break and shatter the Bones at once. When he meets with a Per∣son guilty of petty Irregularities, or some trivial Offence, he Confines him for some time; but if his Misdemeanour be more notorious, he must smart for it by a Chawbuck, or Bastinado.


Tho this City is frequented by a conflux of several Nations, and Peo∣pled by abundance of Foreigners as well as Natives, whose mixt Concourse and mutual Conversations might be apt to raise Tumults and Disputes, yet they ve∣ry rarely happen, so much as to cause e∣ven a slight Punishment. And for Capital Inflictions, there are seldom Criminals so daring as to merit or incur the Guilt of them.
 The In-offensive Conversa∣tion of the Gentile 
Indians,
 who are very apt to receive, but seldom to give an abuse; keeps them Innocent, and at a distance from all hainous Crimes, and timorous in approaching the com∣mission of any such gross Offence, as Murther, Robbery, and such like; and for petty Failures, a drubbing is a suf∣ficient Atonement to publick Justice.


I believe there has not been a Crimi∣nal for this 20 Years that has suffer'd a


Capital Punishment at 
Suratt.
 There were, I confess, some Pirates, but all of them 
Europeans,
 who were guarded thro' 
Suratt
 in their Journey to the 
Mogul,
 for a Tryal of their Lives, while I stayed there.


The Power of Life and Death is the Emperour's Prerogative,
 which he hard∣ly vouchsafes to communicate to any Civil Judge, except they be at a di∣stance, but reserves that Authority in∣tirely to himself, of pronouncing the Sentence of Execution; and if the Of∣fender is at a distance, his Crime is ma∣ny times transmitted by a Messenger to the 
Mogul,
 who determins some∣times without sending for the Offender, according to the Account of the mat∣ter that is sent him.


In Controversies and Decisions of Right,
 Oaths are administred and made use of here, as well as in Chri∣stendom. Tho' the timorous 
Bannian
 will be apt rather to venture the loss of his Cause, than the taking an Oath, be∣cause of the Infamy which swearing ob∣tains among them. As we lay our Hands in swearing upon the Holy Bible, so he puts his hand upon the


venerable Cow, with this Imprecation,
 
That he may eat of the Flesh of that Blest Animal, if what he saies be not true.
 For as the 
Chinese
 endeavour a perpetuati∣on of their Laws, and the preserving their People in Obedience, by the dread and awful Respect which they Har∣bour towards their Dead Parents, whom they pretend are Inspectors of their Childrens Actions, and highly in∣cens'd at their Posterity, whenever they transgress, or would contrive an alteration of those Laws which they have left them; so does the Opinion of the Trasmigration awe the 
Bannian
 in∣to a singular respect for all Kinds of Beasts, especially the Cow, which for their Lives they would not touch, lest they might thereby Eat the Flesh of that Animal, wherein they hope their Father's Soul has been.


If any Thefts or Robberies are com∣mitted in the Country, the 
Foursdar▪
 another Officer, is oblig'd to answer for them; who is allowed Souldiers and Servants under him to traverse the Country, and look after the High-Ways, to hunt out the Robbers, and keep all suspected Places quiet and safe for Passengers.


Having given this Account of the si∣tuation and Extent of 
Suratt,
 of its Strength and Buildings, and of its Riches and Commerce, (which are the strength of a Nation) and likewise of its Governour and Principal Officers: I shall now proceed to a Relation of its Inhabitants, especially its Natives, of their Customs and manner of living; of their Religion, their Festivals and Fasts; their Marriages and Burials; of their Language, their Learning and Recreations.


I shall distinguish the Natives here into three sorts. Frst, the 
Moors,
 or 
Mo∣guls.
 Secondly, the 
Bannians
 or Antient Gentiles. Thirdly, The 
Parsies
 or 
Gau∣res.
 And first, To treat briefly of the 
Moors,
 who are allowed a precedence to all the rest, because of their Religi∣on, which is the same with that of their Prince,
 and for this reason they are advanc'd to the most Eminent Sta∣tions of Honour and Trust; are ap∣pointed Governours of Provinces, and are intrusted with the Principal Mili∣tary, as well as Civil Employments. Very few of the Gentiles being called to any considerable Trust, or incou∣rag'd


any more, than just to follow their several Manual Occupations, or Merchandize. For Religion, which puts a Biass upon the Mind, Intitles them to the Court Favours, when it carries a conformity to that of their Prince. Therefore the Gentiles are little esteem'd of by the 
Mogul,
 and contemned by the Moors, and often treated with Inhumanity and neglect, because of their adhesion to the Prin∣ciples of a Religion, which is differenr from that of the State. And yet their peaceable submissive Deportment wins mightily upon the 
Moors,
 and takes off much of that scornful Antipathy which they harbour against them.


As the 
Mahometan
 Principles indulge an extraordinary Liberty for Women, so are they nice in the innocent allow∣ance of Wine, and strictly prohibit the tasting of strong Liquor. The 
Moors
 therefore here, as in other Kingdoms, practise the Use of Concubines, ac∣cording as their Fortunes and Abilities can reach towards their Maintenance; by which means they fancy not only an impunity to themselves, but some∣thing of Merit, by propagating the


number and increase of the Faithful.


Yet tho' they are under a severe re∣straint from the Juice of the Grape,
 they are not debarr'd the Eating of Rich and delicate Food, nor from dressing it with such store of Spice and high Cordial Ingredients, as migh∣tily invigorate their Spirits, warm their Stomachs, and inflame the Vital Heat. Cloves and Amber-Grese, Cinnamon and other fragrant Oriental Spices, do often help to compound their Dishes of Palau, and other Meats that are in use among them, in the Families of Men of Fortune and Estates. Some of whom, notwithstanding their Pro∣phet, thro' whose Prohibition they are restrain'd from Wine, will yet privately be as Licentious therein, as other Persons who are allow'd to drink it with moderation.
 And many of them take the liberty of mixing Dutra and Water together to drink, without a∣ny privacy or fear, which will intoxi∣cate almost to Madness, when they are in the humour of gulping it freely; and this sometimes puts them beyond their Native tender Deportment, and forces them upon suddain Bold Attempts. 'Tis commonly observ'd concerning


this Herb Dutra, that whatever Hu∣mour prevails in any person at the time of his drinking it to Excess, that Tem∣per continues with him in the high∣est pitch, 'till the inebriating quality abates. If he is Melancholy, he is then rais'd to the utmost degree of Sadness; If Amorous, he is all Love and Flame; if he is Merry, he is then a perfect Antick. And pouring cold Water upon the Leggs, removes these excessive Humours, and restores them to their Senses and Sobriety again. The 
English
 and other 
Europeans
 some∣times in their pleasant Frolicks, are pleas'd to divert themselves with these gay Humours and strange Actions, by taking a chearful Draught or two of this Liquor.


When any grievous Disaster hap∣pens to a Man, which he finds himself unable to sustain through disquietness of Mind and anguish of Spirit, 'tis very customary upon the Coast of 
Malabar,
 for such an unfortunate person to make his Application to a large Dose of this Herb for his Relief; which chafes and ferments him to such a pitch; that with a Catarry or Bagonet in his hand


he first falls upon those that are near him, whether Parents, Wife or Child, killing and stabbing as he goes; and then in the same mad Frenzy runs a∣long the Streets and High-Ways, and blindly Executes the same Fate upon all he meets with, 'till at length by some Martial Hand he falls himself, and ends his Life in that bitter Fit. These that run thus are called 
Amouki,
 and the do∣ing of it 
Running a Muck.
 And for this reason, to prevent all Misdemeanours of Persons heated with Arak, or any strong Liquor, does the King of 
Siam
 forbid any one to enter into his Palace;
 and all that do, or are suspected, must al∣low the Porter to smell their Breath before they pass the Gates.
 Those that pretend to the understanding of the de∣rivation of this word Arak, deduce it from the 
Arabick,
 wherein they say it sig∣nifies Sweat, and metaphorically Essence, and by way of Excellence 
Aqua Vitae.
 Of this sort of Liquor there are two kinds most fam'd in 
India,
 the 
Goa
 and 
Bengal
 Arak, besides that which is made at 
Batavia. Bengal
 is a much stronger Spi∣rit than that of 
Goa,
 tho' both are made use of by the 
Europeans
 in making


Punch, and are bought at both places at very low rates. Arak is distilled from Rice,
 and sometimes from Toddy the juice of a Tree, and is prescrib'd in healing the Griping of the Gutts. Stronger than this is another Com∣pound-Liquor made in 
India,
 which is distilled from Black Sugar mixt with Water, with the bark of the Tree Ba∣boul, this is called Jagre Arak;
 it is as hot as Brandy, and is drunk in Drams by the 
Europeans.


But the Coco and the Palm-Tree af∣ford a pleasant Juice from their Head and upper Branches,
 which the 
Moors
 as well as 
Europeans
 drink of plentiful∣ly. A Quart of it may be got for a Pice or two, and is so strong that it turns the Brain as soon as 
English
 Beer; for want of which the Sailers take up with this Juyce to refresh themselves, when the Ships Anchor near the Shoar; for no Malt drink is made in 
India.
 It distils from the Tree into Earthen Jars, which are fixt to the Branches of the Coco-Tree, when they are cut off to a Foot length; and are put to the Hole in the Palm Tree, which by in∣cision is made one Inch deep, and three


wide; and in one Nights time a Jar containing above a Quart will be filled with the Juyce of one Tree. When it distils into a Jar that has been former∣ly us'd, it suddainly taints and grows harsh, and turns sower in less than the space of 24 Hours: In the Morning it is laxative, and costive in the Evening. The name of this liquor is Toddy;
 but the Neri which is drawn from the Arequier Tree in a fresh Earthen Vessel, is as sweet and pleasant as Milk, but more lively, without any mixture of a hard or sharp Taste. Several 
Euro∣peans
 pay their Lives for their immode∣rate Draughts, and too frankly Carou∣sing these chearful Liquors, with which when once they are inflam'd, it renders them so restless and unruly, especially with the additional heat of the Weather, that they fancy no place can prove too cool, and so throw themselves upon the ground, where they sleep all Night in the open Fields, and this commonly produces a Flux, of which a multitude in 
India
 die.
 The securest way here for preserving Health after an excess in drinking, and an intemperate draught of any strong liquor, is to keep close after it under some convenient Cover∣ing,


and to digest it by keeping warm, and sleeping out the Fermentation.


The 
Moguls
 feed freely on Beef or Mutton, or the Flesh of any other Creature which is not accounted un∣clean among them;
 but Swines-flesh is under a dis-repute, and held among them an Abomination. Yet the Gran∣dees will taste of this, as well as Wine, and will not stick at the Eating it at a private Collation. For an 
English
 Agent,
 by a frequent Interview with the Governour of a City, arriv'd at length to that familiarity with him, that he took the liberty of Inviting him and some Intimates more, to a friendly Entertainment of 
Persian
 and 
European
 Wines. The Governour com∣ing to it, was so Charm'd with the welcome which he receiv'd, because the Wine had that influence on his Hu∣mour and Palate, that upon his depar∣ture he stept to the Agent and told him, he design'd him suddenly another Vi∣sit, and withal desir'd from him a couple of young Kidds of the Agent's preparing, and whispering to him pri∣vately, he told him he meant young Piggs. The Agent expressed his humble


Sense of the Honour they had vouch∣saf'd him, and his satisfaction at the freedom they had taken; and withal assur'd them, that such an Evening the Kids should be provided for their com∣ing. He instantly sent abroad his Ser∣vant, for procuring him two of the fattest Pigs that could be met with, and order'd them to be roasted against the time appointed; and pulling off their Skin, and cutting off their Heads and Feet, had them brought before the invited Guests. They rejoyc'd at the sight of them, and when they had tast∣ed, applauded the delicacy of the Meat, eat it with abundance of delight, and boasted that they had never seen any such plump Kids, whose relish out-did any thing they had ever tasted; and heartily wisht for the opportunity of such another Repast, and the liberty of Banqueting frequently upon such Dainties. They admir'd the Christians Indulgence in such noble Liquor, and such exquisite Fare, and believ'd that the unconfin'd Luxury in Eating was equal to the pleasure of their desirable variety of Women; and that the Car∣nal Excesses approv'd by 
Mahomet
 do


not outvie the unconstrain'd Liberty which the Christians take in sumptu∣ous Repasts, and such kind of Luxu∣rious Sensuality.


The 
Moors
 are only bound to ab∣stain from Unclean Beasts, and load their Tables with Fish and Fowl, and other Fare. And it is only among them that the Butchers kill the Meat,
 and sell it to strangers; for the 
Indians
 will scarce look upon a mangled Car∣kass. A Butcher with them is little less than a Murtherer, but of all Vocations that is the most odious with them.


The 
Moors
 with a very rigid and avowed Abstinence, observe every Year one Month, a Fast, which they term the 
Ramezan;
 during which time they are so severely abstemious, that they stretch not their Hands to either Bread or Wa∣ter, 'till the Sun be set, and the Stars appear; no, not the Youths of 12 or 13 Years of Age. Which makes the Penance so much the more rigorous and troublesome, in that a draught of Wa∣ter in those warm parching Climates is so very necessary, and so refreshing to such as are ready to faint with Thirst. This Fast is not kept always at the


same Season of the Year, but begins its date Annually more early by Eleven Days. When I was at 
Suratt,
 this mortifying Custom was about the Month of 
September,
 at which time the 
Moors
 would begin to refresh them∣selves about the close of the Evening, and Eat then freely; and by an Early Collation in the Morning, before the dawning of the Light, prepare them∣selves for the drought and heat of the following Day. The Almighty, they told us, requir'd from 
Mahomet,
 that his followers should be oblig'd to this Austerity, the whole Circuit of the Year; but that the Holy Prophet, in compassion to the Faithful, obtain'd from God the confinement of it only to a Month, which would therefore highly aggravate their Crime, if they neglect∣ed the Dedication of so small a Portion of the Year to this Religious Abstinence, tho' the observance of it had been in∣joyn'd after a more rigorous manner than it is. And to add to the Sanctity of this Celebrated and solemn Fast, their 
Mullahs,
 acted with a sacred Zeal, and lively concern for the Souls of the People, will at this time spend whole


Nights in the 
Musseets,
 in chanting a∣loud alternately their Divine Hymns, 'till the approach of day breaks up their Devotions: And so they com∣pleat their Fast, according to the strict∣est Rules of the most rigid 
Asceticks,
 by mixing Prayers and Watchings with their Abstinence; in which, as well as in their Publick Prayers and Religious Worship, they tie themselves up to a very nice and devout strictness, and be∣have themselves with all those decencies of Respect, with that astonishing Re∣verence in the 
Musseets,
 as not to defile them with either their Eyes or Lips; not daring so much as to turn their Heads to gaze about, or utter the least word to one another. Which profound Respect casts an obloquy and deserv'd Reproach upon some Professors of a much purer Religion,
 and more Holy Faith, whose careless Deportment and familiar Address discountenance all the Religious decorum of Prayers, and might tempt those Heathens to con∣clude, that our Devotions were rather some light Diversion, than the effects of serious and sacred Thoughts.


The 
Moguls
 are very profuse in their Funeral Expences;
 as well at the time of their Friend's decease, as at several others within the compass of a Month, when they think themselves ingag'd at their publick Invitations to lavish away immoderate Cost to their Friend's Memo∣ry, enough almost to sink a rich Fortune. Besides the solemn yearly Celebration of an Expensive Feast for all the Friends and Relatives, in Honour of the Depart∣ed; that they may revive the kindness they entertain'd for the Virtues and Af∣fection of him they lament, and that they may keep up the Idea of his Per∣son and Endowments. At this time too the Tomb is deckt with Lamps, and beset with bright Illuminations, as Emblems of his shining Excellencies and Perfections.


The dead Corps is carried after our manner on a Bier upon Mens should∣ers,
 decently drest and beautifyed with Flowers, and attended with the com∣pany of Friends and Relations to the place of Burial The Grave is Arched under Ground so high, that a Man may sit under its Roof; to this Intent, that when the Angel at the Day of


Judgment shall come and ask them, Whether they are 
Mussulmen?
 They may sit up in their Graves, and an∣swer, 
Yea.
 Some of them are report∣ed to be skilled in preserving a Corps from Putrefaction a considerable time,
 only with the Repetition of some few Words, and without the Art or Expense of 
Egyptian
 Embalming, to keep it from Corruption, only with a Verbal Charm.


And as their Minds are wrought in∣to an Aversion against ours, by the Contrariety of their Faith, when they were alive; so they would seem to con∣tinue that Antipathy even beyond the stroke of Death, to the very Confine∣ment of the Grave, by placing their Corps in a quite contrary Position to ours, which are laid from East to West, as theirs are athwart from North to South.


The Language of the 
Moors
 is diffe∣rent from that of the ancient Original Inhabitants of 
India,
 but is oblig'd to these Gentiles for its Characters. For though the 
Moors
 Dialect is peculiar to themselves, yet is it destitute of Let∣ters to express it; and therefore in all their Writings in their Mother Tongue,


they borrow their Letters from the Heathens, or from the 
Persians,
 or other Nations. The Court Language is 
Per∣sian,
 which obtains with all the Honou∣rable 
Omrahs,
 and with all Persons of Ingenuity and polite Conversation through the Empire, which creates an Ambition of dressing their Speech as well as Writing in that favourite Style. For Foreign Languages in 
Asia,
 as well as 
Europe,
 invade the use of the Mo∣ther Tongue with Princes, and their Ministers of State; as here the 
Persian
 prevails; in 
Persia
 the 
Ottoman
 Lan∣guage; and at the August Port the 
A∣rabian
 Tongue.


'Tis observable that the Introduction of a Language concurs towards com∣pleating the Conquest of a Nation; which yet the 
Moguls
 have not been able to effect in 
India,
 neither totally to reduce the old Natives to a chearful undisturb'd compliance with the Go∣vernment: But a potent 
Rajah
 is tem∣pted to raise new Factions now and then to disturb the Affairs of the 
Mogul,
 and give Diversion to his Army. And zealous of the Tradition of their An∣cestors, maintain not only their own


Tongue, but as much as possible their ancient Customs and Opinions, and start new Objections against their pre∣sent State, the better to assert their Pri∣mitive Liberty again; and the ancient Possession of those Kingdoms, which their Progenitors for so many Ages by immemorial Custom had formerly re∣tain'd.


Indeed the 
Bramins,
 who are deriv'd from 
Bramon,
 who (they say) was one of the first Men that inhabited the World, have a Language used among them, but very difficult to be attain'd, which several of themselves therefore under∣stand not. It is the Learned Language among them, called the 
Sanscreet,
 and is the same with them as Latin is with us. In this the Records of their Na∣tion, the Mysteries of their Theology, the Books of their Religion and Philo∣sophy, and the Fables of their Priests, are writ; wherein are several weak and loose Opinions, discovering their Ignorance both of the Duration of this World, and the State and Condition of the next. I wanted that opportunity I wish'd for, of enquiring more parti∣cularly into the several Mysteries of


their Religion. Besides, few of the learned 
Bramins
 live near 
Suratt.


The Paper-Books,
 in vulgar use a∣mong the Inhabitants of 
India,
 on which they write, are long Schrowls of Pa∣per, sometimes Ten Foot in length, and a Foot broad, sowed together at the upper end as many long Sheets as the occasion of the Writing requires. The Pen they write with is the ancient 
Calamus,
 or Reed, about the thickness of a large Goose Quill. And some of their Standishes are made long and square, and above an Inch broad,
 and of sufficient length to contain both Pens, and a place for Ink.


Their manner of Writing is neither directly forwards nor backwards,
 nor in a streight Line downwards, like the 
Chinese
 from the upper to the lower part of the Paper; but it is a Medium between both, from the uppermost Corner of the left to the lowermost Corner of the right, slanting gradual∣ly downwards; especially when they write any Notes or Epistles to one ano∣ther.


Their Paper by its Slickness and Smoothness appears shining,
 which is


of ordinary use; but that which they write upon, either to the Emperour, or Persons of Consequence, is gilt all on the Surface, as ours is only on the edges, with some small Flowers inter∣spersed here and there for Ornament.


For the Security of Letters sent a∣broad to the principal Ministers, or the Emperour, they are inclos'd in a large hollow Bambou of a Foot length, at one end of which is a Head or Cover two Inches long, which after the Letter is put in, is join'd close to the Bambou, and upon that joining the Seal is fixt, to prevent taking out the Letter with∣out breaking the Seal. This preserves the Letter neat and clean, unsullied by Rain or Dust, or being carried from Hand to Hand; so that let the Jour∣ney be never so tedious, this Re∣spect always accompanies the Letter to him it was sent to, that in opening of it, he finds it as neat and fair as it was when it was first sealed up. The Co∣vers of Paper which are put upon our Letters in 
Europe,
 bear some resem∣blance to the Civility of the 
Indian
 Bambou.


Upon their Chops, as they call them in 
India,
 or Seals engraven, are only Characters, generally those of their Name, upon Gold, or Silver, or Cor∣nelian Stones. Coats of Arms in 
India
 are not heard of;
 for no Man is here∣ditary there, either to Estate or Ho∣nours, those all depend upon the Breath and Pleasure of the 
Mogul,
 who is the sole Fountain of Honour and Riches, who blasts the Fortune of his Subjects, or raises them by his Favour, as he thinks fit. There every Man's Title and Estate are as mortal as himself, die with him, and return to the Disposal of the Soveraign.


The 
Indians
 in sending their Letters abroad have not learnt the convenience of the quick Dispatches of our Posts:
 A Pattamar, 
i. e.
 a Foot Messenger, is generally employ'd to carry them to the remotest Bounds of the Empire. So that whenever the 
English
 are under a necessity of writing to 
Bengal, Maderas,
 or any other part of 
Indostan,
 a Person is sent on purpose upon the Errand.


Neither have they endeavour'd to transcribe our Art of Printing;
 that would diminish the Repute and Live∣lihood


of their Scrivans, who main∣tain numerous Families by the Pen. But they can imitate a little the 
English
 manner of Binding Books.


They have not many Learned among them, to remove any Defects that might be found in their common Stile, or to improve their Language, so venerable for Antiquity, and preservation of its self for so many Ages without any known Alteration. It is otherwise in 
Europe,
 where Foreign Words are na∣turalized for embellishing the Elegancy of Speech, which has been more par∣ticularly design'd in 
Germany;
 and for compleating which the Emperour founded the 
Swan-Society,
 as Censors of the Language, to correct and refine, to alter and amend whatever they found unpolish'd or amiss. But Dr. 
Kempfire,
 an ingenious Traveller, and 
German
 Physician, who told me this, told me likewise, that they exterminate all ex∣otick Words, however proper or speci∣fick, by a Confinement to those of their Mother Tongue, tho' loaded with Cir∣cumlocutions. This Method, methinks, cannot so much refine, as debase the Speech; which being an Instrument


of conveying the Ideas of things to the Mind, must needs increase its Excel∣lence, by how much the more parti∣cular and distinguishing Characters it represents them by; and this Excel∣lence depends upon the Idiom of Words.


In Journeying, or in taking the Air, the 
Moors
 are not only accommodated with delicate Horses bred in 
India,
 but have convey'd hither from 
Persia
 and 
Arabia
 Horses so well turn'd, and of such admirable Shapes, that a Thou∣sand Roupies is easily sunk in the Price of one of the more ordinary that are brought hither. Some of them are train'd up, and excel in Management as well as Shape; but their Care of them is equal to neither of these Ex∣cellencies; for in the shooing of them, 'tis commonly done so inartificially, that they easily batter their Hoofs, and expose them to surbating with a very moderate Journey.


The Vulgar are not mounted on these stately Steeds,
 but they are pleas'd with getting upon a small Ox, as their Pad, to carry them in the Town, or round the Country. They ascend them


as we do our Horses, equipp'd with a soft Cushion instead of a Saddle, and a long Rope thrust through the Carti∣lage, which separates the Nostrils, knotted on each side, which supplies the use of a Bridle. And thus at a good round easie rate they travel upon the ambling horn'd Beast, either longer Journeys, or shorter Stages, as they please.


Their Hackeries likewise, which are a kind of Coach with two Wheels, are all drawn by Oxen, which though they are naturally heavy Beasts, and slow in their Motions, yet by constant and long Exercise they acquire a great Facility and Speed of Foot in draw∣ing the Hackeries, so as to vie with one another in Swiftness for Wagers in run∣ning Races. Some of their Oxen are very large and tall;
 and all their black Cattel, both of this kind, and the Buf∣foloes, are remarkable for a big piece of Flesh that rises above Six Inches high between their Shoulders, which is the choicest and delicatest piece of Meat upon them, especially put into a Dish of Palau. The Buffolo is gene∣rally larger than an Ox,
 but a very


sowr untractable Animal, by which means he is useless to the Natives in the convenience of Riding, or of Hac∣keries, and is generally employ'd in carrying large Bags of Fresh Water on each side, from the Tanques to the Houses. They affect no gaiety of Trap∣pings or of Harnass upon their draught Oxen,
 but delight to see their Horns set off with Brass or Silver made hol∣low, of three or four Inches length, fixt to the tip of them, with a long Chain of Silver reaching from the end of each Horn to the middle of the Head, and there fastened.


The Hackeries are made of a square Figure,
 as our Coaches, but the Seat is flat, not rais'd with Cushions to lean upon. They can carry three or four persons, and are all open on the sides, but supported at each Corner, and in the middle by Pillasters. Some of better fashion are hung round, with an Imperial over Head to fence off the scorching Rays of the Sun, and with a Carpet spread under to sit upon.


Those whose Wealth is able to support it, are pompously carried upon Men's shoulders in Palanquins,
 whose carri∣age


is as easie and pleasant as that of our Chairs in the Streets of 
London,
 but far surpasseth them in point of State and quick dispatches of a Journey. Four or Six Servants support the Palanquins, with others that attend and relieve them by turns, who will with ease car∣ry it twenty or thirty Miles a Day. It hangs like a Cradle upon a Bambou five or six Inches in the Diameter, and near four and twenty Foot long▪ Arch∣ed in the middle for the convenience of him that sits in it, and sustaining the Hangings with which it is cover'd; but it is streight above five Foot at each end, where the Servants carry it upon their shoulders. Ballisters of four or five Inches thickness support it; the sides of it are curiously wrought, and richly plated with Gold or Silver; the Covering is made of fine Silk; the Cushions within are generally of rich Zarbaft,
 with the choicest Carpets spread under them. Here the great Men stretch themselves at ease, as it were upon a Couch, and hereby they avoid that Heat and ruffling of their Spirits, which either the motions of a Horse or a Hackery might cause, and


which in these Kingdoms is so very troublesome. The Antient 
Romans
 us'd something like a Palanquin, as 
Juvenal
 in his first Satyr, tells us, 
Causidici nova, cum veniat lectuca Mathonis Plena ipso.


When they take the Air, either in Palanquins or otherwise, they usually frequent the coolest Groves, and the pleasant Gardens adjacent to the City, refresht either by the River 
Tappy,
 or by Water convey'd into their Tanques, or Ponds. And here the Dan∣cing Wenches,
 or Quenchenies, enter∣tain you, if you please, with their sprightly Motions, and soft charming Aspects, with such amorous Glances, and so taking irresistible a Mien, that as they cannot but gain an Admiration from all, so they frequently Captivate a zealous Rich Spectator, and make their Fortunes and Booty of the In∣chanted Admirer.

—ut Gaditana canoro


Incipiat prurire choro,
 plausu{que} probatae


Ad terram tremulo descendant clune puellae.

One of the principal Persons about 
Su∣ratt,



was thus surpriz'd and insnar'd while I was there, and lost both him∣self, his Fortune, and his Friends, in their eager Admiration. For they are Educated in the Improvement of all that is gay and entertaining, they set themselves off with such advantage, by a Rhetorical Look and taking Air, wherein they shew an unparallell'd Master-piece of Art, that a grave 
Eu∣ropean
 will scarce adventure himself in the sight of their insinuating Tempta∣tions, and charming deportment.


Among the Men, whose Imployment it is to divert Spectators with amazing Shows and Sights, some, they say, will take in their Hands a Clew of Thread, and throw it upwards in the Air till it all unravels, and then climbing up themselves by this tender Thread to the top of it, presently fall down piece-meal upon the Ground▪ and when all is dropt, unite again the parted Mem∣bers. Others are said to raise a Man∣go-Tree, with ripe Fruit upon its Branches, in the space of one or two Hours. To confirm which Relation, it was affirmed confidently to me, that a Gentleman who had pluckt one of


these Mangoes, fell sick upon it, and was never well as long as he kept it, 'till he consulted a 
Bramin
 for his Health, who prescrib'd his only Remedy would be the restoring of the 
Mango,
 by which he was restor'd to his Health again.


Dancing Snakes kept tame in Bask∣ets are every where common▪
 their Keepers use them as familiarly as we do Puppies, take them in their Hands, and sometimes force them to bite their Flesh without any consequent harm. He that carries them about, plays up∣on a Pipe when he exposes them, at the noise of which the Snake will hiss, spread his Head and throw it about.


We had brought into our Factory once a tame Snake,
 of that bigness and length, that one of the Fowls of the largest size was swallowed whole by it, with all the Feathers on, in my sight, it first began with the Head of the Fowl, and then twisting its Body about the Body of the Fowl, squeezed it close, to facilitate the Passage. The Fowl Screeched once at the first seizing, and afterwards lay dead: The Snake strug∣led sometime with the Bulky part of the Body before it could get it down;


but as soon as it was once swallow'd, it found a speedy passage to the middle of the Snake, which lay there stretcht and swell'd, 'till the natural Heat, in less than 24 Hours, had digested both the Bones and Feathers. This was an extraordinary Morsel, and far surpas∣sing that ordinary Food upon which the Snakes do commonly feed. But there is much more danger than diver∣sion from these Serpents in 
India,
 where they are so numerous, that the unwary Traveller is often expos'd to the fatal effects of their sudden Venom. For a Peon of mine, named 
Gemal,
 walk∣ing abroad in the Grass after the Rains, was unfortunately bit on a sudden by one of them. The latent Snake twisted unawares about his Leg, and in a short time brought him to the Ground, by causing in him an imme∣diate deliquium of Spirit, almost even to Expiration. The Servants who were standing by, amaz'd at the acci∣dent, called immediately upon an 
Eng∣lish
 Merchant, who hasten'd towards him with a special Medicine for his Re∣covery. The thing which he carried about him, and which instantly apply∣ed,


is a Specifick against the Poison of Snakes, cured him, and therefore ob∣tains the Name of Snake-stone.
 It is a small artificial Stone, almost flat, only with a little protuberance in the middle, and of a gray Colour. The Composition of it is Ashes of burnt Roots, mixt with a kind of Earth, which is found at 
Diu,
 belonging to the 
Portuguese;
 and those are burnt to∣gether again, out of which Paste the Stones are formed. They are not all alike Colour'd, but those that have re∣ceiv'd more of the Fire, are thereby inclin'd to a lighter Gray, the others are a little more dark.
 This Stone Cures by the application of it to the part invenom'd, to which it immedi∣ately sticks fast, and by its powerful Attraction sucks back the infus'd Ve∣nom, 'till its Pores are full. Then like a glutted Horse-Leach it falls off, and disgorges the replenisht Pores in Milk (the properest liquor for this purpose) which by discolouring, it renders livid. Upon this it recovers new strength, and its Alexipharmick quality again, and is speedily prepar'd for a fresh Draught of Poison, if any remains in


the affected part, 'till it quite extracts whatever the venomous Serpent had immited; which makes those Counter-poisons in great esteem against all ex∣ternal Attacks upon the Body; as the Cordial Antidotes are most valuable for expelling or subduing any Poyson in∣wardly receiv'd. The double Excel∣lence of this Stone recommends its worth very highly, in that a little of it scraped off, and mixt with Wine, or some other proper vehicle, and inwardly ta∣ken, is reputed one of the most pow∣erful Medicines against any Malignant Fevers or Infectious Diseases, that is known; and much excess the deserv∣edly fam'd 
Gasper Antoni,
 or Goa Stone. The trial of these Stones is made by fixing them to the Roof of the Mouth,
 to which if they stick fast, 'tis a sign they are genuine, if they easily fall off, fictitious. Another method for know∣ing the true Stones from the Counter∣feit, is to immerse them in a Glass of Water, where, after a while, if some light Ebullitions rise from them, and ascend through the Body of the Water, this likewise is an approv'd Sign that the Stone is not spurious. The 
Eu∣ropeans,



for the Security of themselves against the Danger of these Serpents, which are every where so common in 
India,
 carry always about them one of these Stones inclosed in a Heart of Gold, fixt to a Golden Chain, which hangs about their Necks.


A burning Coal is boasted to be able to effect the same Cure,
 as the Snake-Stone does; and to heal the Venom of Serpents, or stinging of Scorpions, by gradually drawing out all the Poyson, when it is applied very near the Wound; which is not easily vext or incommoded by the Fire, by reason that the acuteness of the Venom a∣bates the sensibleness of the Heat of the Fire, and keeps it off.


As the Kingdom of 
Indostan
 is very much annoy'd by the multitude of these venomous Creatures, which lurk in all Coverts and secret places, so is it stockt with Medicines extraordinary a∣gainst their Harm. The wise Designa∣tion of Heaven providing all things for the Convenience, as well as Necessity, both of Nations and particular Crea∣tures, by suiting Remedies peculiar to each ones Exigence, and appropriating


agreeable Circumstances to the parti∣cular Natures of all. Therefore as inward Poysons prevail in these parts, as well as outward; so do Medicines likewise, which are available for abating and expelling both of them. For be∣sides several Poysonous Herbs which grow in 
India,
 the old Natives of 
Ben∣gal
 affirm, that if Sugar be kept for Thirty Years,
 it is as dangerous, as quick, and effectual Poyson as any. One of the Antidotes, above all the rest, is the celebrated 
Maldive
 Coco-nut,
 of which this Encomium is given by 
Piso,
 in his 
Mantissa Aromatica,
 at the latter end of 
Bontius, Vera cum Gloria praedi∣care non dubito, Antistitem Alexipharma∣corum Coccum nostrum esse, experimentis indubitatis non fallacem.
 That is, He can truly boast by many infallible Ex∣periments, that there is no Alexiphar∣mick goes beyond the 
Maldive
 Coco-nut. He prescribes four Scruples, or from half a Drachm to a whole, to be taken in proper Liquor, which he af∣firms prevails miraculously to the Cure not only of Internal Poysons,
 but migh∣tily helps forward Women in Labour, as he would prove by an Induction of


many Particulars. It cures the Bloody Flux, the Pestilence, and Malignant Fevers, Poysons, Falling Sickness, Pal∣sey, Convulsions, and frightful Tre∣mors of the Spirits: So great are its Virtues, that the use of it, as he else∣where tells us, is consecrated by a cer∣tain Priviledge of Nature to the sup∣port of Life, 
p.
 207. Which made 
Ru∣dolphus,
 a certain 
Roman
 Emperour, un∣derstanding its Excellence, purchase it at the price of Four Thousand Florens.


The Name of this Nut with the 
Maldives
 is 
Tavarcare;
 and tho' it has appropriated the Name of 
Maldive,
 
et is it found in other parts of 
India
 besides, though probably the first, or most of them, are met with there. It is conjectured to be the same with the Land Coco-Nut, and that when the Ocean invading the Main Land of 
Asia
 made a Breach of the 
Maldives
 from it, these Nuts were cover'd under the Wa∣ter, which now and then are taken up in it floating, or washt upon the Shore.


The 
Indians
 are very fond of it, and strongly maintain its Medicinal Vir∣tues against Poyson; in Confirmation whereof, an old 
English
 Master of a


Grab,
 or small Vessel, 
George Toach,
 has frequently repeated this Story to me, 
That in his Voyage to 
Patta,
 which lies near the 
Red Sea,
 upon the Coast of 
Africa,
 in the time of the Sale of his Cargo there, the King's Son of the Place was poysoned to that de∣gree, that his Skin was bloated and swollen upon him like a Bladder: He presently betakes himself for a Reme∣dy to the 
Maldive
 Coco-nut, several or which are found there. This he rubbed upon a hollow Stone, contain∣ing five or six spoonfuls of Water, till the Water was well tinctur'd by it▪ and in the same manner rubb'd a piece of a Rhinoceros Horn, and then drank the Water off. And re∣peating this Medicine for three or four Days, the Humours sensibly as∣swaged, and in that time were all drawn off by so powerful a Purgation, that though it had rack'd and exa∣min'd every part of his Body, yet he recover'd in that short space of time; the Swelling abated, and his Skin fell, and hung loose about him like a Gar∣ment.

I brought one of these Coco-nuts with me from 
Suratt,
 which was graciously accepted of by the late


Queen, of Glorious and Immortal Me∣mory.


They ascribe very much likewise to the Rhinoceros Horn in 
India,
 as it is an Antidote against all poysonous Draughts, and hugely extol in it that Medicinal Excellence and singular Quality. The Character of this Horn prevail'd so far with a former Presi∣dent of ours at 
Suratt,
 that he ex∣chang'd for a Cup made of this Horn a large capacious Silver Bowl of the same bigness.


The Heat of the Country about 
Su∣ratt,
 will scarce permit that eager Pro∣secution of Sports or Recreations, which a cooler Climate does encourage; but a Game at Chess in their Houses,
 or in the Shades of the Streets, will in∣vite them to spend some Hours at it: I did not hear of their Expenses other∣wise, I mean of their Goods or Mo∣ney. For they seldom are heated into Passion, or ruinous Adventures, by the Polemick Traverses of that intricate puzling Game. Their Frolicks reach not to that pitch of Folly, as to ex∣change their Pastimes into Punish∣ments, or to make them hazard the


loss of their comfortable Subsistence for ever, for diverting themselves for some Hours or Minutes.
 And to me it seems more rational, the Penalty of the 
Japanners
 upon Gaming, who have de∣creed it a Capital Crime to play for Money; than the Liberty taken by the 
Siamese,
 in playing away not only their Estates, but Families, and some∣times themselves too. How many fair Estates have been squandred away in one Night's time, by the Votaries of Fortune, who have both ruin'd them∣selves and their Families, by the Effects of this Vanity, and the bewitching Love of Gaming? And by running their Estates upon unhappy Destinies, by a cross turn of Fortune, or an un∣lucky Chance, have made themselves Suppliants for part of those Possessions, of which they were intire Masters be∣fore.


The variety of Wild Beasts afford the stouter 
Indians
 abundance of other Game, and divert them with more manly Pastimes. Insomuch that in some of our 
English
 Factories, particu∣larly 
Carwar
 upon the Coast of 
Malabar,
 Deer, Antilopes, Peacocks, wild Bulls


and Cows, are almost the daily Furni∣ture of their Table, brought home by the Peons, without any further Expence than that of Powder and Shot. 
Suratt
 abounds not with that Plenty; how∣ever, Hares and Peacocks, Deer and Antilopes, are sold here at easie Rates; though Provisions are not quite so cheap as at 
Bengal,
 where Forty Fowls, or Fifteen Ducks, may be bought for a Roupie.


A considerable Value is set upon any of our 
European
 Dogs,
 either Spaniels, Greyhounds, or Mastiffs. A Water-Spaniel, in the River of 
Tappy
 after a Duck, will call forth the whole City to the Pastime; and 'tis with them up∣on this score so very amazing and de∣lightful, because they have none of that Breed among them; nor indeed any other, that I ever saw, but Currs; into which our fiercest and most lively Dogs degenerate, after a Litter or two, by the constant unallay'd heat of the Country. The Grayhounds and Hounds are like∣wise equally valuable and divertive, and live for some time, if they run them not in the Heat of the Day; but if they chance to hunt with them a∣bout


Noon, the ambient Air mixing with the natural, when it is fermented and chafed, commonly proves too strong for their Constitutions; so that they frequently expire upon the spot, and rarely live out any number of Years or Months.


A couple of 
Irish
 Wolf-Dogs were so prized in 
Persia,
 that they were ta∣ken as a welcom and admired Present by the Emperour himself. Two more of which (which were given to me by the Earl of 
Inchequin,
 when we put in∣to 
Kingsale,
 after the Voyage) I dispos'd of to the 
East-India
 Company, who dispatcht them in their Ships immedi∣ately to the 
Indies,
 to be there bestowed in some of the Eastern Courts.


A large 
English
 Mastiff, given by a Merchant, was look'd upon as such a Rarity and Favour by a Noble 
Omrah,
 that he engag'd himself and Six Hun∣dred of his Followers, in a hot Dispute concerning his Property in the Dog, with another as potent a Grandee who claim'd a Right in him. For the Deci∣sion of this Controversie, they each led forth a like number of Men, to deter∣min their Right by a bloody Contest.


Till one, a little wiser and more cool than the other two, intreated their respite, and bespoke their Audience, and told them the case might be easily remit∣ted to the 
English
 President, who was able to give a just determination in it. This by their joynt consent and application kindly prevented the De∣sign'd Quarrel, and the 
English
 Pre∣sident Arbitrated fairly in justice to him to whom the Dog was given.


And because the 
Moors
 have invent∣ed peculiar Arts and methods in their Recreations, from what obtain a∣mong us; I shall instance in some of their diversions, which will not be un∣grateful to the Reader, especially if he be a Man of Sports.


In hunting their Antilopes and Deer,
 as they are destitute of Dogs, so they endeavour to supply their want by tame Leopards, train'd and brought up for that purpose, which warily leap upon they Prey, and having once caught it, hold it fast.


In 
Persia,
 in the room of Dogs and Leopards, they bring up Faulcons to hunt their Antilopes and Bucks,
 which are brought to 
India
 from thence, and


are train'd to it after this manner. Whenever the Hawk they breed up to it is hungry, they fix its meat upon the Nose of a Counterfeit Antilope, and from thence only feed it, without allowing it any Meat but what it Eats there. After this they carry one or two of these Falcons into the Fields, and flying one of them at an Antilope, it fastens just upon his Nose, which so blinds and stops the Antilope, by the force and fluttering of its Wings, that he can neither well espy his way, nor find his Feet as nimbly as he would; and this gives a very easie admittance to the Men or Dogs to come in and catch him. If this Hawk is beaten off, which is sometimes done with much a∣do, another aloft stoops and lights up∣on the same place, and strikes him backwards with his Talons, 'till at length he is made a Prey: For one of the Hawks always mounts as the o∣ther stoops.


Sometimes a great company of Men range the Fields, and walk together into the Inclosures, to look after their Game; when once they have espy'd the place where they fancy the Game lies, they


inclose the Ground, and stand in a Ring, with Clubs or Weapons in their Hands, whilst they employ others to beat up the Ground, and raise it for them.


Nor are they destitute of ingenious Inventions, when they recreate them∣selves with Fowling, any less than they are in their Hunting Sports. For in the room of our stalking Horses, they make use of stalking Oxen,
 which are manag'd and bred up to the purpose, even to admiration. I have seen a 
Moor Indian
 shoot at once five or six Ducks under one of their Bellies, with∣out the least starting, or surprisal to the Ox; and the quiet temper of this la∣borious Animal renders it, I believe, as easily brought up to it, and as pro∣per for this Game as any Horse. Some of the 
Indians
 maintain themselves very well by this Art.


But they use another ingenious me∣thod for catching Wild Fowl, which is very pretty. The Fowler when he is in quest of his Game, espying at length his sport at a distance,
 prepares a Man to go before him toward the place where he sees his Game, and car∣ry in his Hand the boughs of Trees, so


artificially wrought and joyn'd toge∣ther, that they perfectly resemble a small Bush or Hedge, which is a shel∣ter both to the Fowler and him that carries it. By this contrivance, the Fowler passes altogether undiscover'd towards his sport, and gains the con∣venience not only of shooting at what distance he pleases, but sometimes ap∣proaches his Game so near, that he takes it almost in his Hand. If the Wild Fowl be at a distance upon the Water, he then contrives another method for coming near them,
 and surprizing them with his Hands. He takes a Pitcher or Earthen Jarr, so large that he fits it to his Head, which he covers all over, and decks it with the Feathers of what Water-Fowl he thinks convenient; and making holes in it for him to breath and look thro', he then fastens it upon his Head, and being expert in swimming, ventures into the Pond where he sees the Fowl, and moves towards them, without any thing visible but the Pitch∣er above the Water; when he comes near them where they swim about, he catches them one by one by their Legs, and silently pulls them under Water, and


there fastens them to his Girdle. They all this while fancy the moving Fea∣ther'd Jarr a living Fowl, and those that were pluckt under the Water to have been Diving, 'till sometimes the Fowler catches the whole Flock.


Next to the 
Moors
 the 
Bannians
 are the most noted Inhabitants at 
Suratt,
 who are Merchants all by Profession, and very numerous in all parts of 
India.
 They are most innocent and obsequious,
 humble and patient to a Miracle; some∣times they are heated into harsh Ex∣pressions to one another, which is sel∣dom; and this Tongue-Tempest is term'd there a 
Bannian
 Fight, for it never rises to Blows or Blood-shed. The very killing of a Fly with them, is at Crime almost inexpiable. They cannot so much as endure hot Words, as they call them, from the 
Europeans;
 but if they see them exasperated, and in a Rage, retreat for a day or two, 'till they give them time to cool; and when they find the Passion asswag'd, form their Addresses in the most affable manner, and obliging Respect.


The Orientals are generally much more tender and insinuating in their Language,


and more prompt & easie in their Deport∣ment, than those that are bred in the Tempestuous Regions, and Northerly Air of 
Europe,
 which has a certain In∣fluence upon their Spirits, to render them boisterous and irregular, in re∣spect of that submissive temper and af∣fable Carriage of the Eastern Nations. He that has convers'd for any time a∣mong these, can hardly bear the rough∣ness, or be brought to digest the rude∣ness of the others. For the sudden Changes, and uncertainty of the Weather in all Seasons of the Year, affect both the Heads and Hearts of such as are Conversant in these uneven Climates; it makes them suddenly heated into Passions, and as hardly brought to an warmth of Affection; it makes them both unlike other Na∣tions, and inconsistent with themselves, by raising unequal Humours, and un∣constancy in the Passions, unfixt De∣sires, and uncertain Ends. And were the 
Bannians
 to be transported hither, who hold a Transmigration, they would be apt immediately upon their Arrival to conclude, that many of the Men had really invaded the Natures of


some of the most savage Brutes, were animated with no other Souls than those of Tygers and Bears; and that the 
Irish
 and 
French
 Opinion of the 
Lou∣garoos,
 or Men turn'd into Wolves, was as true and authentick a Notion, as any that prevail'd among them.


But that Opinion of the 
Bannians,
 which possesseth them with an Horror of Blood, does quite discourage them from all Hostile Attacks and thoughts of War; and their Despotick Govern∣ment breaks their Spirits, and the fee∣ble phlegmatick Aliments, with the consumptive Heat of the Sun, all con∣tribute to weaken and effeminate their Constitutions, to the producing a tra∣ctable Disposition, and smooth regular Deportment.


They are mainly addicted to prose∣cute their Temporal Interest,
 and the amassing of Treasure; and therefore will fly at the securing of a Pice, tho' they can command whole Lacks of Roupies. I know those among them computed to be worth an Hundred Thousand Pounds, whose Service the Prospect of Sixpence Advantage will command to traverse the whole City of



Suratt.
 For they are always upon the Thoughts of increasing their Wealth, and plodding for Gain, which they lay hold on upon the least occasion, tho' by never so minute and inconsiderable Advantages. By which Diligence they generally secure a comfortable Subsi∣stence; and some of them amass a pro∣digious Treasure.


The 
Bannians
 are by much the most numerous, and by far the wealthiest of all the Pagans of 
India,
 whose Di∣stinction in Religion argues a difference of their various Vocations;
 and each single Trade is diversified by some par∣ticular Opinions; the Goldsmith, and Scrivan, the Joyner, Barber, and Merchant, 
&c.
 as they have different Employments, so are they of divers Sentiments, and distinguish'd in the Ceremonies of their Worship; and mix no more in their Sacred Sentiments of Religion, than in their Civil Arts. Therefore all their Arts are Heredita∣ry, and their Employments confin'd to their own Families. The Son is en∣gag'd in the Father's Trade, and to maintain the Profession of it in his Po∣sterity, it is transmitted always to the


succeeding Generation, which is obli∣ged to preserve it in a lineal Descent, uncommunicated to any Stranger. Up∣on this account all Marriages are re∣strain'd to one Sect,
 and contracted only between Persons of the same Per∣swasion and Profession. The Mer∣chant is debarred from entring into any League of Love with the Daughter of a Goldsmith, Shoemaker, or of any other different Employment; and all Persons are under a strict Confinement, in their Matrimonial Ties and Ad∣dresses to direct their Passions and Affe∣ctions to those only of their own Opi∣nion and Trade. Which Custom has formerly prevail'd even in the most Western Island of this Hemisphere; and several Great Men in the Septs of 
Ireland,
 had heretofore their Physicians, Poets, Smiths, and such like, who al∣ways continued in the same Races.


The 
Indians
 are in many things of matchless Ingenuity in their several Imployments,
 and admirable Mimicks of whatever they affect to copy after. The 
Bannian,
 by the Strength of his Brain only, will sum up his Accounts with equal exactness, and quicker Di∣spatch,


than the readiest Arithmetici∣an can with his Pen. The Weavers of Silk will exactly imitate the nicest and most beautiful Patterns that are brought from 
Europe.
 And the very Ship-Carpenters at 
Suratt
 will take the Model of any 
English
 Vessel, in all the Curiosity of its Building, and the most artificial Instances of Workmanship about it, whether they are proper for the Convenience of Burthen, or of quick Sailing, as exactly as if they had been the first Contrivers. The Wood with which they build their Ships would be very proper for our Men of War in 
Eu∣rope;
 for it has this Excellence, that it never splinters by the Force of a Bullet, nor is injur'd by those violent Impres∣sions, beyond the just Bore of the Shot. The Tailers here fashion the Cloaths for the 
Europeans,
 either Men or Wo∣men, according to every Mode that prevails; and fit up the Commodes, and towring Head-Dresses for the Wo∣men, with as much Skill, as if they had been an 
Indian
 Fashion, or themselves had been Apprentices at the 
Royal Ex∣change.
 But they are tainted with a superstitious Fancy, that mending old


Cloaths in a Morning, is of very ill a∣bode; and therefore they rather are willing to employ that time in fashion∣ing of New, and reserve the Afternoon as most proper for the other.


The 
Indians
 have not yet attempted an Imitation of our Clock-work in Watches; and may be it is, because they seldom continue their just Motions for any long time, by reason of the Dust that flies continually in the Air, which is apt to clog and stop the Wheels. But the 
Chinese
 have under∣taken to take our Clocks and Watches in pieces, to form new ones themselves,
 and may be in some time produce some fresh Improvements in those Mechani∣cal Operations. The 
Siamese
 measure their time by a sort of Water-Clock,
 not like the Clepsydra of old, wherein the Water descended from above, but by forcing it upwards through a small Hole in the bottom of a Copper Cup, plac'd in a Tub of Water. When the Water has sprung up so long that the Cup is full, it sinks down, and those that stand by it forthwith make a noise with Basons, signifying that the Hour is expired.


In some things the Artists of 
India
 out-do all the Ingenuity of 
Europe, viz.
 in the painting of Chites or Cal∣licoes, which in 
Europe
 cannot be pa∣rallell'd, either in the brightness and life of the Colours, or in their conti∣nuance upon the Cloath. The Gold Stripes likewise in their Sooseys, and the Gold Flowers in their Atlasses, are imitated with us, but not to Perfection. And the Cornelian Rings with double Chains of Gold about them, meeting at several Distances, where small sparks of Diamonds, Rubies, or Saphires are in∣laid to beautifie the Ring, surpass the Skill of any other Nation to arrive to. I cannot boast of the Lack upon Scru∣tores and Tables at 
Suratt,
 which is but ordinary in respect of that at 
Ja∣pan.
 They make it, as I was told by Mr. 
Prescot,
 one of the Council at 
Bom∣bay,
 invulnerable to all Impressions, so hard and thorowly firm, that if you will but rise to the price of it, they will venture it with a Bagonet, and forfeit it entirely, if the sharpest Point shall pierce it very deep. But yet all the Wood among them which is Lackt, is not of this impenitrable


Hardness; and yet all of it is laid on both deeper, and made much firmer, than the Lack of 
Tunquin,
 which some∣times yields to the Force of the Nail of ones Finger pressed upon it;
 and is one way of trying its Excellence. This Varnish grows upon Trees very common in the Woods of 
Siam,
 which distils from them like a Gum, and is transported to 
China, Japan,
 and other Kingdoms.


Among the 
Bannians
 are reckon'd 24 Casts, or Sects,
 who both refrain from an indiscriminate mixture in Marriages, and from eating together in common. They all maintain a Transmigration of Souls,
 and Abstinence from the Food of any Living Creature, according to the Doctrine of 
Pythagoras,
 who is presum'd by some Learned Men to have borrow∣ed his Opinion from them. This 
Phi∣lostratus
 relates of 
Jarchas,
 a Principal of the 
Bramins,
 how he told 
Apollonius Tyanaeus,
 that he himself had formerly been 
Ganges, Apollonius
 had been an 
Egyptian
 Mariner, and an Attendant that waited upon them had been 
Pala∣medes,
 and in new Bodies had repre∣sented themselves to the World. Which


Opinion spread it self as far formerly as our Nation, among the Druids,
 who for this reason taught and preserib'd an Abstinence from Flesh. They fancy that every Man, according to his De∣merits in his Life-time, shall animate a noble, or more infamous Animal af∣ter Death.
 And him they pronounce compleatly happy, whose Soul, after its departure out of the Body, can for∣tunately escape into that of a Cow, and inform the Body of that blest Crea∣ture, which above all the rest of the Animal Generations, is of singular E∣steem and greatest Respect, even al∣most to Adoration: A solemn Address is paid to this Creature every Morning; and he that is destitute of one at home, makes his Visit to that of his Neigh∣bours. They admire it for the Excel∣lence of its Nature, for which it is con∣spicuous in those extraordinary Bene∣fits which Mankind receive from it in the support of their Lives; and for the Convenience of it after Death, in con∣ducting them over a broad deep River, which they are ingaged to pass, which would be impassable, were it not for the Cow's Tail, which the 
Bramins



tell them, they are to take hold of in getting over.


Besides these, there are other Rea∣sons for the profound Respect they have for the Cows; for they believe, with the 
Mahometans,
 that the Foun∣dations of the Earth are supported on the Horns of these Creatures; and that the Cows extraordinary fast Motion causes Earthquakes. They tell us like∣wise, that 
Mahaden,
 being greatly pro∣vok'd by the Crimes of the People, and resolving upon it to destroy the World, he was appeas'd by a Cow, who reconcil'd him, and sav'd the Earth from utter Ruin. Therefore did the former Kings of 
Malabar,
 when∣ever they created a Nairo or Knight, after their embracing him, enjoyn'd his Kindness to those two especially, the 
Bramins
 and the Kine.
 And whatever Opinion some present Philosophers have of Brutes, who deny them not only the use of Reason, which others have a∣scrib'd to them, but likewise that of Sense, by degrading of them into meer Machines; the Ancients had better Thoughts of them; and the 
Egyptians
 and 
Persians,
 as well as 
Indians,
 had


them in universal Esteem. The 
Egypti∣ans
 form'd the Images of their Gods in the Similitude of Beasts,
 or Birds, or Fishes; as that of an Ox, a Crocodile, or other Creature, to affright the Vul∣gar by these Sacred Symbols from hurt∣ing the dumb Animals; and that struck with a Sacred Reverence, they might abstain from the Death of any living Creature.
 And thus the Disciples of the 
Persian
 Magi receiv'd an Alteration of their Names into those of Beasts, or Birds; and were called Lions, Pan∣thers, Hawks, or something else, to form in them a likeing to those Crea∣tures; and by resembling them in the various Figures with which their Gar∣ments were painted, to bring them to entertain a certain Friendship and Af∣fection to them; thereby insinuating this 
Indian
 Perswasion of the Transmi∣gration of Souls, and that the Spirit of Man is liable successively to animate all kinds of Bodies.


The 
Bannians
 are of so firm a Belief in this matter, and so far gone in this Assertion, that if either Bird or Beast be seen to frequent their Habitation, it must consequently be the Spirit of


some lately departed Friend. 
Mora∣dash
 a 
Bannian,
 and Scrivan or Secreta∣ry to the 
English
 Brokers, was some few Years past sorely afflicted for the Death of his Father, and in deep me∣lancholy Sighs had long bewail'd his Misery and Loss. Till at length a large Snake appearing in the House some time after, where his Father died, became a Refuge to his sorrowful Thoughts, and reliev'd the Troubles of his Mind. 
Moradash
 fixing his Eyes upon the crawling Snake, and atten∣tively considering its Windings and Motions for a while, revolv'd in his Mind how it found out its way thither, having never seen't before. And there∣fore strengthening his Opinion by his Affection, concludes that this could be nothing else but the Soul of his ancient Father, who in this Shape applied him∣self to his Son for Relief and Nourish∣ment. Upon which his Superstition wrought so powerfully, that nothing now could alter this new Opinion, but he must carefully nourish this Snake, and so religiously continues a filial Re∣spect to it, appointing it daily a certain Allowance of Rice and Milk. The


Snake lodges in a Hole of the Wall, and after taking his Repast and Liber∣ty in the Room, retires into his Apart∣ment, till Hunger calls him forth to a fresh Meal; and is now both by the Scrivan and his Family as carefully at∣tended, as if his Father were alive. This fond indulgent 
Indian
 is as pro∣fuse in his Favours to some Rats,
 which lodge in his House, and are grown as familiar as Cats; for to these he allows some daily Food, because he is certain they harbour the Souls of some depart∣ed Relations.


Some Men think that this Opinion of the Metempsycosis takes its Origi∣nal from the Transformation of 
Nebu∣chadnezzar
 into a Beast, which is men∣tioned in the Book of 
Daniel;
 and that when his Soul passed into that of a Brute, when he was under a corporal Transformation, the Souls of other Men might undergo the same Fate af∣ter Death, as a Punishment for their Crimes, as his was. For the ancient 
Gauls
 maintain'd the Immortality of the Soul, and its shifting continually from one Body to another; and that according to its Deportment here, such


and such Bodies were appointed it by God, more or less painful, and suitable to its Condition. 
Claud. in Ruff. Lib.
 2.


Muta ferarum


Cogit vincla pati, truculentos in gerit Ʋrsis,


Pradonesque Lupis, fallaces vulpibus addit,


Atque ubi per varios Annos per mille figuras


Egit, Lethaeo purgatos flumine tandem


Rursus ad humanae revocat primordia formae.


He made them wear the silent Yoak of Brutes, some that were Cruel, he lodg∣ed in the Bodies of Bears and Wolves; those that were Crafty, in Foxes, and others in other Animals, 'till after the succession of a thousand Years and Shapes, at length they are re-plac'd into Human Shapes, when they had been well purg'd in 
Lethe
's Flood.


But to strengthen this Consideration the more concerning 
Nebuchadnezzar,
 they observe, that this wonderful Trans∣formation of that great Monarch, hap∣pen'd at or about the very same time that 
Pythagoras
 was at 
Babylon,
 whither he travell'd to gain the Eastern Learn∣ing;

but this may be a small mistake in time. Hence he brought the Report fresh with him, and being of a fanci∣ful Genius, thought the best way to solve that strange occurrence, was to assert a Metempsychosis. But tho' there is no mention of the Soul's Trans∣migration more ancient among the 
Greeks
 than 
Pythagoras;
 yet among the 
Chineses,
 whose Antiquities are said to be stretcht backwards above four thou∣sand Years, there is this Opinion yet current among their Learned Men, as well as among the 
Indians,
 and is a∣greed to be of ancient Date: That the Souls after Death are Subject to a Transmigration. And it is not impro∣bable that much of the 
Phaenician,
 as well as 
Grecian
 and 
Egyptian
 Instituti∣ons, were deriv'd from the ancient and remote Fountains of Learning, the 
In∣dies
 and 
China:
 Especially, if we consi∣der not only the Opinion of the Soul's Transmigration, but of the Eternity of Matter; the four Cardinal Virtues, the Indolence of Body, and Tranquility of Mind, Abstinence from living Crea∣tures, and several others, which seem to be intirely Oriental, and brought


from thence by 
Pythagoras, Democritus, Lycurgus,
 and others, who travell'd into those distant parts.


The Days set apart for the publick Devotion of the 
Bannians,
 are only two in a Month, about our ninth and twen∣ty fourth; in which, by a very strict Discipline, they abstain from all things eatable 'till the Evening most Religi∣ously. And inculcate this severity up∣on their younger Children, in their In∣fant Growth, to induce the observance of it with facility upon them,
 and to render the Abstinence tolerable and less troublesome in their riper Age.


The Pagans, who are bred to labour and Manual Occupations, consecrate each Day in the Week,
 and every thing they take in Hand thus far; that they fill their Mouths with a pious Song at the first dawning of the Morning, as soon as ever they ingage in their seve∣ral Employments and Manual Occupa∣tions, and never cease their Secular Vocation without concluding with the mixture of a Holy Rhime. When a Company of Labourers are employ'd to∣gether about the same Work, this sa∣cred Ballad is repeated by them some∣times


alternately, sometimes by single persons, the rest answering in a Chorus, all the Day long, without the intermis∣sion of one quarter of an Hour. The Lascars or Sea-Men upon the Water, all the while they handle the Oar, divert themselves by turns with this tuneful Melody. This piece of Religion they are so solemnly and constantly inur'd to, that if they design'd the undertaking a∣ny work in secresie and un-observ'd, the custom they have acquir'd in sing∣ing would be apt by some sudden E∣ruption to betray their Privacy, and discover the silence and obscurity they desir'd.
 I fancy the warmth of the Air, which is apt to stupifie the Spirits, and render them unweildy and dull, was as likely a Reason for introducing this me∣lodious Diversion, which is apt to keep them active and awake at their Work, as it was to exercise the Devotion of their Thoughts.
 The Introduction of this Custom was probably design'd by him, who writ the second Volume of the five principal ones that are extant in 
China;
 which is a Collection of Odes, and several other little things of that nature. For Musick being greatly


esteem'd and much used in 
China,
 and whatever is publish'd in this Volume, having respect only to the Purity of Manners, and practice of Virtue, those that wrote it compos'd it, in Verse, to the end that every one being inabled to sing the things therein contain'd, they might be in every ones Mouth. And from thence it might spread it self, for this very reason, as far as 
India.


Aureng-Zebe,
 upon an implacable de∣testation to the Idolatry of the 
Banni∣ans
 and other Gentiles, has forbid in a great measure their Pagodes, and com∣manded both a defacing of them, and suppressing the Solemnities of their pub∣lick Meetings, which thereupon is not so common as formerly, and that which is conniv'd at, is generally in some dist∣ant Priviledg'd Parts.


They repeat their Devotions,
 especi∣ally the 
Moors,
 in the Corners of the Streets, and upon the House tops, in the High Ways, and where there is commonly a publick Concourse of People; as if they were ambitious of opportunities of demonstrating their Zeal to the God they worship, whom they always approach with Postures


most submissive, and suitable to the re∣spect of that awful Majesty they im∣plore. After they have bended the Knee,
 they in the most profound Pro∣stration kiss the Ground frequently with their Fore-heads, express their servency in Devotion with the most ardent pathetick Aspirations, in the Mornings especially, and with the setting Sun.


They are constant in their washings, either in the River 
Tappy,
 which runs by the Walls of 
Suratt,
 or in their own Houses before they stir abroad; at which time they cannot endure the least touch from any Stranger's Hand upon their naked Bodies, 'till they have finisht their Lustrations. And all their Infants, even in their tender Years, are washt all over both Morning and Even∣ing. When they are called upon by the Necessities of Nature,
 they always carry in their Hands a small Jarr of Water, which they use to wash them∣selves clean with; and this Office is never perform'd but only with the Left-Hand. They never drink out of the same Cup with a Christian,
 or any Person of a different Sect; nor defile


their Lips with the same Water that has been touch'd by any Stranger; whereby all their Water-Pots are re∣serv'd entirely for their owe Use, nor are ours ever desir'd by them. There∣fore they carry about with them Kou∣sers or Jarrs of Water when they go abroad, to quench their Thirst, and pour it into their Mouths at a certain distance, according to the 
Thracian
 manner of taking full draughts with∣out winking, without either shutting the Mouth, or fetching Breath. See 
Horace,
 Book 
the first, Ode
 36.


— multi Damalis meri


Bassum Threicia vincat amystide.


The Kousers are made of a sort of Earth,
 which preserves the Water cool and palatable, and so porous, that once only in a minute or thereabouts, a single drop distils thro' the body of it, which falls into a Bason underneath, and ac∣quires a little pleasing Coolness, as well as Rarefaction, by the Distillation.


When any 
European
 is invited by a 
Bannian
 to a Collation, the Repast is


little else but variety of Sweet-meats laid upon the green Leaves of Trees,
 which after the Entertainment are thrown away. Sometimes a Dish or two of rich spic'd Palau may come in to make up a complete Banquet. Sher∣bet, that is Wine, Water, and Lemon; tis the best Drink they indulge them∣selves, or allow others commonly to partake of. For Wine they abominate as well as Flesh, and hate it as much as 
Manes,
 the Author of the 
Manichees,
 who pronounced it to be the Blood of De∣vils.


India,
 of all the Regions of the Earth, is the only publick Theatre of Justice and Tenderness to Brutes, and all li∣ving Creatures; for not confining Murther to the killing of a Man, they Religiously abstain from taking away the Life of the meanest Animal, Mite, or Flea; any of which if they chance wilfully to destroy, nothing less than a very considerable Expiation must A∣tone for the Offence. This Precept was comprehended in that short System of Injunctions laid down by 
Draco
 and 
Triptolemus,
 the most ancient Law-giv∣ers among the 
Athenians, To Honour


their Parents, and neither to kill Man nor Beast.
 And 'tis observ'd, that the Benefits which the 
Barbarians
 fancied they received from Beasts, made them less Cruel and severe towards them, and sometimes Consecrate them; which 
Plutarch
 thus excuses in the 
Egyptians,
 saying, 
That it was not the Cat, the Ox, or the Dog which they adored; but that in these Beasts, they ador'd some resem∣blance of the Divine Perfections; in this, the Vigilance, in that the Patience and Ʋtility, and the Vivacity in the other.
 But however a Civil Regard, tho' no Veneration, is enjoyn'd as a common Duty of Humanity, which forbids an Arbitrary Violence, a Cruel or Wanton Malice towards them. Therefore the 
Romans,
 pleas'd with the Vigilance of the Geese, by publick Voice took care of their Nourishment. And beyond this, the 
Athenians
 Decreed a liberty of Summering it up and down, and taking their Choice and Range in any Pasture, Hill, or Valley, to the Mules that were Employed in Build∣ing the Temple, called 
Hecatompe∣don.


But that which most of all amuses and disturbs the 
Bannian,
 is our de∣struction of living Creatures in their growing Years; for in this they con∣demn us of Folly, as well as Cruelty, in preventing that greater advantage which we might promise our selves by their Increase in Bulk and Age; and denominates it, in their Opinion, a dis∣advantagious, as well as barbarous A∣ction in those that kill them. And therefore they mightily decry our Inhumanity, and inveigh severely a∣gainst our Imprudence in slaughtering Kids, Lambs, Chickens, 
&c.
 But above all,
 the Calf is the Darling Animal a∣mong them, as the Goat is the Idol a∣dor'd by the 
Bonzes
 of 
Tunquin,
 whose Life they seldom fail to Ransom, and that sometimes at an immoderate rate, when they find it is in danger. There∣fore the Gentiles near 
Goa
 used to di∣vide the meat, when it was ready, into three parts; the first was given to the Poor, the second to the Cow, and the third to the Family. The Young Fa∣ctors at 
Suratt
 divert themselves with this fondness of the 
Bannians
 to the dumb Creatures, and make an advan∣tage


of their tenderness and respects to them; for the 
English
 Caterer is cau∣tious in buying a Calf for Slaughter, lest some 
Bannian,
 Friend to the Factory, should beg the Life of it, or some way molest or prevent him in taking it away; tho' at other times he makes himself a gainer by its Redemption. Some∣times the Young Men enter with a Gun or small Fowling-piece into the Fields and Inclosures adjoining to the Habitations of the 
Bannians,
 and there make a show of shooting Sparrows, Turtle-Doves, or other small Birds a∣mong the Trees, which when the 
Bannian
 observes (as it is design'd he should) he runs in haste, as it were for Life, to bribe the Fowler, not only with cour∣teous Expressions and fair Speeches, but with ready Money, not to persist in his Diversion; and drops in his Hand a Roupie or two to be gone, and not defile the Ground with the effusion of any Blood upon it; for all kind of Fowl are as dear to them, as ever the Dove was to 
Semiramis,
 or the Swan was unto 
Philip;
 and they entertain all their fellow Animals with a singular E∣steem and kind Respect; and are at


considerable Annual Expences for pre∣serving their Lives from Inhumanity and Death.


For within a Mile distance from 
Suratt
 is a large Hospital,
 supported by the 
Bannians
 in its maintenance of Cows, Horses, Goats, Dogs, and other Animals diseas'd, or lame, infirm or decay'd by Age; for when an Ox by, many Years Toil grows feeble, and unfit for any farther Service; lest this should tempt a merciless Owner to take away his Life, because he finds him an unprofitable Burthen, and his Flesh might be serviceable to him when he was dead; therefore the 
Bannian
 re∣prieves his Destiny, either by begging him from the Owner, or by buying of him at a certain Rate, and then places him in the Hospital, where he is rescu∣ed from any other Death, but what is due to Nature, and is there attended and fed, 'till he spins out the appoint∣
d customary term of Life. This Cha∣erity which they extend to Beasts, is ac¦counted by them an act of great Re∣putation and Virtue; nor can they be reconcil'd to that inhuman Cruel∣ty, which destroys those Creatures


which are the Nurses of our Lives, and by whose labour we live at Ease.


Near this Hospital is another built for the preservation of Buggs, Fleas, and other Vermin,
 which suck the Blood of Men; and therefore to main∣tain them with that choice Diet to which they are used, and to feed them with their proper Fare, a poor Man is hired now and then to rest all Night upon the Cot, or Bed, where the Vermin are put, and fasten'd upon it, lest the stinging of them might force him to take his flight before the Morning, and so they nourish them∣selves by sucking his Blood, and feed-in on his Carcass.


Once a Year the charitable 
Bannian
 pre∣pares a set Banquet for all the Flies that are in his House,
 and sets down before them, upon the Floor or Table, large shallow Dishes of sweet Milk and Su∣gar mixt together, the most delicious Fare of that liquorish little Creature.


At other times he extends his Libe∣rality to the Pismires,
 and walks with a Bag of Rice under his Arm, two or three Miles forward into the Country, and stops, as he proceeds, at each Ant-Hill


that he meets with, to leave be∣hind him his Benevolence, a handful or two of Rice straw'd upon the Ground, which is the beloved Dainty on which the hungry Pismires feed, and their best reserve and store in time of need.


Therefore they never taste the flesh of any thing that has breath'd the com∣mon Air, nor pollute themselves with feeding on any thing endued with Life; and are struck with astonishment at the voratious Appetites of the Christi∣ans, who heap whole Bisks of Fish up∣on their Tables, and sacrifice whole Hecatombs of Animals to their Glutto∣ny. They cannot be tempted, either by the delicacy of the Food,
 or for pre∣vention of either Sickness or Death, to so enormous an Offence as the tast∣ing of Flesh. Vegetable products, and the Milk of Cattle, Rice, and other sorts of Grane, which Nature affords in plenty, and they with Innocence can enjoy, is the lawful Nourishment they delight in; nor will they be induced, by the meer indulgence of their Ap∣petites, to make their Tables Altars of Luxury and Excesses, no more than


the original Inhabitants of the World, whom Antiquity supposes not to have been Carnivorous, nor to have tasted Flesh in those first Ages, but only to have fed upon Fruits and Herbs.


The Prohibition of Flesh being eaten with the Blood, was an ancient Sancti∣on of the 
East,
 and is very universal to this day. It was forbidden by Moses, because he plac'd the Life in it; nor is it dispens'd with by the 
Mahometans.
 Some ancient Philosophers, as 
Empedo∣cles,
 plac'd the seat of the Soul in the Blood, and 
Democritus
 assign'd it the whole Body: And tho' the 
Bannians
 are under restraint from the Blood of either Animal, or that of the Grape, yet will they freely taste the Grapes themselves, and entertain themselves Luxuriously with their Juice, while it is innocent and harmless. We have Grapes brought to 
Suratt,
 from the middle of 
February
 'till towards the end of 
March;
 some from 
Amadavad,
 some from a Village called 
Naapoure,
 four days Journey distant from 
Suratt.
 They feed likewise upon Pine-Apples, Custard-Apples, so called, because they resemble a Custard in Colour and


Taste, and many other sorts of Fruit unknown to 
Europe.
 But the Mangoes are of principal esteem, and the most common Fruit of 
India:
 They have a Stone in the middle, by which and their outward shape, they come nearest to the form of our long Plums of any Fruit, only they are generally much larger; they attribute many medici∣nal qualities to this sort of Fruit, and ascribe to it those Virtues which free them from all Diseases incident to that Season of the Year, and sometimes those Chronical Distempers they labour un∣der. They are of exquisite Taste when they come to Maturity, and are Eaten then in vast quantities by the 
Indians
 and 
Europeans,
 as well for the Security of their Health as for pleasure and delight. When they are Green, they are Pickl'd there and sent abroad, and make that Man∣go Achar, which we taste in 
England.


The cold quality of the Cucumber is here so prepar'd and digested by the Sun's Heat, that the 
Bannians,
 without endangering their Health, will feed upon them as plentifully as we do up∣on Apples. And the Water-Melons are very large, delicious, and easily


purchas'd, and very refreshing cooling Fruit in the warmer Season. But the Musk-Melons from 
Amadavad,
 highly deserve that fragrant Name,
 being in∣riched both with a flavour and a taste superiour to any of that kind in the World.


The 
Bannians
 are not restrain'd from the liberal Draughts of Tea and Cof∣fee,
 to revive their wasted Spirits, a∣ny part of the Day; but in those they may Revel uncensur'd, as long as they please; and have there more inviting Temptations to drink them plentifully, than with us. For the Coffee,
 when it it truly boiled and prepared, carries a kind of yellow Oil upon the head of it, by which it acquires a soft, pleasant Relish, and requires so much Art in bringing it to this Perfection, that it ingages some who affect this sort of Li∣quor in the expence of a skilful Peon, on purpose to look after it in the Pre∣paration. This Berry is of very com∣mon growth in 
Arabia,
 especially about 
Mocha,
 and from thence is transported to the remotest Regions of the 
East
 or 
West.
 Coffee is said to be good for Cleansing the Blood, for helping Di∣gestion,


and quickening the Spirits.


Tea likewise is a common Drink with all the Inhabitants of 
India,
 as well 
Europeans
 as Natives; and by the 
Dutcb
 is used as such a standing Enter∣tainment, that the Tea-pot's seldom off the Fire,
 or unimploy'd. This hot Liquor it may be suppos'd might not seem so proper and agreeable to so hot an Air, and yet we find is very con∣venient for our Health, and agree∣able to the Habits of our Bodies. And even all the Arak Punch which is dunk there, is seldom toucht, 'till by a heated Iron, or Wedge of Gold, it is made luke warm. This both supplies the Vapours which are continually ex∣hal'd from the Body, and helps the prevention of Fevers by keeping the Pores open.


Tea, with some hot Spice intermixt and boiled in the Water, has the Re∣pute of prevailing against the Head∣ach, Gravel, and Griping in the Guts, and 'tis generally drunk in 
India,
 either with Sugar-Candy, or, by the more curious, with small Conserv'd Lemons. And a Dram of double distill'd Arak, is prescrib'd likewise as an Excellent


Remedy against tht Gripes, and such inward Twistings of the Bowels. The frequent use of this Innocent Tea, and the perpetual perspiration caus'd by the Heat, which is augmented by this Li∣quor, are the reason why the Gout and Stone, Agues, Rheumatisms and Ca∣tarhs are rarely heard of in these parts. The Heat indeed abates the vigour of our Spirits, and thereby induces a lan∣guid Faintness, which is the general, but withal a very tolerable Infirmity, in respect of those acute Distempers. The 
Chinese,
 among whom the Tea grows, take abundance of this Drink before their Meals, and are generally very plump and in very good likeing.


Our 
English
 President enquir'd much for the Flower of Tea, among those who had been Conversant in 
China,
 but could never obtain a sight of any; and it seems very doubtful whether that Shrub bears any Flowers at all up∣on it. For a 
Chinese Madarine,
 who ar∣riv'd at 
Suratt
 in the quality of an Envoy from 
Limpo,
 brought with him several kinds of Tea, but no Flower; some of it was so valuable in 
China,
 that a single Catte of it was reputed a noble


Present for the chief Ministers, and it was very rarely to be found, however he brought with him a Taste of it for our President, among several other kinds, wherein he gave him a Morning En∣tertainment. And a Learned Physici∣an, who for some Years had lived in 
China,
 spoke nothing of this Flower of Tea, only gave this Account of three other sorts that grew there,
 and were most frequently drunk among them, 
viz.
 Bing, Singlo, and Bohe. Bohe is a small Leaf and very young, and by its moisture, upon the score of its un∣der-growth, requires more than an or∣dinary frixure, which makes it acquire that blackness visible in it, and which discolours the Water to a kind of Red∣ness The second is Singlo, which is a larger Leaf, because more grown. The third, which is Bing, is the largest of all; and is in 
China
 of a proportionable larger rate than the other two. Singlo obtains most among the 
Europeans;
 but Bohe among the 
Chinese
 has so much the esteem and precedence above the other two,
 that in their Sickness they totally forbid them, but in their most dangerous Distempers instantly make


use of this; and Experience convinces them of the Choice and Utility of that Leaf in their Extremities.
 They all proceed, he told me, from a Shrub a∣bout the height of our Goosberry or Curran Bushes. The Leaf is first green,
 but is made crisp and dry by frying twice, or oftner, in a Pan; and as of∣ten as it is taken off the Fire it is roll'd with the Hand upon a Table, till it curls. This Preparation is cautiously conceal'd from all Strangers, and was ac∣cidentally known to him by the oppor∣tunity he once had of peeping through the Crevice of a Door when it was a preparing. He found it growing in the Latitude of 51, as well as in a warmer Air; which gives a probable Conje∣cture for its thriving in our Kingdom; for 
London
 lies near the same Parallel.


As Musk and Amber grease are said to damage Pearl, so is Tea prejudic'd by the approach of unsavory Smells, and particularly of 
Assa Foetida,
 and is so delicate and tender, that it is injur'd by the very Breath of only the common am∣bient Air. For preventing which it is in∣clos'd in Pots of Totaneg, or in strong large Tubs of Wood, and in them is safely sent abroad.


The 
Bannian
 seldom drinks of the common Water of the Wells or Rivers, only what falls from Heaven in the time of the 
Mussouns,
 which is preserv'd in large Tanques and Cisterns made on purpose to receive it, and keep it ready for their use the following Year. For in this, as well as his Diet, he is very squeamish; and therefore he confines his Draught to those Heavenly Show∣ers, which he esteems a more pure and Etherial Liquor for descending from above.


Dye
 is a particular innocent kind of Diet, fed upon by the 
Indians
 for the most part about Noon. It is sweet Milk turn'd thick, mix'd with boil'd Rice and Sugar, and is very effectual against the Rage of Fevers and of Fluxes, the prevailing Distempers of 
India.
 Early in the Morning, or late at Night, they seldom touch it, be∣cause they esteem it too cool for their Stomachs and Nocturnal Delights.


Kitcheree
 is another Dish very com∣mon among them, made of 
Dol,
 that is, a small round Pea and Rice boiled to∣gether, and is very strengthning, tho' not very savoury. Of this the 
European



Sailers feed in those parts once or twice a Week, and are forc'd at those times to a Pagan Abstinence from Flesh, which creates in them a perfect Dislike and utter Detestation to those 
Bannian
 Days, as they commonly call them.


Wood is the only combustible mat∣ter in 
Suratt,
 which is commonly made use of in the Kitchin, either by 
Indian
 or 
European,
 for boiling and roasting their Victuals. Some of the more poor Natives make Fires of dried Cow-Dung. There is not any Necessity of Fuel in private Apartments, the great Globe of Light is the universal Fire all over 
India,
 which cherishes and keeps them warm without any Expence of Chimneys or of Hearths in their Lodg∣ing-Rooms. The Fire-Wood is bought in the Bazar by Weight,
 for so much the Seer, and is brought home by Servants. And every Roupie which the Servant lays out in buying either this or any other Goods, he peremptorily demands back for his own use a Couple of Pice from the Seller.


The 
Bannian
 is very curious in dres∣sing his Meat,
 and preparing his Vi∣ctuals; and therefore least some un∣clean


Hand should have touch'd what is sold already cookt in the Shops or the Bazar, he seldom buys any from thence, but eats what is dress'd only by his own Domesticks. In their so∣lemn Entertainments they are kind and communicative, to the meanest Atten∣dant of any Person of Consequence or Rank whom they invite to their Hou∣ses; and like the Great Men at 
Tun∣quin,
 will provide almost for the very Dogs.


In the middle of the City is built a noble spacious Caravansaray, or Inn, for the Convenience of Merchants that are Strangers, and resort hither for Traf∣fick, where they may decently repose at Night. For here are no Publick Hou∣ses for the Entertainment of Guests or Travellers,
 lest the Jealousie of the Husbands should be rais'd concerning their Wives and Daughters, by the fre∣quency of such Temptations. And up∣on this Account, all Men whose Affairs call them into the Country, either take care of providing their own Victuals, or commit that Charge to their Peons and Attendants, to make it ready for them at their Resting-places by Day,


or in the Fields where they sleep at Night.


As the heat of the Sun, when it is in the Meredian, is very apt to pall the Appetite, and dissipate that warmth and Heat of the Stomach, which is pro∣per for Digestion;
 so the 
Bannians
 and 
Moors,
 to prevent that inconvenience, change their Repasts to other Seasons of the Day, and take their Collations about 8 or 9 in the Morning, and at 4 or 5 in the Afternoon. And often at Midnight, after their nocturnal Embra∣ces, they recover their Spirits by some nourishing Food, to excite them again to fresh Amours.


The Heat of the Day is spent in Rest and Sleeping,
 to refresh their exhausted Strength, sometimes upon Cotts, and sometimes upon Bechanahs,
 which are thick Quilts, spread the breadth of a Room, and the length of a Man, with Bolsters at the Head, where Eight or nine may sleep together. They sel∣dom take their Repose without a Wench in their Arms, that is a small Pillaber upon their Stomack to defend it from the ambient Vapours that might be apt to annoy it; and sel∣dom

use any other Covering but their Shirts and Drawers, except it be a Sheet or slight Callico spread over them.


The Garments which the 
Indians
 wear, are generally made of white Cal∣lico, fashion'd into Caba's, that is, outward Coats, somewhat like our Frocks, turning over their Breasts as far as the Shoulders, and from thence tied with strings down to the middle; with a Puggarie, or Turbant upon their Heads. It was very surprizing at first, to view so many People passing up and down, most of one coloured Cloaths, and those white. For a distinction be∣tween the 
Moors
 and 
Bannians,
 the 
Moors
 tie their Caba's always on the Right side, and the 
Bannians
 on the left; and if any 
European
 thinks fit to dress himself, and take upon him the 
Indian
 Garb, he therein compliments the 
Moors,
 and pays his Respect to their manner of wearing and putting it on.
 The length of their Breeches, which descend to their Heels, serve them instead of Stockins; which is the reason that their Language has no word for our Stockins, so that they


thrust their Feet always bare into their Shoes, which are very neatly Imbroi∣der'd with Gold, or Silver, or Silk Flowers.


No Man in 
India,
 no not the 
Mo∣gul
's Son, is permitted the Priviledge of wearing a Kittisal or Umbrella, let the Sun's Beams be never so scortching, but a Peon goes before the great Men, carrying a small Skreen made of Ostrich Feathers, to shade his Eyes. The use of the Umbrella is sacred to the Prince, appropriated only to his use.


The 
Bannians
 observe several Fasts; but one more solemn in the Year is much remarkt, when they drink no∣thing in the Morning but the fresh Stale of the Worshipful Cow,
 which they fancy is abstersive, and endow'd with a kind of lustral quality, apt to purifie the Defilements of a 
Bannian;
 as one of themselves was pleas'd to tell me.


Their constant Ablutions and daily Washings,
 their Abstinence from Ani∣mals and from Wine, had doubtless a prospect more than what was merely Religious in it; they were not im∣prudently design'd upon a Civil Ac∣count,


to keep their Organs clear, their Spirits lively, and their Constitutions free from those Diseases, which a gros∣ser Diet is apt to create in these warm Climates, and to preserve their Bodies Neat and Clean by frequent Bathings and Lustrations. For there is not one of these Customs which are fasten'd upon them by the Rules of their Re∣ligion, but what comport very well, and highly contibute to the Health and Pleasure of their Lives. And for this end they are much addicted to sweet Smells and fragrant Exhalations, and generally each Night procure a Necklace of Jessemy Flowers to sleep with, for at that time they more sen∣sibly emit their Fragrant Vapours. The scent of flowers is much abated on the day time,
 being dissipated by the great Heat; which is the reason why the Streets of 
Suratt,
 tho in ma∣ny places over-spread with the Excre∣ments of Men and Beasts, yet never molest those that pass thro' them, by an unsavoury Smell, because the Sun's attenuation of the Vapours, diminish∣es their strength from annoying the Sense.


Under their abstemious mortifying Diet,
 the 
Bannians
 maintain as good a Habit of Body, are as comly and pro∣portionable as other People, and live to reckon as many Years as those that pity their spare Food. But in their Thoughts they are often more quick and nimble,
 by that course of living they chuse to delight in, which ren∣ders their Spirits more pure and subtle, and thereby greatly facilitates their Comprehension of things. Besides, this Religious abstinence very much disin∣gages their Affections to the World,
 disintangles their fears of Death, and Passions for these momentary things; it sets their Spirits upon the Wing, ready without reluctancy to quit this Life, in expectation of a better; and makes many of them pass as chearfully into the invisible World, as they would take a Journey from their own King∣dom to another Country.


Their Wealth consists only in Cash and Jewels,
 the distinction of personal and real Estate is not heard in 
India,
 and that they preserve as close and private as they can, lest the 
Mogul
's Exchequer shou'd be made their Trea∣sury.


This curbs them in their Expen∣ces, and awes them to great secresie in their Commerce, especially in their receiving,
 or Payments of Money, for which they either make use of the dark∣ness of the Night, or of the obscurity of the Morning, in conveying it to the place of Payment. For should the 
Mo∣gul's
 Officers see the Chests and Bags of Gold and Silver carried as publickly here, as they are in the Streets of 
Lon∣don,
 they would be apt to change their Owner, and be deliver'd to him who calls himself the Original Proprietor. And yet the condition of these 
Indians
 is not so vile and lamentable by much, as that of the Commonalty at 
Tunquin,
 where the vulgar Mechanicks are Slaves for one part of the Year, and work three Months for the King, and two for the 
Mandarins,
 and are only al∣lowed the rest of the Year for them∣selves, for supporting of their Wives and Families. This is called there 
Viecquam,
 that is the condition of a Slave.


But I was told of a Noble 
Bannian
 at 
Amadavad,
 who, by bribeing the 
Nabob
 into a connivance, did on pub∣lick


Festivals, and times of Jubilee make his Entertainments in Dishes and Plates of solid Gold. But poor Man, his splendid living did not hold out long,
 before it rais'd the Envy of a neighbouring 
Moor,
 who could not en∣dure this repeated Magnificence in a Gentile, and therefore dogging the Merchant as he rode one day out of the City, he followed him at a distance, and shot him dead with a poison'd Arrow. Sumptuousness and State suit not very well with the Life and Con∣dition of a 
Bannian;
 they must not both flourish long together. This keeps our Brokers at 
Suratt,
 who are 
Banni∣ans,
 from all costly disbursements, tho' they are reckon'd by some to be worth 15, by others 30 Lacks of Roupies, and causes a Contraction of their Ex∣pences, and a retrenchment of their Tables to three or four Thousand Rou∣pies a Year, without any show of a lux∣urious Garniture, either on their Dish∣es, or in their Houses.


Their main Cost is expended upon their Women,
 who ambitiously affect a Gayety in their Dress and Cloathing. Jewels and Ornaments are the very


joy of their Hearts, (as they usually call them) with which they are deckt from the Crown of the Head to the very feet. Their Toes are adorn'd with Rings, and their Legs with Shackles of Gold, or Silver, or some other Metal, which are sometimes above two Inches in Di∣ameter, wreath'd and hollow. The Women that carry the Water about the Streets, will not walk abroad with∣out these Ornaments upon them. Some tie up the Hair of their Heads, and put it under a hollow large piece of Silver, rais'd somewhat like a Bell, gilt, and neatly embellisht on the outside, and fasten'd to the Crown of their Heads. Some wear Ear-rings all round their Ears, which for Ornament's sake will dangle sometimes almost down to their Shoulders, and have Bracelets about their Necks and Arms, and Rings a∣bout their Wrists, and on every Fin∣ger. Some adorn themselves with Breast Jewels, form'd in Fashion of a Heart, compos'd of variety of Dia∣monds, Rubies, Saphirs, and other Stones of Esteem; and on their Fore-Heads wear a Gold Bodkin, broad at the end, beset with glittering Diamonds,


or some other precious Stones. And as they are much taken with this gawdy Attire, and delight in these splendid Ornaments themselves, so they think them a kindness to the very Brutes;
 and shew their Affection to a Darling Cow, or Favourite Goat, by fastening large Rings of some Metal or other a∣bout their Legs. Nor will they spare their Ornamental Favours to the Fruit-Trees in their Gardens, but shew them their profuse Respect in adorning them with a Painting of divers Colours.


The meanest Female in 
Suratt
 is not wholly destitute of Ornaments upon her Body, though she be able to spend no more than two or three Pice a day. For Herbs (which are the common Food of the Poor) are here in plenty, and bought at very low Rates,
 which encourages the daily Labourers to work for very low Wages. And the moderate Barber (which is not the meanest Pro∣fession) shaves the Beard, and cuts the Hair, picks the Ears, and pairs the Nails, all for one Pice or two.


The Love of Women, which is root∣ed in Mens Hearts by Nature, and which discovers it self in People of all


Ages, Nations, Qualities and Constitu∣tions, is cherish'd betimes by the 
Ban∣nian,
 who courts and sometimes mar∣ries his Mistress at Six or Seven Years of Age, and cohabits at Eleven or Twelve, or sometimes sooner. And some of the Gentile Sects, before they feel any great Warmth of this amorous Passion, are by their Parents join'd to∣gether in their very Infancy, at three or four Years of Age. From which time they endeavour mutually to kindle this tender Passion, till the growing Years blow it up into a lively Flame. And by a thousand little Tricks and Arts of Love they endeavour to stamp their Affections upon their Infant Souls, which like melted Wax are pliant and easie to receive the Impression, and so they are insensibly captivated by each others Snares. The young Lover wins upon his Mistresses Passions by frequent Visits, large Presents, and munificent Gifts, whilst her soft Looks and Inno∣cent Air form his Mind into kind and amorous Inclinations towards her. And thus being happily prepossessed with a mutual good liking, even as it were from the Womb, as if they had been


born Lovers, they are taken off from all Objects, and freed from the Disappoint∣ments of fickle Mistresses, and from being wearied with whining Addresses to coy Damsels. Which, besides others, may be some Reason why the 
Indian
 Wives committed themselves with so much chearfulness into the Funeral Flames with their Dead Husbands;
 because their Sympathetick Minds, lin∣ked together from their Infancy, were then fed with such early Tastes of Love, as became the Seminary of those strong and forcible Inclinations in their riper Years, and made the Pains of Death become preferable to a Life abandon'd the Society of those they so entirely lov'd. For what could fix their Affe∣ctions more than the cherishing of them in their tender Years, and digest∣ing them with their Mother's Milk? Or form their Embrio Passions into more Strength and Duration, than con∣fining them early to such an Object, as might receive their entire good liking, before ever they were distracted by va∣rious volatile Affections?


But the Reason alledg'd by them for these Infant Marriages, is, because


they esteem it a matter of more De∣cency to approach their Brides in their purer state, before they come to riper Years. And for hastening the young Mistress's Maturity for the Conjugal Embraces, great Care is taken of a pro∣per Diet, and that she feed plentifully upon Milk,
 boil'd two or three Quarts into one, which they find by Experience is very nourishing, and ripens them for being fit to come together at Ele∣ven or Twelve. The Husband drinks largely of melted Butter,
 which he finds very apt to invigorate his Spirits, and makes use of it as Oil to his Flame.


Second Marriages, which are in∣dulg'd to the Men, are solemnly pro∣hibited the Women, because this enga∣ges their Fidelity so much the more to the first Lovers, in that they are de∣barr'd all Hopes and Prospect of all o∣thers. But with this Additional Seve∣rity upon the young Maids, whose Hus∣bands die before they cohabit, that they are obliged to a disconsolate Virginity all the Days of their Lives; and must never contract with another Man, tho' they are unfortunately Widows at Six or Seven Years of Age.


Polygamy likewise,
 besides second Marriages, is allowed the wanton Hus∣bands, who notwithstanding are not often so very Amorous as to prosecute that Liberty, or rather Thraldom, to more Wives than one at once. The na∣ture of the Climate inclines them much to this Amorous Passion, which stings them with impatient Desires, and makes them restless by Delays; and yet tho' Marriage upon this account is so very necessary and agreeable, they do not think that the variety of Women will compensate for the double Burthen and Inconvenience of them in a Family; nor do they imagin that it's worth their while to satisfie the fervour of their wandring Desires, that is attended with such a train of mischievous Consequen∣ces. A merry 
Bannian
 was wont often to complain of this Folly,
 of engaging with two Wives at once, and ventu∣ring too hastily upon a double Marri∣age, because the fondness of the two Wives provoked them to continual Feuds and Jealousies. For he could ne∣ver enjoy the one without disturbance to the other, whose Passions were pre∣sently alarm'd upon any token of Kind∣ness


extraordinary. When he was wheedled into a liking of the one, the other would pout and ask him if he meant to forsake her? And if he was going that way, would hold him by the Coat, and pull him back to her. This urg'd to him, that she was the Wife of his Youth, that they had contracted a long and intimate ac∣quaintance, and his first solemn En∣gagements were made to her: The o∣ther replies to him, that she now ought to partake more liberally of his Fa∣vours, and his Thoughts should incline more kindly towards her, since the o∣ther possess'd him so long before. Thus the distracted Husband was twitted on both sides, and at a stand many times which way to turn for his own tran∣quility and their satisfaction, and often in his 
Indian
 English confest, 
English fa∣shion, sab, best fashion have, one Wife best for one Husband.
 And 'tis seldom but among a multitude of Wifes, there will now and then happen Debates and Contests. We read of a Custom among the Ancient 
Britains
 which seems pecu∣liar to themselves,
 and not found in the Stories of any other Nations, either


Civil or Barbarous, not of many Wives belonging to one Husband, which is the case of many Heathen Nations, but a Society of Wives among cer∣tain numbers, and by common consent. Every Man married a single Woman, who was always after and alone e∣steem'd his Wife: But it was usual for five or six, ten or twelve, or more, either Brothers or Friends, as they could agree, to have all their Wives in com∣mon. But neither did this method pre∣serve an entire Amity and Affection a∣mong them, but sometimes Encounters and Disputes happen'd.


The 
Nairos
 Women hold Matrimo∣ny in such singular esteem,
 That they think it sacred, and so necessary in this Life, that if they chance to die Vir∣gins, they are debarr'd from entring into Paradise. And are therefore ex∣treme sollicitous of not neglecting the happy opportunity of the Marriage state, which is reckon'd by them a necessary introduction to so much Bliss.


Clandestine Marriages and stoln Brides are things unheard of at 
Suratt.
 For both the Bridegroom and the Bride, and their several Attendants, appear


publickly in the Richest Garments,
 in the gayest Equipage and splendour, which they can either purchase for their Money, or procure by their Friendship. Flags, Flambeaus, Musick, State-Coaches, and Led Horses, are all too little for this Day's Solemnity. The Pretty Bride then puts on her costly Jewels, and is trimm'd with all the finest Silks; sits Queen of the Ce∣remony, carried in Triumph through the Streets of the City. The Bride∣groom likewise is set off with all the advantage of rich Cloaths and Trap∣pings; and there is nothing great and noble in 
Suratt,
 but is purchas'd for them, according to their Abilities, to give credit to the Nuptials, and adorn the Solemnity; which is perform'd af∣ter this manner. When the Joyful Bridegroom and the Bride, with their costly Equipage and Pompous Train, have marcht thro' the principal places of the City, in publick view of all Spectators, seated upon some delicate 
Indian
 Horse, or 
Persian
 or 
Arabian
 Steed, ambitiously courting the Eyes and observance of all as they pass along, to take notice of that honourable state


they are now proceeding to: When with a blameless undisguis'd Assurance they have finish'd their stately Progress thro' all the noted places of the Town, they turn about to the Bride's Habitati∣on,
 where they enter, and are seated opposite to one another in two Chairs, with a Table put between them. Then stretching forth their Hands to each o∣ther over the Table, they join them to∣gether, and the 
Bramin,
 standing by, covers each of their Heads with one large Hood or Pamarin, which is spread over them about a quarter of an Hour, 'till he has finisht his Prayers for their Happiness, and made an end of his Be∣nediction; and then loosing their Hands, and uncovering their Heads, the Cere∣monious part of the Marriage is con∣cluded. And now the Mirth and Fe∣stivity follow; now they begin to scat∣ter about their Perfumes,
 to sprinkle their Guests with Rose Water, poured upon them out of Silver Cruets, and so refresh them with sweet smells. The Caba's and Puggaries, 
i. e.
 all their ex∣teriour Garments, are wet with Un∣guents, and Coloured yellow with the rich and fragrant Essence of Saffron,


which remains upon their Cloaths for a Week, to declare their presence at this joyful meeting. For the nature of Saffron being very Cordial, and apt to exhilerate the Mind, is sprinkled outwardly as a token of their inward Mirth and Gladness. And to com∣plete this sumptuous jollity, the Guests are all invited to lie down to a large and costly Banquet.


In the Celebration of these Marria∣ges, they are much addicted to the strict observance of particular days, and only upon those that are account∣ed lucky, will they undertake the Ce∣lebration, because their pitiable foo∣lish Superstition has laid severe Re∣straint upon their Consciences, from Marrying upon any days of bad O∣men. Upon those which they account Lucky, will sometimes be solemniz'd more Weddings, than in two or three Months at other times, sometimes two or three hundred on a day. Such as are Wealthy,
 continue the sumptu∣ous Festival Entertainments above the space of a Week, which with the large Expences at their Funeral Feasts, drains their Fortunes, and keeps them


low; and if they are Poor, never suf∣fers them to grow Wealthy. These Charges upon their Estates, the 
Mo∣gul
 encourages on purpose, by this Ar∣tifice to break their Spirits and For∣tunes, that he may keep them servile and less able to Rebel against him.


When once the Husband and the Wife come to cohabit,
 she is then un∣der great distinctions of Respect, and in a manner oblig'd to a kind of ser∣vile Attendance upon his Person; how∣ever in Language and Deportment the Man appears very kind and obliging, and shews a tenderness to the Partner of his Bed.


But among all the Nations of the 
East,
 the 
Siameses
 excel in Civility of Expressions to the Female Sex. For their Language (as we are told) admits no distinction of Masculine and Femi∣nine in their Genders, which is the cause, that whenever they would Ex∣press a Woman, they add young to the Masculine, to imply the Feminine; whereby their Language hinders a Wo∣man from ever growing Old, by affix∣ing always Youth to the Female; as when, for Example, they would name


an Empress, they would say young Em∣perour.


The 
Bramins
 Marry, as well as the other 
Indians;
 and treasure up some∣times abundance of Wealth, which is bequeathed to their Families, for main∣tenance of their Widows, and to por∣tion their Children. One of the 
Bra∣mins,
 who had been straitned in his A∣bilities from giving a competent Por∣tion with his Daughter,
 which was then closely Courted, contrives this Stratagem to squeeze some hundreds of Roupies from the People for that purpose. He ascended a Tree, which stood without the Gates of his City, and then declar'd, that there he would fix his Habitation; there he would stay and starve, and never come down, 'till they contributed among them to make up the Sum. The af∣frighted Inhabitants, who are tender of the Life of any Animal, thought it not fit to dally with that of their Priest, but lest his obstinate Resolution of con∣tinuing there might endanger the wel∣fare of him they so highly esteem'd, and involve them in the guilt of Sa∣cred Blood, therefore with united


Hearts they clubb'd together to make up a common Purse, which was deli∣ver'd to the Damsel as a Dowry. The crafty Priest upon this descended from perching aloft in the Boughs of the Tree, and was kindly congratulated at his coming down for sparing his Life, which he had taken private Care of that it should not be in any Danger, by engaging an Accomplice to convey to him secretly what Nourishment might be necessary for his Subsistence.


One sort of 
Bramins
 at 
Suratt,
 which are by much the strictest Sect among them, do far exceed the rest in Abstra∣ctions from Sense, and abstemious liv∣ing, and refrain from entring the Con∣jugal State, lest some Animals, as they tell us, might be crusht to Death by their mutual Embraces. And there∣fore to keep up the Succession of this Priesthood, if any Lay-Person of their Tribe has two or three Sons, one of them is chosen from among the rest to be consecrated to this Order. This sort of 
Bramins
 are sparing of their Speech, and will rarely speak, for fear of killing some invisible Creatures, which they affirm float in the Air, and which some


of their Holy Men have seen, though others cannot. They also sweep the places where they rest with a Brush, lest they should crush some Animal by sit∣ting upon it. And for this end a Cloath is always tied cross their Mouth, and fastned at each Ear, to prevent all in∣visible volatile Creatures approaching their Breath, lest it might prove fatal to them.
 And though Ablutions are so necessary in 
India,
 so universally pra∣ctis'd, and so solemnly enjoin'd, yet can∣not this sort of 
Bramins
 be brought o∣ver to this convenient Discipline, to wash their Bodies, and cleanse them∣selves with Water, for fear of murther∣ing some Creatures which they fancy live in that Element. Nor will they drink cold Water till it's boil'd, because they say it has Life in it, and that would destroy it. They neither cut their Beards, nor shave their Heads;
 but notwithstanding all the Pain of it, pull all the Hair up by the Roots, as fast as it grows on those parts of their Bodies. And wholly careless of the Future,
 and never anxious for to Mor∣row's Concerns; they take all chear∣fully that happens each Day, and of


the Provision which Providence sends them, if any Overplus remains, they liberally distribute to such as want it, and trust the same Providence for the following Day. Thus they live 
ex tempore,
 and as little sollicitous for the World, as if they had been intimately acquainted with our Saviour's Rule, 
Take no thought for to morrow, but let the morrow take thought for the things of it self; sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof.


The 
Bannians,
 at the naming of their Children,
 which is about Ten Days after the Nativity, perform that Cere∣mony after this manner. They call to∣gether about a Dozen Children, and put into their Hands a large Sheet, which is spread, and they standing round, take hold of it in a Circle, and bear it up from the Ground. The 
Bra∣min
 standing by, has brought to him thither two or three Sere of Rice, which he pours into the middle of the Sheet, and upon the Rice lays the Child to be named. The young Boys that hold the Sheet shake the Child and the Rice together to and fro, for a quarter of an Hour, or more. The Fa∣ther's


Sister then steps near, and has the right of naming the Child; but in case of her Absence, or Death, this Pri∣viledge devolves upon the Father or the Mother of the Infant. When the Child has thus receiv'd its Name, it continues so for the space of a Month or two, after the expiration whereof they proceed further towards its perfect Ini∣tiation into the 
Bannian
 Religion; and then it is brought to the Pagode, where the 
Bramin
 is ready, and mixes some Shavings of Sandalwood, Champhire, Cloves, and several other sweet-scent∣ed Perfumes, and puts them upon the Child's Head; after which it is esteem∣ed a Member of their Religion, and commences compleat 
Bannian.


The Mother, till Ten Days after Child-bed, is toucht by none but a dry Nurse, nor is she allowed her self to put forth her Hands for the Dres∣sing of any Meat till Forty be past af∣ter lying in, and she be perfectly past her Purification.


The Cradles for the Children in 
In∣dia
 are much easier, and more conveni∣ent than ours, that are plac'd and move upon the Ground. For theirs are


hung in the Air by strings ty'd to each end, and fastned to a Beam or Post a∣bove, and so swing to and fro with a soft quiet Motion by the slightest touch of the Hand. And this was an∣swerable to the Tenderness and Care they had for their Children's Temper,
 even whilst they were carried in the Womb; who provided such conveni∣ent Food and innocent Diversions, such pleasing Entertainments of their Senses and Fancy for the Teeming Women at that time, that the Minds of the Chil∣dren might participate thereby of those Delights, might be chearful and serene, and free from all dismal Impressions from their Parent; and so their Lives afterwards might be composed and ex∣empt from all anxious Thoughts, from all turbulent Desires, and vexatious A∣gonies of Spirit. And from hence I will proceed to one of the last things I shall take notice of concerning the 
Ban∣nians,
 and that is their Burials.


As every Man's coming into the World necessarily infers his going out of it, and consequently a Separation of Body and Soul; all the World there∣fore seems much concern'd, what will


become after Death, of that other part of themselves, in the Sepulture of their Bodies.
 And as there have been five ways of disposing of the Dead; one, to put them into the Ground; another, to cast them into the Water; the third, to leave them in the open Air; the fourth, to burn them; the fifth, to suffer them to be devoured by Beasts: So of these Five, two have principally obtain'd in the World; that, of com∣mitting their Bodies to the Earth; and the other,
 to the Flames. The last of these is made choice of by the 
Banni∣ans,
 who carry their dead Bodies to a Pile of Wood near the Water-side, not far from 
Suratt,
 which is presently kindled after the Corps is laid upon it; and when the Flame has reduced it to Ashes, the Remains are thrown into the River. They likewise, if they are able,
 burn some fragrant Wood of great Value with the Corps, to sweet∣en the Air, and mix its Perfumes with the black Exhalations.
 And were it not for the Tyranny of Custom, it seems more Honourable to have our Bodies consum'd by that lively Ele∣ment, than to have them devour'd by


Worms and Putrefaction; whereof Fire being an Enemy, and the Emblem and most sensible Hieroglyphick of Im∣mortality, there can be no better Ex∣pedient to secure our Friends from Obli∣vion, than that of burning their Bo∣dies, whereof we have either the Bones or Ashes Left, which may be preserved whole Ages. The several Nations of the World had Customs of their own,
 which commencing upon uncertain Principles, have been deriv'd to their Posterity, and receiv'd with a Religious Fancy; and they would rather die, than do an Act of Violence to them, and be∣liev'd it the greatest Impiety in the World to break them. Whereof 
He∣rodotus
 gives a full Instance in a Trial made by 
Darius
 to the 
Indians
 and 
Greeks.
 He askt the 
Greeks,
 what they would take to do as the 
Indians
 did, who eat their dead Parents and Friends, and accounted it the most honourable Burial? They answered, They would not do it at any Price. And when he askt the 
Indians,
 upon what Account they would be induced to burn the Bo∣dies of their Fathers, and not to eat them? They desired him not to speak


to them of any such horrid Impiety, as to burn their Fathers Carkasses, and to deny them the Honour of a Natural Burial in the Bowels of their dear Chil∣dren. This shews how Custom is the Spirit and Genius of a Man's Actions, and introduces a Nature and Religion it self: and were the Prejudice of that remov'd, other civiliz'd Nations might doubtless be as zealous for burning their dead Friends, as the 
Bannians
 are now-a-days.


The Four Elements were formerly worshipped by the ancient 
Siamese,
 who committed their Bodies, when dead, to what they ador'd when they were alive. He therefore that worshipped the Earth, made choice of that for his Interrment; the Fire consum'd the Corps of its Adorers; the Worshippers of the Air were expos'd to the Birds to devour them; and those that reveren∣ced the Element of Water, were drown∣ed in it at their Burial. This Care of Mens Bodies after Death seems natural to Mankind,
 and almost universal; which 
Osiris
 King of 
Egypt
 taking notice of, made use of as an Encouragement to Vertue, and an Argument for the


practice of Morality among his People. Those whose Vertues were Illustrious, and whose Characters were unblemisht, were appointed by him to be buried in Beautiful Fields, near 
Memphis,
 verdant with all manner of Flowers; whilst the others were assign'd to places of Punishment and Ignominy, whose lives had been Dissolute and Vicious.


The 
Gentiles
 of 
India,
 as it they were weary of their Friends when a∣live and loath to harbour them when dead, burn the Body sometimes before it is quite dead, and when they think it past recovery. A 
Bannian,
 who was Broker to the 
English,
 was thus hur∣ried away to the burning Place, as he was just expiring; but being happily met by the 
English
 Surgeon, who felt his Pulse, and gave some hopes of Re∣covery, some kinder Friend among the rest, disswaded the Company from pro∣ceeding, and in a little time, by the ap∣plication of a few Cordials, he was re∣cover'd to his Health, and by that Mi∣raculous chance evaded an untimely end.


The Corps is carried upon a Bier,
 according to the Custom of the 
Moors,



attended by Friends and Relations, who as they pass along the Road, are incessantly repeating 
Ram! Ram!
 that is, in their Language, God! God! For 
Ram,
 they say, was formerly the name of a mighty Prince among them, and is now invoked by them, as if he were God, or the name translated to the Almighty.


If a 
Rajah
 dies, his Subjects and De∣pendants cut off all their Beards, and shave their Heads, as tokens of the deepest Mourning for his Decease; which is such a solemn sign of Grief and extraordinary Sorrow, that this nakedness and want of Nature's Cover∣ing and Ornament of the Head and Face, is never shown, but for a Prince, a Parent, or some nearest Relation.


Upon the Death of any Friend, the 
Bannians
 are not sparing of their Cost, but spend profusely in Banqueting and Feasts, which are kept publickly for the two or three days following; then they observe upon the same account, the Twelfth, the Twentieth, the Thir∣tieth, and the Fortieth, besides once each Quarter of the succeeding Year, 'til the Annual Solemnity returns. And


he who at these times is parsimonious, and endeavours to contract his Expen∣ces, is accounted, if he be a Man of Wealth, the most sordid Miser in the World.


The Impious Opinion which the 
In∣dians
 formerly entertain'd,
 of having a power over their own Lives, as they were Masters of themselves, caus'd many of them to venture upon Death at pleasure, and as advantagious to the Soul, by securing it some degrees of Felicity and Virtue.
 And for this reason the loving Husband inamour'd with his kind or beautiful Wife, would sometimes burn himself with her in the Funeral Pile, in expectation of a happy future Enjoyment of her. But this was seldom. For it generally fell to the Wives lot to be committed to the Flames with the dead Husband.
 And this Heathenish Custom was introduc'd, because of the libidinous disposition of the Women, who thro' their inordi∣nate Lust would often poison their pre∣sent Husbands, to make way for a new Lover. This was so far incouraged by the Politick 
Bramin,
 who was always a Gainer by her Death; that if any


Woman refus'd to burn,
 her Head was order'd presently to be shav'd, that she might appear Contemptible and Infa∣mous for ever after. For all the Jew∣els she put on, who deckt her Body for the Flames, when she was resolv'd to die, were carefully lookt after by the Priest, and made his Propriety af∣ter her Death; because he only had power to touch the Ashes, and rake therein for Gold and Silver.


Since the 
Mahometans
 became Ma∣sters of the 
Indies,
 this execrable Cu∣stom is much abated, and almost laid aside, by the Orders which the 
Nabobs
 receive for suppressing and extinguish∣ing it in all their Provinces. And now it is very rare, except it be some 
Ra∣jahs
 Wives, that the 
Indian
 Women burn at all; and those that do, obtain the liberty by costly Presents and pow∣erful Applications to the Governours; by which the Women who are forc'd to survive their Husbands by a superiour Authority, evade that Ignominy and Contempt which would otherwise be cast upon them. This foolish desire of Dying with their Husbands, is exprest by the Poet in these Verses. 
Propertieu
 L. 3. Eleg. 11.




Ʋbi mortifero jacta est fax ultima lecto


Ʋxorum fusis stat pia Turba comis:


Et certamen habent lethi quae viva sequatur


Conjugium, pudor est non licuisse mori;


Ardent victrices, & flammae pectora praebent,


Imponuntque suis or a perusta viris.


'Tis from this barbarous perswasion of a Power they have of disposing of their own lives, and those that belong to them; that the 
Tunquinese
 poyson each Year one of the Fruits of the 
Ara∣guer,
 and gives it to a Child to eat, imagining that by the death of that innocent Child, they shall thrive the better the succeeding Year.
 And indeed it is an unaccountable Folly in the 
Indi∣ans
 to be so profligate of their own lives, and yet so sparing of the Life of any the most insignificant living Creature; as if the life of a Man were of less con∣sequence and consideration than that of a Beast. The usefulness indeed of some Brutes may gain them an esteem, and the kindness and fidelity of others, as of the Dog 
Hircanus
 belonging to 
Lysimachus,
 who leapt, as we read, into the Fire with the Body of his dead Ma∣ster,


and was burnt for Company; and Tyranny even to any Creature argues a savage inhumane Nature; but then it argues the pitch of stupidity and madness, for a Man to destroy and cast away himself in a vain fit of Fancy or of Humour; who is by the dignity of his Nature advanc'd so far above the rest of the Animal World.


Tho' all the 
Gentiles
 do for the most part consume the Corps of their Dead by Fire, yet some small Tombs are seen here and there, where their Bodies have been immur'd; but all of them very small and mean in respect of the rich and stately Monuments erected by the Prin∣cipal 
Europeans
 near 
Suratt.
 For the 
Ban∣nians
 are not of the Opinion of the 
E∣gyptian
 Kings, who fancyed that the Souls after Death were delighted to ho∣ver about their Bodies, and to keep as intimate a Correspondence with them as they could; the 
Bannians,
 I say, ne∣ver dreamt this, and were not therefore sollicitous for any stately Receptacle for their Bodies after Death, as those Mo∣narchs were, who erected those stately Pyramids, as Palaces of their last Re∣pose; which neither the fury of the


Elements, nor the Assaults of Time were able to Demolish; and where their Souls might live with their Bo∣dies solitary and undisturb'd, by the approach of any rude Guest or vulgar Spirit.


Six Years are now elapsed since a violent Pestilence first broke out among the 
Indians
 at 
Suratt,
 and has raged without interruption from the time of its first rise, tho not always with equal fury; for as it had some sort of Inter∣val, in the times of the 
Mussouns,
 which cool'd the Air; so its greatest Paro∣xysms were always immediately before, and after that Season of the Year. Before the Rains fall, the Air is extreme dry and parching, and when they are fallen, such store of hot unwholsome vapours are rais'd and scatter'd in the Air, that they give Birth to more Diseases, than all the Year besides produces. Above an Hundred 
Gentiles
 in one of these Sea∣sons were carried out of the Gates of this City one Morning to be Burnt, besides the 
Moors
 which were carried off by the Plague, and those of both Casts which died in the Suburbs; which by a very modest Calculation will a∣mount


to the number of 300 a Day. And yet the Inhabitants are very nu∣merous still, the Streets populous, and there is but little appearance of any such violent Destruction of the Natives. Before the Eruption of this Pestilence,
 there happen'd a small Earthquake, which alarm'd the People, but without the Ruin of Houses, or mortal effect to any Inhabitant. But that which cre∣ates the greatest Admiration in the 
Moors,
 and not a little Joy in the 
English,
 is our escaping all this while the dire∣ful Influence of this mortal Disease, so that not one 
English
 man was ever yet affected by it. This makes the Hea∣thens cry out, that God is among us, whilst they observe whole Families of their own swept away, without the least Infection touching any one of our Nation; they observe those menial Servants that attend us, both con∣stantly in our Chambers, and in all publick places, falling Dead within a few Hours after they have left our pre∣sence; and both the Wives and Chil∣dren of these persons that wait upon us, languishing at home of this Pestilential Sickness, whilst we all escape its hor∣rid


Mortal Blasts. And tho' I cannot in this case but ascribe something to second Causes, to the generous Wines and costly Dishes, to the strength of that Aliment whereon we feed; yet when I consider how languid and feeble several of the 
English
 are at sometimes of the Year, and notwithstanding their Food, much less vigorous and Athle∣tick in their Bodies than the 
Indians,
 and therefore less able to repel a con∣tagious Disease; I think there is some Reason for the Pious Opinion of the 
In∣dians,
 and that the Almighty displays an extraordinary Power in our Preser∣vation.


From 
Balsera
 we received Advice,
 in the Year 1691, that Two Hundred ThOusand People, in Eighteen Days time, were taken away by a sweep∣ing Pestilence; but it soon abated its Rage, and the violence of it shorten'd its continuance.


The common Distemper that de∣stroys the most in 
India,
 is Feavers,
 which the 
Europeans
 with difficulty es∣cape, especially if they have boild up their Spirits by a solemn Repast, and been ingag'd in a strong Debauch. Be∣sides


this,
 the Mordechine is another Disease of which some die, which is a violent Vomiting and Looseness, and is caus'd most frequently by an Excess in Eating, particularly of Fish and Flesh together. It has been Cur'd by a Red-hot Iron clapt to the Heel of him that is sick,
 so close that it renders him uneasie by its nearness, whereby it leaves a Scar behind it. Another Di∣stemper with which the 
Europeans
 are sometimes afflicted,
 is the Barbeers, or a deprivation of the Use and Activity of their Limbs, whereby they are ren∣dred unable to move either Hand or Foot. This arises sometimes from the neglect of guarding the Limbs from the cold Vapours of the Night, and secu∣ring them from the Moistness of those Nocturnal Mists which are some∣times felt in these Parts.
 And nothing contributes more to the Recovery of the benum'd Limbs, than frequenting the Humhums, which are here in great plenty.


The general Ease and Cure which the White Powder in 
India
 gives to Fea∣vers, makes that a very common and acceptable Receipt there; and it has,


with very good Success, been admini∣stred in 
England,
 sent from thence by the 
Indian
 Physicians. And all their Medicines here are generally of the cooler sort, because of the Heats to which the Climate naturally inclines them.


Tho' Theology is the proper Pro∣fession of the 
Bramins,
 yet some of them are skilled in Arithmetick, A∣strology, and Physick; and make pre∣tensions to the Prediction of Events, the Calculation of Nativities, and Cure of Diseases. But such as addict them∣selves to the Practice of Physick,
 are bound to pay an Annual Fine to the rest of their Sect, because Physick is both Advantagious and Foreign to their Profession.


A 
Bramin,
 who had spent some Years in studying the Art of Physick, was invited to visit an 
English
 Gentlewo∣man, labouring under a Chronical Dis∣ease, who when he came desir'd a sight of her Urine, and pouring it into a small 
China
 Cup, he let fall upon it one drop of Oyle, upon which he made this Remark in my presence. That if the Oyl sank to the bottom, it inevitab∣ly


betoken'd Death; the spreading of it self immediately upon the Urin, pro∣gnosticated an Increase of the Distem∣per; but if slowly, and by little and little, an abatement of the Disease.


Cooling Herbs, and Congy, that is, for Water with Rice boil'd in it, and Ab∣stinence, are the best Receipts they prescribe for mitigating Intestine Fer∣vors of the Spirits, and allaying the Heat of the Blood, which they think is better preserv'd and cool'd within the Veins, than let out, if it boils too fast.


I could never learn that our 
Indian
 Physicians could pretend to that won∣derful Knowledge in the Pulse, which those of 
China
 confidently boast of, and presume to so much Skill in it, as to tell not only the Term of a Man's Dis∣ease by it to a Day or Hour, but how many Years, excepting Violence and Accident, a Man in perfect Health may live.


For Astrology, and Natural Physick, the 
Indian Bramins
 account themselves however still very eminent and re∣nown'd, by which they foretel such di∣stant Occurrences, and effect such strong Operations, as seem to Men very won∣derful


and astonishing, and not to be done without some secret Recourse to the Invisible Spirits, or Familiarity with Supernatural Powers. We read the same of some excellent ancient Philoso∣phers, so learn'd in the Works of Na∣ture, as thereby to point out the times both of Eclipses in the Planets, and Commotions in the State, Earthquakes and Inundations, Storms at Sea, and Plagues at Land. And that the Reader may see that their extraordinary Skill in Magical Operations is not yet va∣nisht, I will here relate a Story of them,
 which I remember was often publickly repeated by the last President at 
Su∣ratt, Bartholomew Harris,
 concerning a certain 
Bramin,
 in the time of the Pre∣sidency of Mr. 
Aungers,
 who foretold the Arrival of a certain 
English
 Ship se∣veral Months before she came to the Harbour. President 
Aungers
 being un∣der a Disturbance of Mind, and op∣press'd with some perplex'd Thoughts for want of Intelligence from 
England,
 was desir'd by the 
Bramin
 Physician, who observ'd his Grief, and the me∣lancholy of his Spirit, the Reason of his Concern and dejected Looks, with a


chearful Tender of his Service, and Wil∣lingness to administer to him in any thing that might contribute to the re∣moval of his Malady, and to his Cure. The President told him, that it was be∣yond the Power of Physick to heal his Disease, or abate that Distemper he labour'd under; that no Cordial could revive his Thoughts, but News from 
England;
 or chear his Heart, except it were the sight of an 
English
 Ship, which he had long expected, but now despairs of. 
If an
 English 
Ship then,
 says the 
Bramin, is your only Cure, be pleased to give me leave to be absent for three or four Days, and I question not by that time but to remove your Trouble, and bring you undoubted News of that Medicine you long for.
 Upon which the President consented to his Departure for that time, and withal promis'd him as an Encouragement to his Skill, a rich Pa∣ramin, or Indian Mantle, for a Reward. Within Four Days the 
Bramin
 returns, and addressing himself to the President, assur'd him, that at such a time an 
English
 Ship would arrive at 
Suratt
 Ri∣ver's Mouth, with such a particular Person, who had formerly been in 
In∣dia,



on board her; and that on such a particular Day of the Month he would arrive at the Custom-House of 
Suratt,
 before Eleven in the Morning. The President pleas'd with this Assurance, and this confident Relation of the 
Bra∣min
 diverted himself with the thoughts of it for some time, and a little after rehears'd it jocularly at a publick Din∣ner to all the Factors. The Young Men who heard this Discourse, did sometime after recollect with them∣selves, as they were walking down the Banks of the River to enjoy the Morn∣ing Breeze, that this was the critical Morning foretold by the 
Bramin,
 when an 
English
 Ship should arrive, and such a particular Person in her. The Thoughts of it hasten'd them back a∣gain towards the Custom-House, to en∣quire if there were any 
English
 News; and upon their Return were surpriz'd at the sight of an 
English
 Boat, which they espyed was rowing up the River; and were no sooner arrived at the Cu∣stom-House, but they found the 
English
 Man who had been expected in her. The News of this was very grateful to the President, and not ungrateful to


the 
Bramin,
 who received a curious Pa∣ramin from the Hands of the Gover∣nour, whom he had oblig'd with so faithful and particular a Prophetick Re∣lation.


And the worthy President Mr. 
Har∣ris,
 who had himself been sometimes in distress for 
English
 News, has like∣wise told me of a 
Bramin
's Proposals to him, of bringing him undoubted In∣telligence, how the Companies Affairs in 
England
 stood, within the space of four days. But that he durst not ac∣cept of the Proposition, because he was confident that it depended upon the Assistance of a Familiar. And surely those sprightly Beings can easily dis∣patch a very tedious Voyage in a ve∣ry short time. For if we only consi∣der the nimble progress of Light thro' the Air, with what swiftness it darts its bright active Atoms from 
East
 to 
West,
 and flies thro' the immense Ex∣panse from the lofty Regions of the Skie; we cannot with any great Rea∣son deny this same or greater Power to the active Spirits of Darkness, who are stript of all the Clogs of Matter, and void of all material Substance.


The 
Bannians
 are far from any thing of Severity, and not prone to the in∣flicting any Corporal Punishments,
 and have a perfect Antipathy to those that are Capital; but the ignomi∣nious Punishment which they all sorely dread, is Slippering; that is, when any Person, who has been offended by a 
Bannian,
 takes off his Slipper, spitts upon it, and then strikes the 
Bannian
 with the sole of it. This is more de∣testable and abominated by them, than for any among us to spitt or throw dirt in another's Face; for it is not on∣ly esteem'd the most hainous Abuse, but the redemption of the Affront is very costly, and the disgrace is not wiped off without difficulty and Expence. This touching the 
Bannian
 with the sole of a Slipper, is as unsufferable and odi∣ous in 
India,
 as touching with the Hand the Head of a 
Siamese;
 for that being the highest part of the Body, is with them accounted of principal Honour, and never to be stroakt or toucht with∣out the greatest Offence and Affront. Insomuch that the King himself per∣mits no Person to dress his Head, but is so far his own Valet, that he puts the Covering upon it himself.










This is the Substance of what I thought might contribute to fill the Account of the 
Bannians,
 of whom I have discours'd concerning their Na∣tural Tempers, and Religious Opinions concerning their Abstinence, and Days of Devotion; their Diet and Ingenui∣ty in their Vocations; their Attire and Ornaments; their Marriages; Naming of their Children, and their Burials; and have Concluded with a Relation of some of the common Diseases of 
India,
 and of the tedious Plague at 
Suratt.
 And shall now endeavour to entertain the Reader with a Description of the strange Manners of the 
Indian Faquirs
 near 
Suratt,
 and with an Account of the 
Parsies,
 and 
Halalchors.








THE FAQUIRS NEAR 
SURATT.


TWO Miles distant from 
Suratt,
 is a very delightful place, nam'd 
Pulparrock,
 adorn'd with pleasant Walks and Groves of Trees, near the gentle Streams of the River 
Tappy.
 The Ground is all very even, except only near the Banks of the River, where the rising Hills enlarge the prospect up∣on the Water. And the Hot Air is temper'd by the shady Walks under the spreading Branches, and the near∣ness of the Current of the Water glide∣ing by. For these Religious 
Santones



here, as well as in 
Europe,
 are indu∣strious in culling out the most delight∣ful Habitations in the Country, and taking up their Abode where ever ei∣ther Art or Nature Invite, their Resi∣dence by a commodious pleasant Dwel∣ling. For there is not any place near 
Suratt,
 that yields either the Beauty, or the Delight that 
Pulparrock
 affords.


The Original of these Holy Mendi∣cants is ascrib'd, according to their Ac∣count, to a certain Prince named 
Revan,
 who quarrell'd with 
Ram,
 a Knowing and Victorious Prince; and being Con∣quer'd and depriv'd of all by a certain Ape named 
Herman,
 or 
Hanneman,
 which was his Assistant on Earth, spent the remainder of his Days in Pilgri∣mage, and rambling, without any Main∣tenance either to himself or his Follow∣ers, but what was given them in Cha∣rity: It was for the good Services done to 
Ram
 in his Life time by the Apes,
 that they are in so great Esteem both with the 
Moors
 and 
Gentues
 in the 
In∣dies;
 and this arch unlucky Creature is in that Repute among them all, that they seriously declare, 
were the Blood of one of them spilt upon the Ground, the


Earth would suddenly become unfruitful, and the Judgment upon it would be at least a Years Famin.
 And therefore when a large Ape had broke loose from the 
Eng∣lish
 Factory at 
Suratt,
 and skipping to and fro' had snatch'd away several things of value, and in his Anger had bit a Child or two so sorely, that they afterwards died of the Wounds, (as it was reported,) yet was it an inexcu∣sable Crime at the same time for any violent Hand to touch him.


These Philosophical Saints have since the first forming of their Order,
 as∣sum'd a liberty of taking that by vio∣lence, which they find is denied their civil Requests, and sometimes force a Charity from the People, when Intrea∣ties cannot prevail, especially in the Country Villages. For their numbers render them imperious, and upon pre∣tension of extraordinary Sanctity, they commit a thousand Villanies unbecom∣ing their Profession. They imitate the 
Romish
 Orders in Vows of Piety and Celibacy, and in their Pretensions to a strange Intimacy, and prevailing Interest with Heaven. Thus they en∣deavour to raise their Veneration and


Respect; thus they acquire constant Homage and Address, daily Applica∣tions, and large Presents from the People. And some, by a seeming neglect of themselves, indulge their Bodies, and pamper their Ambition the more.


They are called 
Faquirs
 by the Na∣tives, but 
Ashmen
 commonly by us, because of the abundance of Ashes with which they powder their Heads, and mix with their Hair, which falls down sometimes to the middle of their Backs. They use no Pillabers to repose their Heads on, but lay them unconcernedly upon the Ground, where they gather a constant supply of Dust and Filth, which makes them (in their Opinion) of a very becoming appearance, because it is squalid, but gives the Ascetick or vo∣tary in our Eyes a very disagreeable and sordid Aspect.


Of this Persuasion and kind of life, are several sorts both among the 
Gen∣tiles
 and the 
Moors;
 some of whom shew their Devotion by a shameless ap∣pearance, and walking naked, without the least Rag of Cloaths to cover them. And even at Mid-day, and in the heart of the City, and places of chief Con∣course,


will they walk the Streets, as shameless and unconcern'd, as if they were Cloathed all over. The constant sight of them in the City, which offers it self at every turn, abates that bash∣fulness in the Spectators, which such an immodesty might be apt to create, and diverts neither Sex from their So∣ciety, from a familiar Conversation and Intimacy with them; and Custom has wore off all that Coyness even in the Women, which would be startled at such an immodest Spectacle at first.


Others make solemn Vows of con∣tinuance in such and such kind of Po∣stures all the days of their life,
 and will never move from them or alter them, tho' the Pains are never so vio∣lent, which seem to be attended with so much Torture, as would even force them to forbear. For these are Peni∣tentiaries in earnest, without any Mask or possible appearance of Deceit, and voluntarily mortifie their Limbs, and distort their Joints to a perfect Disloca∣tion. For by the Delusions of Satan, these infatuated Votaries are possessed with a wretched Opinion of making themselves unspeakably happy hereaf∣ter


by these insufferable Torments here: And the Enemy of Mankind, impatient of Delays in exercising his infernal Cruelty, persuades them to undergo these Torments which will end in making them Meritorious Saints, and that by these horrid Pu∣nishments they may secure a future larger Bliss.


Among these violent Postures, some I observ'd with both their Arms stretcht out toward Heaven continu∣ally, which they never let fall, and are therefore by long use grown so much into that Position, that by long continuance it begins to grow Natu∣ral, and without Violence they can∣not move them downward. The Nails from their Fingers too, are grown be∣yond the Paws of any Lyon, into three or four Inches length, (by an O∣pinion which they have imbibed, like that of the Emperour of 
Japan,
 who, after his Coronation, is deterr'd from permitting either Razor or Scissers to come near his Hair or Nails,) upon a Persuasion that it is a kind of Sacri∣ledge in those cases to cut them.


Others, as devout as these, gaze with their Eyes continually toward Heaven, by holding their Faces, directly up∣wards. They throw their Heads so far backwards between their Shoulders, that their Eyes can never behold any other Object but the Stars and Sky, whither with unwearied Earnestness they look continually, delighted as it were with the pleasant sight of the bles∣sed Regions above, and loath to cast their Eyes upon any thing of this vile and wicked World. But before their Eyes can be thus fixt, and their Heads setled in this Posture, the 
Faquirs
 run thro' much Uneasiness and Trouble, molested both in the Utterance of their Words, and in receiving any Food. And both those who extend their Arms con∣tinually towards Heaven, as if they were reaching at that place; and those whose Eyes are constantly fixt upwards, are rendred thereby wholly unservicea∣ble to themselves, and are therefore attended always by a Servant or two, who administer to them in their Ne∣cessities, and conduct the gazing Saints to different places of Abode.


Others there are with their Right Arm brought round the Neck over the left Shoulder, and the Left Arm over the Right Shoulder, and their Fingers clasping one another before their Breasts, with the Palms of their Hands turn'd outwards. This twists the Arms, dislocates the Shoulder-bones, and there∣fore vexes the Patient with inexpressi∣ble Torments.


Some of the 
Faquirs
 neither sit, nor ever lie down, but constantly either walk or lean. They lean upon a small Pillow, or Quilt, laid upon a Rope, which hangs down from the Boughs of a Tree, where the two Ends are fast∣ned above, and swing in that posture to and fro Day and Night. But when these 
Faquirs
 prepare themselves to pray, they change this Gesture, and fasten their Feet in two Ropes that hang down from the Boughs of a Tree, and with their Heels upwards, and their Heads down, as if they were a∣sham'd to lift up their Eyes to Heaven, they pour out their powerful Supplica∣tions. And from the Prayers of these humble Saints are expected to flow considerable Blessings, and the preven∣tion of many Mischiefs.


Some of these devoted Mendicants extend only one Hand toward Heaven, others turn only one Arm round their Shoulders. But they are all in singular Esteem, and religiously resorted to by the Vulgar; and by these Distortions of their Bodies they gain the Repute of Men of perfect Hearts and of upright Minds.


Besides these painful unnatural Po∣stures near 
Suratt,
 a savage Custom is still maintain'd by the Gentiles near 
Carwar,
 in offering Sacrifice to the God of Plenty, at the Season of the growing Corn. The 
Bramins
 at this time kill a Cock, and make an Oblation of his Blood, as was usual with other Hea∣thens; while the People that are con∣cern'd in it are struck with amazing Horror and Consternation, their Faces are writhed, and their Looks ghastly; their Flesh creeps upon them, and their Joints tremble; and to all Men they appear frightful, as if they were pos∣sessed; and they own too, that the De∣vil at that time inhabits them, and acquaints them with several strange things. After the Sacrifice is past, Six Men, and an equal number of Women,


are appointed to perform a Ceremony very dreadful. Upon each side of the Back-bone of the Men are stuck two Iron Hooks into the Flesh, by which they are lifted up to the top of a Pole standing out like a Gibbet, above 20 Foot high. This Gibbet is fasten'd to an Engine with four Wheels, which is drawn upon the Ground above a Mile, with the Men hanging upon the Ten∣ters all the way. The Women have each of them a sort of Bason upon their Heads, upon which are set Six Cups as large as Tea-Cups, one upon another, with Fire in each of them, which being very tottering, makes the Women ex∣ceding careful how they tread; lest if they slip, and thereby any Cup falls, or the Fire be shaken out of any, the Woman forfeits her Life, and is sen∣tenc'd to immediate Death. But if with Care and Dexterity they go thro' with the Walk as far as the Men, they then are safe, and the Solemnity ceases. And notwithstanding all the tediousness of the Passage, and the jogging of the Carriage whereon they hang, which one would think would force the Hooks to tear the Flesh in pieces; yet will the


Men, poor miserable Wretches! take Swords and brandish them in their Hands, as it were, in defiance of their Torments all the way


The 
Faquirs
 resort sometimes toge∣ther in great numbers, and live upon the Spoil and Alms of the Country, as they pass in their Pilgrimage. If they find the People unwilling to give, they audaciously demand, and that not in the humble strain for a Pice or two, but sawcily beg a Roupie. One of these Mendicants in a petulant Humour,
 im∣pudently requested from an 
English
 Pre∣sident, whom he met abroad, twenty Roupies. The President to humour his Forwardness and Impudence, offer'd him Nineteen, which he magnanimously refused, because he thought it unbe∣coming his Greatness, to sink a Far∣thing below his first demands.


Of these Imperious Godly Beggars, I have seen an hundred (at least) of them in a Company, seated under a shady Grove of Trees, rejoycing at a publick Entertainment, which was pre∣par'd by a leading Man of their Com∣pany. I observ'd that they drunk very freely of Bang, steep'd in Water, while


I stood among them, whose Intoxica∣ting quality is very apt to disturb the Brain.
 Which made me enquire whe∣ther such Jovial Meetings were not apt to end in Madness and Quarrels; and the Excess of that Liquor, by kin∣dling an unruly Heat, disturb their Spi∣rits, and convert their friendly Meet∣ings into feuds and discords, and mis∣chievous Debates? To which they an∣swer'd, That they took care of pre∣serving Peace and Amity, and as much decency and order at these times of Mirth, as at their ordinary Meetings; for which end, they chose a number from among themselves, who were to∣tally debarr'd from Drinking, and were Censors upon others, to inspect their Carriage, and interpose in their Disputes, to restrain them from all ex∣orbitant Mirth, and excessive Drink∣ing.


Besides the 
Moors
 and the 
Bannians,
 and these 
Faquirs,
 which belong to both Professions, the 
Persies
 are a Sect very considerable in 
India,
 of whom the Tradition is, that coming from 
Persia
 in a Tempest, at the time that 
Mahomet
 and his Followers gave Laws


to the 
Persians,
 (which they were unwil∣ling to submit to) they were driven to that distress, that they almost despair'd of Life, 'till hearing a Cock Crow, and espying Fire at Land, they recover'd their hopes of safety, and gain'd a spee∣dy Arrival. The Cock therefore is as much esteem'd by them,
 as the Cow is by the 
Bannians,
 of the lives of both which, they are the zealous Patrons and Protectors. For the Worshipping of Fire seems to be the Ancientest instance of Idolatry in the World, inasmuch (as some think) that 
Cain,
 after he was ba∣nished from the Presence of the Lord, turned a downright Idolater, and then introduced the Worship of the Sun, as the best resemblance he could find of the Glory of the Lord, which was wont to appear in a flaming Light. And in after-times, they Worshipped Fire in the Eastern Countries, as the best Em∣blem of the Sun, when it was absent. Nor was the Vestal Fire ever more Sa∣cred, than all other Fires are with the 
Persies,
 the extinction of which, if it is voluntary, is a Crime as hainous, as if the vital Heat of the Cock, or some other beloved Animal were destroy'd;


so that if their Houses were on Fire, they would sooner be persuaded to pour on Oyl to increase, than Water to as∣swage the Flame. If a Candle is once lighted, they would judge the Breath of him more than Pestilential, that durst attempt to blow it out. And a 
Persy
 Servant, who is commanded to bring a hot Steel, and warm with it a Bowl of Punch, will plead his Excuse, and that he dare not hasten the coolness of the Steel by a violent abatement of the Heat. The active Flame must be al∣low'd to live, whilst there's any Fuel for it to feed on; if the Fire is once kindled, all care is taken that it comes to a natural Expiration, and no vio∣lence allow'd to bring it to a period sooner. Another account we have for their respect for Fire, is, that their great Law-giver 
Zertoost,
 was taken into Heaven, and brought from thence Fire with him (
Prometheus
 like) which he commanded his Followers after∣wards to Worship.


They have other Fables concerning 
Abraham,
 that he was once in the De∣vil's Power, who expos'd him to the Flames, but the kind Fire would not


fasten on him; from which they infer the great unreasonableness of destroy∣ing that Element, which was so averse, (notwithstanding all its Fury) from hurting 
Abraham
 their Friend;
 the Reason of this may be, because that 
A∣braham
 came from the Land of 
Ʋz,
 which signifies Fire, which might give the occasion for the Fable of his E∣scaping the Fire.


They own and Adore one Supreme Being, to whom, as he is the Original of all things; they dedicate the first Day of every Month, in a solemn ob∣servance of his Worship. And enjoin, besides these, some others for the Cele∣bration of Publick Prayers.


At their solemn Festivals, whither an hundred or two sometimes resort,
 in the Suburbs of the City, each Man according to his Fancy and Ability, brings with him his Victuals, which is equally distributed, and eat in common by all that are present. For they shew a firm Affection to all of their own Sentiments in Religion, assist the Poor, and are very ready to provide for the Sustenance and Comfort of such as want it. Their universal Kindness, ei∣ther


in imploying such as are Needy and able to work,
 or bestowing a sea∣sonable bounteous Charity to such as are Infirm and Miserable; leave no Man destitute of Relief, nor suffer a Beggar in all their Tribe; and herein so far comply with that excellent Rule of 
Pythagoras, to enjoy a kind of Commu∣nity among Friends.


These 
Persies
 are by another Name term'd 
Gaures,
 or Worshippers of Fire, because of their Veneration for that E∣lement; and were Transported into 
India,
 when 
Calyf Omar
 reduc'd the Kingdom of 
Persia,
 under the Power of the 
Mahometans;
 and they profess the Ancient Religion of the 
Persians.
 But their Religion spread it self more We∣sterly, it seems than 
Persia;
 for the 
Babylonians,
 who by their Religious Discipline, were engag'd to the Wor∣shipping the Sun, did likewise under the Names of 
Nego,
 and 
Shaca,
 Adore the Fire and the Earth. And the Pa∣rents of 
Gregory Nazianzene,
 who was born in the Fourth Century at 
Arian∣zum,
 an obscure Village belonging to 
Nazianzum,
 a Town of the second 
Cap∣padocia,
 were of a mixt Religion made


up of Judaism and Paganism, or rather some select Rites of both; for with the 
Gentiles
 they did honour to Fire and burning Lights but rejected Idols and Sacrifices; and with the 
Jews
 they observ'd the Sabbath. But I believe what remains of this Cast, are most of them in the Kingdom of the 
Great Mo∣gul.
 But we read of some in 
Persia
 of great Antiquity. For near 
Yesd
 in the Province of 
Ayrack,
 (or 
Hierack Agemi
) which yields the richest and Fairest Tapestries of all 
Persia,
 and of the World; and on the Mountain 
Albors,
 there are yet some Worshipers of Fire, who are said to have used it above 3000 Years.


They are not quite so Abstemious in their Diet as the 
Bannians,
 but Super∣stitiously refuse to drink after any Stranger, out of the same Cup. Some 
Hindoes
 will eat of one kind of Flesh, some of another, but all refrain from Bief, out of respect to Kine.


In their Callings they are very In∣dustrious and diligent,
 and careful to train up their Children to Arts and Labour. They are the principal Men at the Loom in all the Country, and


most of the Silks and Stuffs at 
Suratt,
 are made by their Hands. The High-Priest of the 
Persies
 is called 
Destoor,
 their Ordinary Priests 
Daroos,
 or 
Harboods.


I shall not mention their Marriages, which much resemble the manner of the 
Bannians,
 but proceed only to a Description of their way of Burying, which is this.
 The noblest Sepulture which they fancy they can bestow up∣on their deceased Friends, is exposing them to be devour'd by the Fowls of the Air, and bestowing their Carcasses on the Birds of Prey.
 After the Bo∣dy is for some time dead, the 
Halal∣chors
 (which area sort of sordid 
Indi∣ans
) take and carry it out upon a Bier into the open Fields, near the place where it is expos'd to the Fowls of Heaven. When 'tis there decently de∣posited upon the Ground, a particular Friend bears the Fields and neighbour∣ing Villages, upon the hunt for a Dog, 'till he can find one out; and having had the good luck to meet him, he cherishes and intices him with a Cake of Bread, which he carries in his Hand for that purpose, 'till he draws him as near the Corps as he is able; for


the nearer the Dog is brought to the dead Body, the nearer are its approach∣es to Felicity. And if the hungry Cur can by bits of Cake be brought so nigh the Deceased, as to come up to him, and take a piece cut of his Mouth, 'tis then an unquestionable Sign, that the Condition he died in was very hap∣py; but if the timorous Dog startles at the sight, or loaths the Object, or being lately well fed, has no Stomach to that ordinary Morsel, which he must snatch out of the dead Man's Jaws, the Case then with him is desperate, and his state deplorable. The poor Man whom I saw, was by these Pro∣gnosticks, very miserable; for the stur∣dy Cur would by no means be inticed to any distance near him. When the Dog has finisht his part of the Cere∣mony, two 
Daroos,
 at a Furlong's di∣stance from the Bier, stand up with joined Hands, and loudly repeat for near half an hour, a tedious Form of Prayer by Heart; but with such a quick dispatch, that they scarce drew Breath all the while, as if they had been under some invincible necessity of running over the Words in such a time.


All the while they were thus gabling, a piece of White Paper fasten'd to each Ear, o'rethwart the Face, hung down two or three Inches below the Chin; and as soon as they had ended their Petitions, the 
Halalchors
 took up the Corps, and conveyed it to the Re∣pository, which was near; all the Com∣pany ranking themselves by two and two, and following it with joined Hands. The place of Sepulture is in the open Fields, within a Wall built in form of a Circle, about twelve Foot high, and about an hundred in the Cir∣cumference; in the middle of which was a Door of Stone about six foot from the ground, which was open'd to ad∣mit the Corps. The Ground within the Walls is rais'd above four Foot, and made shelving towards the Corner, that the Filth and Moisture which are drain'd continually from the Car∣casses, may by an easie passage descend into a Sink made in the middle to re∣ceive them. The Corps therefore was left here, and all the Company depart∣ing thence, betook themselves to a Ri∣volet that run near the place for Ablu∣tion, to cleanse themselves from what


defilements, on this Melancholy occa∣sion, they might have contracted; and retir'd afterwards to their proper Habi∣tations in the City, from whence this place is distant about a Mile. But with∣in the space of a Day or two after, some of the nearest Relatives return a∣gain hither, to observe which of the Eyes of their deceased Friend was first pickt out by the hungry Vultures; and if they find that the right Eye was first seis'd on, this abodes undoubted Hap∣piness; if the left, they then are sorrow∣ful, for that's a direful sign of his Mi∣sery.


The 
Persies
 are very nice in the pre∣servation of their Hair,
 and careful to preserve whatever is cut off their Heads or Beards, that nothing of it be lost or carelesly thrown about, but once a Year be decently laid in their Burying place. A description of which, tho' it be drest with nothing but Horrour, yet may here properly be inserted.


The Burying-place of the 
Persies
 is an Object the most dreadful,
 and of the most horrid Prospect in the World, and much more frightful than a Field of Slaughter'd Men. It contains a numb∣er


of Carcasses of very different disa∣greeable Colours and Aspects. Some are seen there bleeding fresh, but so torn by the Vultures that croud upon the Walls, that their Faces resemble that of a Death's Head, with the Eye∣balls out, and all the Flesh upon the Cheeks pickt off. And on the Fleshy part of the Body, where the Ravenous Bird tasted a more delicious Morsel, are eaten several large Holes, and all the Skin on every part is mangled, and torn by the sharp Beaks of these devouring Creatures. Here was a Leg, and there an Arm, here lay half, and there the quarter of a Man, Some look'd as if they were partly Jelly, others were harden'd like Tann'd Leather, by the various operations of the Sun and Wea∣ther upon them: Here lay one pickt as clean as a Skeleton, near that, another with the Skin in some parts Green, in o∣thers Yellow, and the whole so disco∣loured, as if all within were Putrefa∣ction. A sight terrible enough almost to afright an hungry Vulture from his Prey. But these Birds are most de∣lighted with these dismal Objects, and that noisom smell which evaporates


from the dead Corps affords a pleasant Odour to their Senses. The stench of the Bodies is intolerable, and of ma∣lignity sufficient to strike any Man dead that would endure it; and yet the Vul∣tures chuse to fit to the Leeward upon the Wall, luxuriously to suck up and indulge their smell with these deadly foul Vapours. Some of these glutted Birds were so cloy'd and cramm'd with Humane Flesh, that they seem'd scarce able to take Wing, and the Feathers of others were much moulted away, by this kind of rank feeding.


Besides this manner of Burying, in use with the 
Persies,
 near 
Suratt,
 there are other Eastern Nations who have peculiarly affected the Intombing their dead Bodies in Animals. The Inha∣bitants of 
Pegu
 reckon him happy,
 whose Fate it is to be devour'd by a Croco∣dile. And the Natives formerly, near the Mouth of 
Ganges,
 if weary of this Life by Sickness or Old Age, commit∣ted themselves to be devoured by the Dog-Fish, as the safest passage to their future Felicity.


The 
Halalchors,
 (whom I occasional∣ly mention'd a little before) are ano∣ther sort of 
Indians
 at 
Suratt,
 the most contemptible, but extremely necessary to be there. They are term'd 
Halal∣chors,
 by the 
Moors
 and 
Indians,
 in the 
Persian
 Language, which signifies 
Eat∣alls,
 or 
Eaters at large.
 They will in∣dulge themselves with Wine, as well as drink Water; they Eat all kinds of Fish or Flesh, and without any scruple of Conscience or of Appetite, will feed upon either Horse or Cow, and will satisfie their Stomachs as well with a piece of Carrion out of a Ditch, as with the freshest Meat that can be bought in the 
Bazar.
 These are the Persons employ'd in sweeping the Hou∣ses, and cleaning the Streets, in carry∣ing away the Dirt and Dung, in wash∣ing the dead Bodies, and conveying them to their proper places of Sepul∣ture, which makes them absolutely ne∣cessary in these parts, because such Em∣ployments as these are an Abominati∣on to the 
Moors
 and defile the 
Banni∣ans,
 and are only ingag'd in by these poor People, who for this Reason are accounted Vile and Mean, the most ab∣ject


and Scandalous of all the Inhabi∣tants of 
Suratt.
 One of the greatest marks of Ignominy, when any Person is reflected on, is to be called 
Halalchor.
 Yet these despicable Persons take all in good part, cringe and bow to all they pass by, Eat whatever is offer'd them from any Hand, and go thro' with their Drudgery without noise and con∣cern. The 
Halalchor
 industriously a∣voids the touching of any Person for fear of Offence; he is separated from all the rest of the 
Casts,
 as a thing Un∣clean; for if he happens to come too near a 
Bannian,
 he defiles him by his touch, and puts him to the trouble of some Purification, to wash off the De∣filement he contracted upon it. There∣fore are they shunn'd by all, and en∣deavour to keep at a distance from all.


I have now finisht my Discourse of the City and Inhabitants of 
Suratt,
 of its Government and Trade, and of the Customs and Religion; the Lan∣guage, Arts and Recreations of the Natives; with a particular Account of the Mendicant Friars, or 
Faquirs,



of the 
Persies
 and 
Halalchors,
 and shall conclude all my Thoughts of 
India,
 in a brief Description of the 
English
 Factory at 
Suratt,
 and of the Troubles which happen'd to the 
English
 while I was there.








AN ACCOUNT OF THE English Factory AT 
SURATT.


THE 
English East-India
 Compa∣ny (from an Account we have of it in a Pamphlet concerning their Trade) are at the Annual Expence of one hundred Thousand Pounds.
 For they esteem it necessary, as well for the


Honour of the 
English
 Nation, as faci∣litating of their Traffick, to maintain their principal Servants in 
India,
 not only in Decency, but Splendor, as is visible to any that has travell'd either to 
Suratt,
 or the 
Fort
 of St. 
George,
 to 
Gombrone
 in 
Persia,
 or 
Bengal.
 These are the chief places of Note and Trade, where their Presidents and Agents re∣side, for the support of whom, with their Writers and Factors, large Privi∣leges and Salaries are allowed.


The several parts of 
India
 have each their peculiar Commodities proper to them, which are bought up, and made ready by the Companies Servants, to load upon their Ships at their Arrival. And were not the 
English
 constantly up∣on this Account kept in those parts,
 the other 
European
 Nations would soon fill up all our vacant Factories, and so monopolize the 
Indian
 Trade, that not only the Spice Islands would be their darling Propriety, but all 
Indian
 Commodities as well as Spices, Silks, Callicoes, Drugs, Precious Stones, 
&c.
 should (within a while) be apt to bear what Rates in 
Europe
 they thought fit to lay upon them. For accomplishing


which design, some People have alrea∣dy some time ago, profer'd to the 
Great Mogul
 the advancement of his Customs at 
Suratt,
 to a much higher Rate than now they are at, upon condition of E∣stablishing that intire Trade upon them. And both by large Presents, and by rais∣ing of the Price of Pepper upon the Coast of 
Malabar,
 they have indefati∣gably endeavour'd a total subversion of our Trade therein among the Natives. Therefore the continuance of Factors in 
India
 by a Company, seems very ne∣cessary and just; and were this practice once withdrawn, the 
Indian
 Trade to 
England,
 would probably soon be re∣mov'd too. For other means would soon be projected for accomplishing what Bribes and Presents to the 
Mogul
 and his Officers could not effect, by which those that secur'd the Trade for themselves, would soon find a Way of stopping all Traffick from the 
Indies,
 but what came through their Hands. Therefore are our Presidents oblig'd continually to watch their Motions in 
India,
 and observe their Designs, to countermine their Projects, and grati∣fie not only the 
Mogul
 now and then,


with grateful Gifts, but likewise to be always upon the same method with the 
Omrahs
 and Favorites at Court, inga∣ging a continuance of their Favours.


This makes those that are concern'd in the Trade of 
India
 think fit, that this necessary Expence of Factors for conti∣nuance of the 
Indian
 Trade to 
England,
 should be recompens'd with some pub∣lick Priviledges for its support. And that therefore the private Advantage which grows from this great Care and Cost, should not easily be checkt and discourag'd, especially considering like∣wise that the securing the Traffick in the power of the 
English
 from Foreign Designers, contributes not a little to the common good, especially if there∣by their Ships be enabled to come home in good Fleets, as the 
Dutch
 do, which would thereby the better secure them from the common Enemy the 
French,
 that they might not be so easily Seiz'd to the publick Damage of the Nation.


The House provided for the Enter∣tainment of the 
English
 at 
Suratt
 be∣longs to the 
Mogul,
 and is fitted with the best Accommodations of any in the City. It is situated in the 
North-West



part of it, and is able to give conve∣nient Lodgings to forty Persons, besides several decent Apartments to the Pre∣sident. Our Land-lord 
Aureng-Zebe
 is extreme kind and liberal in per∣mitting us to expend the Rent, which is 60
l.
 Yearly, either in Beautifying, Repairing, or in additional Rooms to the House, so that he seldom receives much Rent from us. It is built with the Convenience of several Cellars, and Ware-houses, of a Tanque of Water, and an Humhum.


The President of the Northern Parts of 
India
 resides here,
 who is dignified frequently with the Government of 
Bom∣bay,
 and invested with the Title of Ho∣nourable. A few Years stay here has rais'd several of the Presidents to Plen∣tiful Estates, who besides their Salaries, which is 300 
per An.
 and several Advan∣tages by the Ships, are permitted a free Trade to all the parts of the 
East.
 This is indulg'd likewise to all the Companies Servants of what station soever, which is a Favour attended with considerable Benefit, suits well with the freedom of an 
English
 Subject, and is a profitable Blessing for which the 
Dutch
 Factors


are earnest Supplicants, and from which they are very strictly restrain'd.


The Accountant succeeds the Presi∣dent, next to him is the Store-keeper, and to him the Purser Marine. These four constitute the Council, among whom the President has a double Vote; and all Cases and Affairs relating to the Company, or their Servants, are debated and determin'd by them.


The Secretary, tho' none of the Coun∣cil, yet always attends their Orders and Consultations, and stands Candidate for the first Vacancy among them; to which all are gradually advanc'd ac∣cording to the Seniority of their time or Station; except the Authority of the Company interposes in their Earlier Exaltation, which they seldom attempt, because as the other method is most e∣quitable, so they find it most suitable to their Affairs and Interest.


The Chaplain, who is respected as third in the Factory, the Senior and Junior Factors, the Writers and Appren∣tices make up the rest. These all re∣main in their various Stations, for three or five Years, or as many as they and the Company have agreed upon at their


first coming out, before they rise to new Degrees, as from Apprentice to Writer, from Writer to Factor. And every step they take in Promotion, the Com∣pany raises their Salary, and allows them some new Privilege. They all have gi∣ven to them their Diet and Lodging gra∣tis by the Company, besides Wages, and the advantagious liberty of Trafick to all parts, wherein from 
China
 to 
Su∣ratt,
 they commonly make 
Cent per Cent;
 they can sometimes mak 50 
per Cent.
 from thence, if they only carry out Sil∣ver and bring home Gold: And those among them that are Persons of Credit and Esteem, but of small Fortunes, may borrow from the 
Bannians
 Money for 
China
 at 25 
per Cent.
 and that only to be paid upon the safe Arrival of the Ship, which if it miscarries in the Voyage, they are exempt from all damage. To some parts their Gains amount to more, to some they are less, according to the distance of Ports, and opportunities of Trade.


For dispatching of the Companies Af∣fairs,
 and attending on the President and Council, there are kept always in the Companies Pay, Forty or Fifty Pe∣ons,


who wait daily upon the President in the Morning, that they may receive his Commands for the Service of the Day; and appear before him in a Body in the Evening, to pay him their Ho∣mage, who then (at his pleasure) with a Nodd dismisses them to their Homes in the City. Besides these, the Presi∣dent is allowed for his personal Attend∣ance several others, the Accountant or second is allowed two, the Minister, and the rest of the Council, and the Secretary, each of them one.


The whole Business and Concern of all is zealously to promote the Honour and Interest of the Companies Affairs, in maintaining their Reputation, and vending their Commodities at as high Rates, and buying for them others at as low as they can.


The President and all the rest of the Society are paid their Salaries once a Year; the Second 120 
l.
 the Senior Factors who are of the Council, 40 
l.
 the Junior Factors 15 
l.
 the Writers 7 
l.
 Besides which, the Council and Secre∣tary have several advantagious Perqui∣sites belonging to their places. The Pe∣ons receive their Wages every Month, which are four Roupies to each, and six


to their Captain. At the beginning of the Month they give their Attendance, and respect; address themselves first to the Moon, and then to the Presi∣dent, who then appoints the Steward to discharge their Accounts.


Lest any thing of value might be lost in the Factory,
 thro' this multitude of Peons who are called to their Service there continually, the Butlers are in∣join'd to take an account of the Place each Night before they depart home, that they might be examin'd before they stir, if ought be wanting. But their Honesty is our security from being da∣mag'd by any Theft, which has not been charg'd upon them in the Factory these many Years: Nay, such is the appro∣ved Honesty and Fidelity of these Ser∣vants to our Affairs, that whenever the President designs to run the Custom of a considerable Sum of Gold or Silver, he commits the secret to some of these Pe∣ons, who manage it dextrously, and are Faithful to a Roupie.


Without Liberty from the President,
 none are permitted to leave the Factory, to lie abroad, or depart into the Coun∣try; and the Porter who attends the


Gate both Day and Night, keeps all from Entring into our Precincts, whose admittance he judges may not be pro∣per. But each 
Thursday
 Night he craves leave of going home, because he is a 
Moor
-man and Married, and he fears that the neglecting a Visit to his Wife for more than a Week, might give an occasion of Complaint. Therefore on this Night the Poor Man that beg in the Streets commonly do it in the pre∣vailing Stile of 
Jimroot sab, Jimroot sab;
 intimating as much as, Sir, since this is 
Thursday
 Night, let me (I pray you) par∣take something of your Bounty, as a means the better to inable my Kindness to my Wife.


Each Day there is prepar'd a Publick Table for the Use of the President and the rest of the Factory, who sit all down in a publick place according to their Se∣niority in the Companies Service. The Table is spread with the choicest Meat 
Suratt
 affords, or the Country therea∣bouts; and equal plenty of generous 
Sherash
 Wine, and 
Arak
 Punch, is serv'd round the Table. Several hundreds a Year are expended upon their daily Pro∣visions which are sumptuous enough for


the Entertainment of any Person of E∣minence in the Kingdom; and which require two or three Cooks, and as ma∣ny Butchers to dress and prepare them. But 
Europe
 Wines and 
English
 Beer, be∣cause of their former Acquaintance with our Palates, are most coveted and most desirable Liquors, and tho' sold at high Rates, are yet purchased and drunk with pleasure. A Wealthy 
Indian
 who was curious to see our manner of Eating, and desirous to please himself with the Pride of our Etertainments, was strangely a∣maz'd and surpriz'd at the opening of a Bottle of Bottled Drink, when he saw it froth and fly about. The President askt him what it was that struck him with such Admiration? which was not, he told him, the sight of the Drink fly∣ing out of the Bottle, but how such Li∣quor could ever be put in.


The President and Council only meet at Supper,
 for the maintenance of a Friendly Correspondence, and to dis∣course of the Companies Business, and prevent all Jealousies and Animosities which might obstruct the publick Af∣fairs from that Progress, which a joint Unanimous Affection might carry them


on with. For the Current of the com∣mon Interest has been sometimes very much lessen'd and diverted by the un∣happy Intervention of private misunder∣standings and Quarrels. And tho' it has been a repeated Contrivance of some leading Men, to play their Servants in 
India
 one against another, and to set them as Spies of each others Actions, yet I'm sure the publick Affairs have suffer'd when the Design has been un∣mask'd, and the Jealous Eye has been a∣waked. For nothing vexes a Man of Honour, and who is conscious of his own Integrity more, than to find himself sus∣pected of Dishonesty, and Designs laid by those to intrap him in his Actions, who have the least Reason in the World to distrust his Fidelity.


Both before and after Meals, a Peon appointed for that purpose, attends with a large Silver Ewer and Bason, for those that sit down to wash their Hands; which at both times is a Decency in all places, but here necessary, because of the Heat and Dust which are so very troublesome.
 All the Dishes and Plates brought to the Table are of pure Silver, massy and Substantial; and such are al∣so


the Tosses or Cups out of which we drink. And that nothing may be wanting to please the Curiosity of eve∣ry Palate at the times of Eating, an 
Eng∣lish, Portuguese,
 and an 
Indian
 Cook, are all entertain'd to dress the Meat in dif∣ferent ways for the gratification of e∣very Stomach. Palau, that is Rice boil'd so artificially, that every grain lies sing∣ly without being added together,
 with Spices intermixt, and a boil'd Fowl in the middle, is the most common 
Indian
 Dish; and a dumpoked Fowl, that is, boil'd with Butter in any small Vessel, and stuft with Raisons and Almonds, is an∣other. Cabob, that is, Bief or Mut∣ton cut into small pieces, sprinkled with Salt and Pepper, and dipt with Oil and Garlick, which have been mixt toge∣ther in a Dish, and then roasted on a Spit, with sweet Herbs put between every piece, and stuft in them, and basted with Oil and Garlick all the while, is another 
Indian
 Savory Dish. Bambou and Mangoe Achar, and Souy the choicest of all Sawces, are always ready to whet the Appetite. The Na∣tives at 
Suratt
 are much taken with 
Assa Faetida,
 which they call Hin, and


mix a little of it with the Cakes that they eat, which tho' very unpalatable and unsavoury, yet because they e∣steem it beyond all things healthful, the 
English
 are tempted sometimes to taste it. The whole City sometimes smells very strong of the nauseating Vapours which flow from that abun∣dance that is eat in it.


Upon 
Sundays
 and publick Days, the Entertainments keep up a Face or more Solemnity, and are made more large and splendid, Deer and Antilopes, Pea∣cocks, Hares, Partridges, and all kind of 
Persian
 Fruits, Pistachoes, Plumbs, Apricocks, Cherries, 
&c.
 are all pro∣vided upon high Festivals; and 
Eu∣ropean
 as well as 
Persian
 Wines are drunk with Temperance and Alacrity. Then the King's Health, and after∣wards that of the Companies, are sent round the Table to the lowest Writer that sits down. When the Banquett is past, they generally divert themselves for a while with some In∣nocent easie Recreation.


The President upon Solemn Days generally invites the whole Factory a∣broad to some pleasant Garden adja∣cent


to the City, where they may sit shaded from the Beams of the Sun, and refresht by the Neighbourhood of 
Tanques
 and Water-works. The Pre∣sident and his Lady are brought hi∣ther in Palanquins, supported each of them by six Peons, which carry them by four at once on their Shoul∣ders. Before him at a little distance, are carried two large Flaggs, or 
En∣glish
 Ensigns, with curious 
Persian
 or 
Arabian
 Horses of State, which are of great value, Rich in their Trappings, and gallantly equipt that are led be∣fore him.


The Furniture of these, and several other Horses, whereon the Factors Ride, is very costly; the Saddles are all of Velvet richly Embroider'd, the Head-stalls, Reins, and Croupers are all cover'd with solid wrought Silver. The Captain of the Peons at this time ascends his Horse, and leads forty or fif∣ty others after him, which attend the President on foot,. Next the Presi∣dent follow the Council in large Coach∣es, all open, except their Wives are in them; the several Knobbs about them are all covered with Silver, and


they are drawn by a Pair of stately Ox∣en. After them succeed the rest of the Factors, either in Coaches, or Hacke∣ries, or upon Horses, which are kept by the Company to accommodate their Pre∣sident, and People at these times, or whenever they fancy to take the Air. In this pompous Procession does the President, when he goes abroad, tra∣vel thro' the Heart of the City.


The Evenings and the Mornings be∣ing allay'd with moderate Breezes, and cool and temperate in respect of the Heat when the Sun is at the Height, invite the Factors daily almost to the Groves or Gardens near the Water side, there to spend an Hour or two with a Bottle of Wine, and cold Collation which they carry with them.
 And nei∣ther the Chaplain nor any of the Council stir without the Walls of the City without the attendance of four or five Peons upon the Coach. This creates a Respect from the Natives as they pass along, strikes them with a Regard to the 
English
 wherever they meet them; makes them value our Friendship, and place an Honour in our Intimacy and Acquaintance. The


Probity and Grandeur of the 
English
 Living hath formerly rais'd the Presi∣dency of 
Suratt
 to that Veneration and Esteem, among the Native Inhabi∣tants, that it has Eclips'd the greatness of their own Government, by incou∣raging the Injur'd and Distress'd 
Indians,
 to apply themselves for Relief, rather to our President, than their Governour.


The Factors when they eat at Home,
 do it after the 
English
 manner, but a∣broad they imitate the Customs of the 
East
 in lying round the Banquet upon the 
Persian
 Carpets which are spread upon the Ground, twenty or thirty Foot in length.


For the Buying and more advantagi∣ous disposing of the Company's Goods,
 there are Brokers appointed, who are of the 
Bannian
 Cast, skilled in the Rates and Value of all the Commodities in 
In∣dia.
 To these is allow'd three 
per Cent.
 for their Care and Trouble.
 And once a Year, which is their Grand Festival Season, called the 
Dually
 time, they have a Custom, much like that of our New-Years-gifts, of presenting the President and Council, the Minister, Surgeon, and all the Factors and Writers with


something valuable, either in Jewels or Plate, Atlasses, or other Silks, according to the Respect which they owe to every Man's Station. Whereby the Young Factors besides their Salaries, Diet and Lodgings, are supplyed likewise with Cloaths sufficient for their Service a great part of the Year. Which things prevent their Necessity of any great An∣nual Expence, and happily contribute towards giving them a Life of Delight and Ease. Besides these Gratuities, the Minister and Surgeon seldom fail of the President's Bounty at the Christmas Sea∣son; and whenever there is occasion for either of their Services, they commonly meet with very liberal Returns.


If either a Disease, or any unlucky Casualties should happen to any in the Factory, the President has provided an 
Indian
 Doctor of Physick, and an 
English
 Surgeon to take care of them. The Sur∣geon, whose Salary is about forty Pounds a Year, gains considerably too by his outward Practice and Traffick. And whatever Medicinal Drugs, or Un∣guents, Balsoms, or Spirits are thought necessary for prevention or healing of Diseases and Sores, they are presently


acquir'd, and charg'd upon the Compa∣ny's Account; that their Factors might in all things be nicely taken care of, and not destitute of any thing for the sup∣port of either Life or Health.


And that their Souls might not be neglected amidst all this Affluence and Ease, and care of their Bodies,
 there is a stated Salary of an Hundred Pounds a Year appointed for a Minister, with Diet and convenient Lodgings, a Peon to attend him in his Chamber, and the command of a Coach, or Horse, at any time he thinks fit to use them. Besides many private Gifts from Merchants and Masters of Ships, who seldom fail of some valuable Oblation to him, or Ra∣rity of the place they come from; and the noble, large Gratuities which he constantly receives for officiating at Marriages, Baptisms, and Burials. And that nothing might be wanting to the making of either his Life happy, or his Function Venerable, he is injoin'd from all a civil Deference and Deportment, and a Precedence next to the second in the Factory. And indeed such is the constant obliging Carriage of all to a Man of his Character, that were he the


Principal Man of the Province, or Pri∣mate of 
Indoston,
 he could not wish for more Respect.


The Minister is oblig'd to a publick Discourse once, and publick Prayers thrice on 
Sunday,
 and to read Prayers Morning and Evening in the Chappel, each o∣ther Day on the Week, 
viz.
 about six in the Morning, before the Factors are called forth to Business, and at Eight at Night, when all is past. He is in∣gag'd to Catechize all the Youth; to vi∣sit the subordinate Factories upon the Coast of 
Malabar,
 at 
Carwar, Calicut, Rut∣tera,
 &c. and to give Instructions for their Administration of Divine Service in his Absence


The Chappel, where they meet at Prayers, is within the Factory, decent∣ly Embellisht, so as to render it both neat and solemn, without the Figure of any living Creature in it, for avoiding all occasion of Offence to the 
Moors,
 who are well pleas'd with the Inno∣cence of our Worship.


For want of a Minister qualified for the Administration of Baptism among the 
Dutch
 at 
Suratt,
 they request that Favour from the 
English,
 who performs


it for them in their Chappel; which at first sight might be very well taken for a Guard-Chamber, because they keep their Arms in it.


The 
English
 and all the 
Europeans
 are priviledg'd with convenient Reposito∣ries for their Dead,
 within half a Mile of the City. There they endeavour to outvie each other in magnificent Stru∣ctures and stately Monuments, whose large Extent, beautiful Architecture, and aspiring Heads, make them visible at a remote distance, lovely Objects of the sight, and give them the Title of the Principal Ornaments and Magnificen∣cies about the City. The two most celebrated Fabricks among the 
English,
 set off with stately Towers and Mino∣rets, are that which was Erected for Sir 
John Oxonton,
 and the other for the Renown'd and Honourable President 
Aungers.
 The two most noted among the 
Dutch,
 is one, a noble Pile rais'd o∣ver the Body of the 
Dutch
 Commissary, who died about three Years ago; and another less stately, but more fam'd; built by the order of a Jovial 
Dutch
 Commander, with three large Punch-Bowls upon the top of it, for the En∣tertainment


and Mirth of his survi∣ving Friends, who remember him there sometimes so much, that they quite for∣get themselves.


Lest all the Care and Instruction of a Minister might be inavailable for reclaim∣ing the Dissolute and Refractory among the 
English,
 the Company have inter∣pos'd their own Authority, and pub∣lisht their Orders and Injunctions in these following words.


The Governour, Deputy, and Commit∣tees of the
 East-India 
Company, having been inform'd of the disorderly and Ʋnchristian Conversation of some of their Factors and Servants in the parts of
 India, 
tending to the dishonour of God, the discredit of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the shame and Scandal of the
 English 
Nation: And being desirous, as much as in them lies, for the future to prevent the like, and reduce all their People in their several Factories and Colonies, not only to a Civil, but also to a Religious and Pious Comport∣ment, that may render our Nation Honou∣rable, and the Religion we profess ami∣able in the sight of those Heathens, among whom they reside: Have thought fit to re∣quire


and enjoin a strict observation of the ensuing Rules and Orders, to which they do expect from all their Factors and Servants a due compliance.


Then after some Rules enjoining a strict Observance of 
Sundays,
 and of publick and private Prayers, this follows.


That the Agents and Chiefs in their seve∣ral Factories, take care to prevent all pro∣phane Swearing, and taking the Name of God in vain by cursed Oaths; all Drunken∣ness and Intemperance, all Fornication and Ʋncleanness; and that if any will not be Re∣form'd, and do not abstain from these Vices, but after Admonition and Reprehension, shall be found faulty again, that then such Punishment shall be inflicted on them, con∣sisting with the Laws of God and this King∣dom, as the Agent and Council shall find their Crime to deserve. And that if after such Punishment inflicted, he or they will not amend, or be reform'd, then the Agent is strictly enjoin'd and requir'd, to send home for
 England 
by the next Ships, such Per∣son or Persons so unreclaimable, that they may not remain in
 India, 
to the dishonour of God, the Scandal of Religion, the discre∣dit of our Nation, and perverting of others.


And that both the Company and their Servants may be constantly blest with the Favours of Heaven upon them in their respective Stations, therefore they have ordered a Form of Prayer to be used daily in their Factories, for the obtaining a common Blessing upon them all; which is as follows,

O Almighty and most Merciful God, who art the Sovereign Protector of all that Trust in thee, and the Author of all Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, we thy unworthy Creatures do most humbly implore thy goodness for a plentiful Effusion of thy Grace upon our Employers, thy Servants, the Right Honourable 
East-India
 Company of 
England.
 Prosper them in all their publick Ʋndertakings, and make them fa∣mous and successful in all their Govern∣ments, Colonies, and Commerce both by Sea and Land; so that they may prove a pub∣lick Blessing by the increase of Honour, Wealth and Power to our Native Country. as well as to themselves. Continue their Favours towards us, and inspire their Ge∣nerals, Presidents, Agents and Councils in these remote parts of the World, and all o∣thers that are intrusted with any Authority


under them, with Piety towards thee our God, and with Wisdom Fidelity, and Cir∣cumspection in their several Stations; That we may all discharge our respective Duties faithfully, and live Virtuously, in due O∣bedience to our Superiours, and in Love, Peace and Charity one towards another: That these 
Indian
 Nations among whom we dwell, seeing our sober and righteous Con∣versation, may be induc'd to have a just e∣steem for our most holy Profession of the Go∣spel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom be Honour, Praise and Glory, now and for ever. 
Amen.








THE TROUBLES WHICH THE ENGLISH Suffer'd from the MOORS AT 
SURATT,
 in the Years 1691, 1692.


AƲGƲST
 the 27th 1691. All the 
English
 the Factory of 
Su∣ratt
 were under a close Confinement


from the 
Moors
 Governour of the City, and surrounded with a Guard of Horse and Foot. Nor were the 
French
 or 
Dutch
 permitted to pass without the Walls. The occasion of it was a Re∣port spread abroad,
 that a Rich 
Moor
-ship belonging to one 
Abdel Gheford,
 was taken by 
Hat-men,
 that is, in their Dia∣lect, 
Europeans;
 and therefore 'till Re∣stitution is made by them of nine Lacks of Roupies, which exceeds the value of 100000 
l.
 Sterling, no liberty must be granted. The Ship was in her Passage from 
Mocha
 to 
Suratt,
 and tho' the 
In∣dians
 were averse from Fighting, or ha∣zarding their Lives for four Roupies a Month, yet the 
Turks,
 who had a va∣luable Cargo of Goods on Board, be∣hav'd themselves with redoubted Va∣lour, 'till after the loss of some of their Lives, they were overpower'd by Men, and forc'd to surrender.


The Accusation run against all the 
Europeans,
 because the Pirate shew'd both 
English, French,
 and 
Dutch
 Colours,
 and a Restitution was expected from them all; especially too, because the 
Moor
-ship which was taken, sailed from 
Su∣ratt
 River with all their several Passes.


Our Honourable President 
Bartholo∣mew Harris
 made his Defence to the Governour after this manner. That for the certainty of the Fact, tho' it might be disputable, because our grand Accu∣ser 
Abdel Gheford
 had been found former∣ly faulty in such a case, wherein he sub∣orn'd a Multitude of Sailers, who after∣wards confest his Bribery and their Per∣jury; yet admitting it true, he thought it unreasonable for us to be charg'd any more with the payment of Money taken by the 
Pirates
 at Sea, than the 
Mogul
 is for Robberies at Land. However thus far he will ingage his Honour for satis∣faction of the Piracy, if it can be fairly prov'd, that the Ship belong'd to his Masters, the 
East-India
 Company.


The Old Governour finding the 
Mo∣gul
's Customs begin to sink, by reason of the Embargo, which was as well up∣on our Ships, as our selves; and know∣ing that the Advancement of them was the great instrument of his Promotion; and unable to remonstrate any thing ma∣terial to our Presidents Reasons, directs a Letter to 
Aureng-Zebe
 to this effect. That since the late Wars the 
English
 Merchants at 
Suratt
 have traded fair∣ly,


and liv'd peaceably; that much of the Money due to the Merchants upon the Account of the Wars was already paid, and the rest would follow; and that for the Pirates at Sea, they were neither Authoriz'd by the Company, nor were they within the reach of their Command: All which things might justly plead the Innocence of the 
English,
 excuse their payment of any Money, and give them therefore a Release. But the exasperated 
Turks,
 and the violent 
Ab∣del-Gheford
 prevail'd for a closer Confine∣ment of us, not only to the Walls of the Factory, but our very Chambers, had not the vigilant Industry of our Presi∣dent opportunely repealed that severe Decree. Our Enemies, likewise, inces∣santly urg'd the Governour to menace and disturb our President, that he might be thereby wrought upon to their De∣signs. To which the sage Governour mildly reply'd,
 That he knew Mr. 
Har∣ris
 too well, to value any Threatnings which were Injurious to the Company's Interest or Honour; and that tho' he suffer'd much, he would endure much more, rather than yield to an unjust Com∣pliance.


The inraged 
Turks
 finding their Ma∣chines would not work, and that they could get no ground upon us this way, began now to threaten our Lives, be∣cause the loss of our Liberty did not ap∣pease them, so much that the Governour as he formerly set a Guard upon us to shut us in, now increases it to keep our Enemies out.


In the mean time, the Providence of God so contriv'd for our Innocence, that the 
Turks
 began to clash among them∣selves, and heated with some private Dissentions, became their own Accusers. For some of them came to 
Dungevora,
 a famous 
Persy
 Merchant, and Friend to the 
English,
 and inform'd him that all their Allegations against us were built upon Falsehood and Malice, and their Charge was all a contriv'd Design, in as much as they were all satisfied in their own Minds, that the 
Pyrates
 were 
Danes,
 and not 
English.
 But this they durst not discover to the Governour, for fear of a publick Examination, which if they submitted to, their lives would be exposed to the Fury of the rest of the Confederates. Neither durst we en∣courage them with any Present of Mo∣ney


to proceed in their Depositions, lest we should find it a Stratagem of theirs, thereby to insnare us.


November
 the 1st. arriv'd a Pattamar or 
Courrier,
 from our Fakeel,
 or Solliciter at Court, acquainting us that the 
Mo∣gul
 had News from the 
Danes
 them∣selves, of their taking and plundering the 
Moor
-Ship, and that they resolv'd upon a continued Enmity to the 
Moors,
 'till their Demands were fully satisfied for the Injuries which they formerly su∣stain'd from them. The Letter was di∣rected to 
Isa Cooly,
 Principal of the 
Ar∣menian
 Merchants at Court, who by making a noise, which is the method for obtaining Audience, was called upon by the 
Mogul,
 to read his Letter upon a publick Court day.


This brought down the 
Mogul
's Let∣ters to the Governour,
 requiring a speedy Respect and Civility to the 
English,
 with a permission and Encouragement of Trade. But the Pishcashes or Pre∣sents expected by the 
Nabobs
 and 
Om∣rahs
 retarded our Inlargement for some time notwithstanding.
 For the strong Contest and Application which was made for the Government of 
Suratt,



which was then said to be dispos'd of, put a stop to the Emperours more absolute de∣terminations. The 
Mogul
's Resolution of continuing the present Governour, fru∣strated all the Court Interests for them∣selves, which mov'd 
Salabet Chan,
 a Bo∣som Favourite, to wave the Solicitati∣ons he had begun for his Son, and end them for the Governour. For he de∣sign'd to send his Son to 
Suratt,
 Invest∣ed with the Command of the City, and the Messenger of this welcom News to us, which would render him thereupon more acceptable to the 
English
 Nation, and would be apt to gain him some cost∣ly Present from us at his Entrance upon his Authority.


Therefore 
December
 the 2d. in the E∣vening, word was brought by the Bro∣kers to our President, of a 
Cosset
's Ar∣rival with Letters from Court to the 
Vacinavish,
 injoyning our immediate Release; and the day following the 
Cho∣cadars
 or Souldiers, were remov'd from before our Gates.


Sheak Jemme,
 a brave and hearty 
A∣rab,
 who had all along wisht Prosperity to our Affairs, was so transported at the hearing of our Inlargement, that he gave


to the President's Peon, who carried him the News of it, a rich flower'd Coat. And when this generous 
Arab
 was cal∣led upon by one of the 
Mullahs
 or Priests, and authoritatively demanded why he would countenance the 
Cafries,
 or Unbe∣lievers, meaning us, against the 
Mu∣soulmen,
 or true Believers? Bravely an∣swer'd that it was his principle to En∣courage Truth wherever he found it; and that he knew the 
English
 innocent of the Fact, which the 
Turks
 insisted up∣on against them. That none were so much 
Cafries,
 in his Opinion, as those that were false in their Words, and Dis∣honest in their Actions, and that the best Believers should always act the best things.


In 
September
 the Year following,
 which was 1692. did 
Abdel-Gheford,
 our Old Implacable Adversary, revive his Enmity, upon a Report he forg'd, that some of his Ships from 
Mocha
 were feiz'd on by some 
English
 Pirates; and upon this pretence, secur'd us in our Factory un∣der a Guard of 
Chokadars,
 'til the latter end of 
October.
 The Governour upon this sent for the 
English, Dutch,
 and 
French
 Presidents, the two latter of


which disputed that Precedence which they allow'd to the 
English,
 but the 
French,
 unwilling to raise any Contest in the Governours Presence, immediate∣ly departed. He insisted upon a Resti∣tution for the Damages which were sustain'd by 
Abdel-Gheford,
 and menac'd them with a Prohibition of Traffick. Which they told him they were willing to relinquish, rather than be liable to the Payment of such unjust Demands.


The Villany of 
Abdel-Gheford,
 and the Baseness of his Actions were after a while made apparent to the whole City. For part of the Money which he charg'd upon us, was convey'd from on Board his Ship, into a Garden near that of 
No∣cha Damus
's by the River side. Four Thousand Checkins he privately tyed to the Flooks of an Anchor under Wa∣ter; and some lie hid within his Tanques on Board, and in the Ballast of his Ship. The rest was put privately into a Palanquin, which the Souldiers observ'd to sway very heavily as it past the Gates, and searching it upon the mistrust, found the Gold in it. So the Injury he would have laid upon us, was fixt with a scandalous Note of Infamy


upon himself;
 and we were before 
No∣vember,
 fortunately released.


I shall now take leave of these Mis∣fortunes, which in some measure com∣pensate for their Uneasiness, by the Plea∣sure which they afford in a Relation; and before I proceed to 
Cape Bone Es∣perance
 in 
Africa,
 will make some stay in 
Arabia Felix,
 in a Description of two of the most Fam'd Emporys and other parts of that Kingdom, 
viz. Muscatt
 up∣on the 
Persian
 Gulf, and 
Mocha
 which lies upon the 
Red-Sea.








THE CITY OF 
MUSCATT
 IN Arabia Felix.


MƲSCATT
 is a City in 
Arabia Felix,
 which lies to the 
Eastward
 of that Kingdom,
 situated upon the 
Per∣sian
 Gulf. Tho' none of the 
Arabia's
 are equally fruitful as many other parts of the World that are less fam'd, yet this


part of 
Arabia,
 because of its Pleasant∣ness and Fertility, in respect of the o∣ther two, has obtain'd the name of 
Hy∣aman,
 which signifies Happy. For be∣sides the great increase of Cattle which is here to be seen; the Soil in some pla∣ces is Rich and Fruitful, and Corn and Wine, Fruits and fragrant Spices are produc'd in great plenty.
 It abounds with many useful and Beneficial Com∣modities, with several kinds of Druggs, with Balsom and Myrrhe, Incense, Cassia, Manna, Dates, Gold, Frankincense and Pearl, and maintains a constant Trade of rare and valuable Goods to 
Persia, Egypt, Syria,
 the 
Indies,
 &c. And 
Muscatt
 above all those places which are situated near the Gulf of 
Ormus,
 is the Principal Town of Traffick between the 
East,
 and that part of 
Arabia the Happy;
 only at one Season of the Year, which is in 
June, Ju∣ly
 and 
August,
 the Pearl-Fishing of the I∣sland 
Baharem,
 which lies higher up in the Gulf, renders that place of more Note and Fame, yielding to the 
Persian
 Emperour yearly, the value of Five hundred Thousand Ducats, besides one hundred thousand more, which are sup∣pos'd to be diverted.


Muscatt
 is Situate between the Capes of 
Raz al-Gate
 and 
Moccandon
 in 23 De∣grees, 30 Min. 
North
 Latitude, exactly under the Tropick of 
Cancer.
 'Tis a∣bout three Miles in its Circumference, built at the bottom of a small Bay,
 en∣compassed with high Rocky Mountains, and guarded with a strong Wall. Be∣sides it is fortifyed with five or six Ca∣stles and Batteries, and lies very conve∣nient for Trade by its nearness to a safe Harbour.


Tho' this City lies at the utmost Bounds of the Suns progress towards the 
North,
 yet it is infested with a more intense Heat than several places that are nearer the Line. The Desart Ground and high Mountains reflect the warm Rays of the Sun with so much vi∣gour, that it may as justly challenge a Title to the name of the 
Torrid Zone,
 as any place between the Tropicks; for some would perswade us that it has a Title to the most literal meaning of these words, and that a small Fish laid in the hollow part of a Rock, where the Sun∣beams reflect from every side, in the heat of the Day, and when the Sun is in the Zenith, will be half Roasted in a little


time by the Heat.
 It rains here but seldom, and in some places of 
Arabia,
 not above twice or thrice in two or three Years; but the abundance of Dew which falls at Night refreshes the Ground, supplies the Herbs with Moi∣sture, and makes the Fruits excellent.


The 
Muscatters
 (for the most part) are lean, and of a middle Stature,
 very swarthy in their Complexion, and not of very strong Voice. They are stout and manly, and expert at the Bow and Dart, and since their ingagement in the War with the 
Portuguese,
 are excellent Marks-men, and very dexterous and ready in the exercise of Fire-Arms, in which they Employ always some part of the Day.


The Ground yields them variety of excellent Fruits, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Grapes, Apricocks and Peach∣es, and most sorts of Roots and green Herbs: But the Staple Commodity of the Country is Dates,
 of which there are whole Orchards for some Miles to∣gether. They have so much plenty of this Fruit, for which they have so rea∣dy a vent in 
India,
 that several Ships are sent thither loaded from hence with∣out any other Cargo.


The Hills are generally all steril and bare, and he that takes only a prospect of them would conclude the Land quite uninhabitable, and unable to afford ei∣ther sustenance for Man or nourish∣ment for Beast. For the Soil there lan∣guishes for want of Moisture, and the ground is dried up like a barren Wil∣derness;
 the Earth brings forth neither Grass nor Flowers, nor Trees with ei∣ther Leaves or Fruit. But casting his Eyes down into the Valleys, he sees them all flourishing and green, and co∣ver'd with Vegetables fit for the Plea∣sure and Refreshment of Animals, and very Beautiful to Admiration. There are Arable Fields and green Pastures, Fruit-Trees that look neither wither'd nor faded; nothing there is Barren or Unprofitable, but bountiful Nature compensates with the fruitfulness of the Valleys for the nakedness of the Hills; so that here, if upon their Tops, a Man would be apt to think himself among the 
Lybian
 Wastes; yet let him but descend lower,
 and he would fancy him∣self in the pleasant Fields of 
Tempe.
 All this is due to the Industry of the People, who for want of Rains, are forc'd to


water their Gardens every Morning and Evening, by the labour of the Ox, who draws the Water twice a day to the Root of every Tree in their Gardens. There are several Channels cut out in the ground for the Water to run thro', and at the Banks of these Canals, the Trees are Planted near the Water for the Moisture and Nourishment of the Roots, which together with the Mists that descend in the Night time, pre∣serve them fresh, and green, and very Fruitful.


Having spoke thus much of 
Arabia
 in general, of the Extent and Situa∣tion of 
Muscatt,
 and the quality of its Climate, of the Stature and Comple∣xion of the Inhabitants, and nature of the Soil thereabouts; I will now relate one thing observable concerning the Food of their Cattle, and will then pro∣ceed to an Account of the Temperance and Justice of the 
Arabians
 of 
Muscatt,
 for which two things they are more re∣markable than any other Nation this day in the World.


Their Cattle here are fed with Fish,
 which is a sort of Food that seems as Unnatural for them as for Fish to live


upon Grass, which is the proper Meat for Cattle. But the Fish which they eat is not fresh, and just taken out of the Sea, but when a great quantity of it is caught, the 
Muscatrers
 dig a large Hole in the Ground wherein they put it, 'till it remains so long that it rotts and comes to a kind of Earth. After this it is taken up, and boil'd with Water in great Earthen Pots, which makes a kind of thick Broth; and stand∣ing 'till it is cool, it is then given to the Cattle, by which they grow extreme Fat, and yet their Flesh is very savory, not tainted with either an ill Taste or Smell.


The Inhabitants of 
Muscatt
 feed pro∣miscuously upon either Fish or Flesh; they eat Beef, Mutton, Goat and Deer, and the Flesh of Camels is admir'd by them, and is in repute for a Healthful sort of Meat. But they are very nice and curious in killing those Animals on which they feed, and which they refuse to taste 'till the Meat is cleans'd and washt from the Blood. They abound too in many sorts of Fish, and are scru∣pulous in Eating of some kinds of them, such especially as have no Scales, from


which they totally refrain, and esteem the Food of such as well as of Blood, an Abomination. The Soil affords abun∣dance of Wheat, which might be proper∣ly made use of for their Bread, but the Dates are so plentiful, so pleasant and admir'd, that they mix them with all their Food, and eat them instead of Bread, through all these parts of 
Arabia,
 both with their Fish and Flesh.


But of all the Followers of 
Mahomet,
 and zealous Admirers of his four princi∣pal Doctors, 
Abu Becre, Osman, Omar
 and 
Hali,
 none are so rigidly Abstemi∣ous as the 
Arabians
 of 
Muscatt,
 as well from the Juice of the Grape, as other more common and innocent Liquors. For Tea and Coffee which are judg'd the privileg'd Liquors of all the 
Maho∣metans,
 as well 
Turks,
 as those of 
Persia, India,
 and other parts of 
A∣rabia,
 are condemn'd by them as unlaw∣ful Refreshments, and abominated as Bug-bear Liquors, as well as Wine. He that would turn Advocate for any of these sorts of Drink, and commend the Use of them as convenient for their Stomachs, as fit to chear their Hearts, and chase away Melancholy from their


Spirits, would be look'd upon as a vile Contemner of their Law, and an Encou∣rager of Libertinism and Intemperance. They abhor likewise the smoaking of Tobacco, and the warm intoxicating Fumes of that 
Indian
 Weed, and con∣stantly burn all that they can find brought into their Country. Sugar, Water, and Orange mixt together, which they call Sherbet, is their on∣ly Drink; such is their Antipathy to all Liquors that are warm and strong, that in perfect Indignation they rased a 
Jews
 House to the ground, that had only made some strong Waters. There∣fore they call themselves the strict 
Arabs,
 the Chaste 
Mahometans,
 the only true Professors of the 
Mussulman
-Law, and genuine followers of the Prophet. To this degree of Abstinence they are all bred up, who are Natives of this Region hereabouts; thus they abstain from all those sensible gratifications of their Palates, which may any way ine∣briate their Faculties, and render the Mind dull and unactive; and shun the Taste of any thing that may disturb their Person, or raise up in them any irregular Appetites.


Nor is the Justice and Civil Conver∣sation of the 
Arabians
 at 
Muscatt,
 less remarkable and to be admir'd, than their extreme Temperance and Sobrie∣ty. The Governour of the City, who is nearly related to the King of the Country, takes care that a strict Watch be kept in the Castle every Night, for the safety of the City, and prevention of all Disorders that might happen. And will not allow any Boat to go, or come ashore, or to row from Ship to Ship, either before the Sun rises, or after it is down; to the end that all that Traffick may do their Business while it is Day, that no man might dispose of his Goods secretly, and shel∣ter himself by the obscurity of the Night.


They forbid all Despotick Authori∣ty in private Families,
 and the Arbi∣trary proceedings of either Masters or Parents towards their Domesticks. So that if either a Child or a Servant chance to transgress, let the Crime be what it will, either more heinous, or less vil∣lanous, Publick Justice must determine the Punishment, and the Magistrates must interpose in awarding the Penalty,


and no man must lift up his Hand to punish any that offends in his own Fa∣mily. By this Oeconomy in their Af∣fairs, the Inferiours are freed from the violence of all Splenitick Disgusts, and unreasonable Severities of their Superi∣ours. A Revengeful Master cannot vent his Passion at his Pleasure upon his Ser∣vant, nor an unnatural Parent Beat and Chastise his Son at his will: Complaint must first be made to the Magistrates of the place, who being dispassionate and unprejudic'd in their Tempers, examin the matter with a still Mind, and Arbi∣trate calmly in the Case. No private Punishment is ever inflicted in 
Muscatt
 and the adjacent parts; they cannot there think that any Corrections are so equitable, as those that proceed from the deliberate Sentence of unbyassed Men.


If Murther or Theft, or any such execrable Crime is at any time com∣mitted among them; which are seldom∣er here than in any other part of the World, the Malefactor is never Punish∣ed with sudden Death, nor does any fatal hand touch him, but his Sentence is, to be Immur'd, where he leasurely


dies, between two Walls. For they hate by any violent direct Death, to take away the life of any Offender.


They are never dilatory in their Ad∣ministrations of Justice, nor vex the Clients with tiresome Delays, but quick∣ly determin in the Case, and dispatch all matters that are brought before them. The Governour with fifty or sixty more sit openly to the publick view, whene∣ver they do justice, which is not by plu∣rality of Voices, but all unanimously consent to the Sentence that is pro∣nounced.


These 
Arabians
 are very courteous in their Deportment, and extreme Civil to all Strangers; they offer neither Violence nor Affront to any; and tho' they are very tenacious of their own Principles, and Admirers of their own Religion, yet do they never impose it upon any, nor are their Morals leven'd with such furious Zeal, as to divest them of Hu∣manity, and a tender Respect.
 A Man may travel hundreds of Miles in this Country, and never meet with any a∣busive Language, or any Behaviour that looks Rude. And if you happen to be loaded with any Money in your


Travels, you need no Arms to defend your Person, nor any Guards to secure your Purse; for you may sleep with it in your Hands in the open Fields, or lay it by you with safety as you repose your self in the King's High-way. Cap∣tain 
Edward Say,
 who had liv'd among them at 
Muscatt
 for several Years, and who affirm'd all this Relation to be really true, had passed from one part of the Country to another, some hun∣dreds of Miles, and never was troubled by any Person, tho' he slept sometimes in the Roads and Fields, neither heard he of any that had been pillag'd by Robbers all that while.


In fine, these are a People natural∣ly Temperate and Just, and endued with those excellent Qualities which the 
Grecian
 Philosophers and 
Roman
 Mora∣lists endeavour'd to inspire into their Subjects, tho' they miss'd of their aim. For these are directly opposite in their Temper and manner of Life to those wild 
Arabs,
 that haunt the Banks of 
Tigris,
 and sculk about near the River of 
Euphrates,
 that live by Rapine, spoil and violence. I shall relate only one remarkable Passage more, concerning


the Justice and Kindness of these 
Arabs,
 and leave this Theme.


When the forementioned Captain 
Say
 had unluckily lost his Ship on the Island of 
Macira,
 which is near this Coast of 
Arabia;
 he and his Mariners were so fortunate that they sav'd all their Lives, and got on Shoar, tho' naked and in a very distress'd forlorn Condition. The sight of this deplorable Accident mov'd the 
Arabs
 to Pity and Compassi∣on towards them, and made them offer their Service, by such Signs, as they thought might be most Intelligible, for assisting them in the Recovery of those Goods that were on board the WracK. They were perfect strangers both of them to each others Persons and Language, and therefore one among the rest, who lookt like the Governour, rais'd a heap of Sand, as they sat near one another, upon the Shoar, which he divided into three parts, reserving two to himself, and offering the other to the Captain. But the Captain esteeming it unequally proportion'd, shook his Head, in token that he dislik'd the Bargain. The Governour seeing this, adjusted the matter with more equality,


and divided the Heap of Sand into two parts only, one of which he took to himself, and gave the other half to the Captain; which because he thought it very fair, they shook Hands upon it, as a sign they were both well content∣ed. The Money which was brought on Shoar, and saved from the Wrack, was twelve or fourteen Thousand Pounds, which they contriv'd to divide in this manner. They tyed to a Stick two Baskets instead of a pair of Scales, and made them as equipoize as they could, and by these they weighed each parcel that was brought off from the Ship with great exactness; if there ap∣pear'd any seeming advantage in either Ballance, the Governour forc'd that al∣ways upon the Captain, so that he was not injur'd one Mite, nor in all that Ac∣count lost a Farthing that was his Due. If the Inhabitants upon all the Coasts of 
Europe
 were as Hospitable and Just to all Persons of their own Perswasion, as these 
Arabians
 were to those of a strange Faith, and distant Nation, those that do narrowly escape with their Lives from the Dangers of the Sea, would not so often by a merciless People be


so barbarously depriv'd of them at Land. The King too in Compassion to his Mi∣series, requir'd only 2 
per Cent.
 for his Goods, whilst he made other Strangers pay 4.


The 
Portuguese
 formerly were re∣ceiv'd by the 
Arabians
 at 
Muscatt,
 with abundance of Civility and Candor, and allow'd not only the freedom and Ex∣ercise of their Religion, but encourag'd to build a stately Church, and erect a College, and were no way stinted in the Profession of their Faith, and ostenta∣tion of their Pompous Worship.
 The King granted them the freedom of the Port, by which they grew very Pow∣erful and Wealthy, and by that means Indulg'd themselves in Ease and Luxu∣ry, built many fair Houses in the Ci∣ty to dwell in, and at length began to be so Insolent and Unruly, that they openly abus'd that Civility which had entertain'd them so friendly, despis'd that Government by which they had been Protected, and endeavour'd to wrest the Authority out of the Hands of the Civil Magistrate, and set up their own instead of it. The 
Arabs
 who are naturally Civil and obliging, bore the


repeated Insolencies with great Patience, and were loath to be drawn into any Quarrels or Debates with them, not∣withstanding all this turbulent Carri∣age of the 
Portuguese;
 'till allarm'd with the danger of their City, and un∣able to endure their Affronts any lon∣ger, the King himself appear'd in Per∣son with a numerous Army of reso∣lute 
Arabs,
 with whom he set down before the City. The 
Portuguese
 de∣fended themselves against him with great Courage for a long time, and shut them∣selves up in their Church and College, which were converted into Cittadels for their Safeguard, because they were strong. But the 
Arabs
 at length block∣ing up all the Avenues whereby they might expect any Succour either by Sea or Land, and placing themselves upon heights which overlook'd the Fortifi∣cations of the Enemy, who receiv'd no Relief either from 
Goa
 or 
Cong,
 as they expected; the 
Portuguese
 at length be∣took themselves privately to two or three of their Ships which lay in the Harbour, and made their Escape that way. The Holes of the Gun-shot which the 
Arabs
 made in the Church and College of the



Portuguese,
 during the time or the Siege, are yet visible. Since this Re∣bellion, there arose an invincible Hatred between these two Nations, that were thus at variance; so that they are al∣ways designing upon each others Lives and Estates where-ever they meet. The 
Arabians
 are a Stout, Couragious, Hardy Nation, and will in nothing, give place to the 
Portuguese,
 and gene∣rally are Victorious, and prevail against them as often as they Attack each other at Sea. The 
Portuguese
 are mightily sunk, as well in their Courage, as in their Fame and Fortune, and are found to be such contemptible Enemies, that they are seldom discours'd of, but with Reproach, by the name of 
Gallina's, i. e.
 Hen-hearted Fellows. The 
Arabs
 car∣ry in some of their Ships above 500 Men, go out in Fleets, and are so very strong in their Naval Forces, that the 
Portu∣guese
 generally endeavour to avoid them, and never dispute it with them but with great Advantage on their side.
 All the Prisoners of War are made Slaves of on both sides; and those that are taken by the Inhabitants of 
Muscatt,
 are used so very kindly, that they are tempted al∣most


to be in love with their Confine∣ment, and are never us'd with any such Hardships, so as to be forct to attempt an Escape by Flight. They neither cor∣rect them like Slaves, nor impose upon them any servile work, but maintain them in Ease and Idleness, with a cer∣tain allowance of Provisions every day. Of such inconquerable Generosity are these 
Arabians
 even to their very Ene∣mies! And tho' they sometimes per∣swade them to their own Faith, and to turn 
Mahometans,
 'tis never but with Mildness, with gentle Allurements, and Hopes of Reward.


I will here insert a short Account of the taking of Captain 
Edward Say
 by the 
Sanganians,
 who Inhabit a Country op∣posite to the 
Arabian
 Shoar, and then pass over to the other Coast of 
Arabia
 the 
Happy,
 which borders upon the 
Red Sea.


This Commander, after his Ship∣wrack upon the Island 
Macira,
 and a te∣dious stay among the 
Arabians
 at 
Mus∣catt,
 set Sail from thence to the Island of 
Bombay
 in the Company of eighteen or twenty Ships bound for 
Suratt,
 and other parts of 
India.
 After they had


been some time at Sea they parted Com∣pany, and the Ship wherein the Cap∣tain had imbarked, espyed a little after, two Sail to windward of them, as far as they could see from the top-Mast-Head, which made all the Sail they could after them, and thereby forc'd them to bear away right before the Wind with all the Sail they had; and to lighten their Ship so as that she might the better es∣cape them, they cut away their Boat which was tow'd a stern, and threw a∣bundance of valuable Goods over-board. But the two Ships notwithstanding this, outsaild them, and as they came up to∣wards them, the Black Sea-men descri∣ed them by their Colours, to be 
San∣ganians.
 They gave the Captain Chase all the Day long 'till four a Clock in the Afternoon, who fir'd the Stern-Chase with his four Guns all the while; at length they shot his Man at the Helm thro' the Head, and laid him on board in the Midships, entring 70 or 80 Men with Sword and Target. The Black Sail∣ers, who were thirty, leapt over-board to save their Lives, leaving the Ship to the Captain and his two Servants. The Throat of one of them was imme∣diately


cut, and as they came in fury to hew down the Captain, and slay him instantly, as they had done his Servant, he fended off the fatal Blow by receiv∣ing it on his Hand, which was cut half off thro' the dint and violence of the Stroke. While they were thus eager for his Destruction, and intent in ta∣king away his Life, they espyed a Rich Prize which diverted their Fury and Design; for the Captain wore a sett of Gold Buttons upon his Coat, which they presently flew at upon the first sight, and were so zealous for the Pur∣chase, that he ransom'd his Life by the price of his Gold. They stript him as naked as an 
Indian Faquir,
 excepting only a small piece of a shirt to cover his Nakedness, and left him in that San∣tone-like Condition for two Months, without either Hat to his Head, or Shoe to his Foot. One of the 
Sanganian
 Ships which had made them a Prize, was of some Force, she carried ten Guns and 150 Men; the other was only a small Galley of no more than four Guns and 50 Men, whereby the Captain who had resisted them stoutly for some time, be∣ing easily overpower'd, was forc'd to


surrender. The 
Sanganians
 after the Dispute wat over, finding no more re∣sistance, grew compassionate and kind, and refresht the Captain with Water and Opium,
 which was the Nourishment they found most proper for themselves after any hard Labour or Languishment of Spirit, and the speediest Relief for decayed Nature. They were much con∣cern'd too for the Cure of his Hand, which was in danger of being lost by the deepness of the Wound, and ap∣ply'd to it Loaf Sugar to stop the Bleed∣ing, and something else to keep the Wound clean; after which the Wool of a Sheep's Back, and the Oil of their Lamps, without any other Medicines, in a short time thoroughly perfected the Cure.


The Ship was taken near the Island of 
Bombay,
 which made them spend a Month in Sailing before they Arriv'd in their own Country. When they drew near 
Aramra,
 which was the Port to which they design'd, they according to Custom, fir'd a Gun belonging to the Captain's Ship, to salute their Country and Relations; in which the Captain had hid 1500 Venetians, to secure them


from the Rapine of the 
Pyrates,
 think∣ing them safe in that strong Hold, but were by this means unluckily lost; which made it a very costly Salute to our poor Commander, of whose Mo∣ney they discharg'd near 700 
l.
 at one Shot.


The Queen of the Country, after she heard of their Arrival, sent a Messenger for the Captain to bring him up to Court, whither he travell'd for two or three Miles without Covering either to his Head or Feet, very ill equipt to ap∣pear in the Presence of a Queen. When he came in this distress before her Ma∣jesty, she spoke to him by a 
Portuguese
 Interpreter, who inquir'd of him by the Queen's directions, which of her People they were that had his Moneys; which he answer'd he could not tell. Then she threatned to keep him a perpetu∣al Exile from his Country, and for his further Comfort, would allow him on∣ly Salt Water to drink.


It happen'd about a Month before this time, that a 
Portuguese
 Ship with a Priest and his Images had been ta∣ken and brought into this Harbour, which because they were devoutly Re∣ver'd


by that Nation, therefore did the Queen imagin, that all 
Europeans
 had them in the same Religious Esteem: And because that the Captain was in∣flexible to her other Menaces, she or∣der'd the Image of the Virgin 
Mary,
 with those of two or three Saints more, about a Foot high, to be brought be∣fore him, and told him if he would but yield to kiss them, she would give cre∣dit to what he said. The Captain who was a very Rational Man, and bred out of the Road of Romish Superstition, was neither so sparing of his Civilities, as to forbear a Complement to the piece of Wood, nor of such unrefin'd Prin∣ciples as to give it a Religious Adorati∣on, but was ready either to kiss or burn it, which they pleas'd, since he had an assurance of his Release upon such ea∣sie terms, and therefore kiss'd it very freely; and after two or three days stay here, where he fed upon Rice and Wa∣ter, and lay in the Night time with the Cattle, he was dismiss'd.
 A while af∣ter they sent him aboard his Vessel for a day or two, which lay in the Harbour, and gave him along with him about twelve Pints of Wheat, the


Sweepings of the Ship, to sustain him in his Voyage to 
Suratt;
 but he im∣bark'd upon an 
Arabian
 Ship which was then loading for 
Muscatt,
 in which he was carried to that City.


Aramra,
 where the Captain was brought in Prisoner, lies opposite to the 
Arabian
 Shoar, between 
Sindy
 and 
Cape Jugatt,
 a little distance from 
Diu,
 which belongs to the 
Portuguese.
 The Coun∣try of these 
Sanganians
 lies between those vast Empires of 
Persia,
 which is on the 
West,
 and 
Indiston,
 which bor∣ders upon it on the 
East.
 They are great 
Pyrates,
 and live by those Prizes which they take at Sea, where they range from the Streights of 
Ormus
 to the Gulf of 
Cambay,
 and down the 
Ma∣labar
 Coast, Cruising about from one place to another, where any hopes of Booty invites them forward. They infest all the Western Coasts of 
India,
 and tho' their Ships are of no great Force, yet they are seldom taken be∣cause they are made so well for Sail, that they are ready to run when they see a Vessel of any Countenance; and those they think they are able to Encounter, they endeavour to make of them a Prey.


Tho' the Principles of these 
Saga∣nians
 are so far leven'd with Fraud and Injustice,
 that they wholly devote themselves to a life of Piracy, and sub∣sist by the Spoil of the Innocent Traf∣fickers at Sea, yet have they not all di∣vested themselves of their obligations to all kinds of Justice, but are very faith∣ful to what they promise, and invio∣lable observers of their Word; as our Captain had occasion to try by an Ex∣periment very successful and advanta∣tagious. For being robb'd of all his Wealth, but an hundred Checkins which were privately hid in some part of the Ship, his Cook came to him and acquainted him, that the Boat∣swain of the Man of War, who was put in Commander in chief on Board them, would ingage to return him half of whatever Money was committed to his Custody. The Captain deliver'd to him an hundred pieces of Gold, which the Boatswain tied in a small bit of Cloath, with a small Line to it and a Bouy at the end of it, and threw it over-board. For every Man was searched before they went ashoar, and not suffer'd to come from aboard, 'till


the Vessel was unladed. The day fol∣lowing, the Boatswain went over-board in quest of the Bag he had dropt in the Ocean, and after a little search found it, and deliver'd half of the Gold to the Captain; at which the Captain was so well pleas'd, being wholly at his Mercy, and in that distress, that he offer'd him ten pieces as a gratuity, which the Boatswain rejected for this Reason, because he told him he would keep his word according to his Pro∣mise.


I shall now proceed to an Account of 
Mocha,
 and other remarkable Pla∣ces situated upon the 
Red Sea,
 accord∣ing to the Method I lately proposed.








MOCHA,
 And other Remarkable Places Upon the RED SEA.


I Shall here give the Reader a short View of 
Mocha,
 and other places of Note and Traffick, which border up∣on the 
Red Sea
 on the 
Arabian
 side,
 in the full extent of it from the Island of 
Socatra,
 where it begins to mix with the Oriental Sea, or 
Indian
 Ocean, to the very Head of it, which reaches to that Isthmus, or Neck of Land which di∣vides 
Asia
 from 
Africk.
 I shall not de∣tain him with any tedious Description


of these places, or run out in expatiat∣ing upon their Government and Laws, the Manners and Customs of their In∣habitants, or their Strength and Polity, but only lead him along the Shoar, and give him a view of the Harbours as we Coast along, to prevent all Miscarriage at his first entring into these Ports, ma∣ny of which are scarce known to the Navigators of 
Europe.
 A fuller Ac∣count of these Parts may be expected from another Hand; from Mr. 
Edward Clyve,
 who by his Personal Observati∣ons is qualified not only for confirming all this Relation, but also is furnish'd with such Remarks, as inable him for a larger performance, in a clear and am∣ple Account of what is yet unknown, and very worthy the publick Notice, among these People.


I shall observe no other Method in this Relation, than what Nature has chalkt out to us in the Situation of the Towns, which shall briefly be describ'd according as they lie upon the Sea-Coast.


And shall begin with the 
Arabian Gulph,
 or 
Red Sea,
 the reason of which Name is perplext with variety of O∣pinions


and different Conjectures; for Antiquity (we find) did not confine the Name of the 
Red Sea,
 only to that nar∣now Channel which divides 
Arabia
 from 
Africk,
 and gives a boundary to some parts of those Ancient Kingdoms, but included also the 
Persian
 Gulf, and all the Seas about 
Arabia,
 and all that vast Tract of Ocean which extends from 
Capè bone Esperance,
 even beyond the River 
Ganges:
 And the later Western Writers have limited it only to this Gulph, because it lies the nearest, and was first discover'd to them. There∣fore they contend, that because King 
E∣rythros,
 who was Master of this Sea, was interr'd in one of its Islands, it ob∣tain'd the Name of 
Mare Erithraeum,
 which signifies the 
Red Sea,
 and the 
Latines
 and others from thence, have re∣tain'd the same Appellation. Some fan∣cy that the redness of the Sand or Co∣rall, which lie at the Bottom, or the redness of its Waters; and others affirm that the strong reflexion of the Sun's Beams upon the Surface, or the redness of the Neighbouring Hills, might just∣ly occasion the immposition of this Name. 
Herodotus
 takes notice of a


place hereabouts, called 
Erythrobolus,
 or the Red Soil, which might Coun∣tenance another Opinion. In the 
He∣brew
 this Sea is called 
Suph,
 or the Sea of Weeds, because according to 
Kimchi,
 there grew abundance of Weeds upon the sides of it.


This Gulph runs from 12 Degrees No. Latitude to 29, and farther, most of it along the Shoar of 
Arabia the Happy,
 which is a large Peninsula, as it stands divided from the other two 
Arabia
's.


The Ships from 
Suratt
 that Sail for the 
Red Sea
 take their departure gene∣rally about 
March,
 and Arrive at 
Mo∣cha
 towards the latter end of 
April,
 or before the 20th of 
May;
 at which time, (or as the Moon Changes, or is in the Full) the Winds vary, and prevent a∣ny more Ships entring into the Sea that Year. In their Passage at that time of the Year, they generally make the Island of 
Socatra,
 and keep under Cape 
Guardifeu
 and the 
Abasseen
 Coast, to escape the danger of those impetuous Currents that run strong on the 
Ara∣bian
 Shore.


The Island of 
Socatra
 lies 12 Deg. 30 M. No. and is subject to the King of



Casseen,
 one of whose Sons is always plac'd in the Government, whose main Revenue arises from the Aloes, Dra∣gons-Blood, and Goats and Cows Skins, which are sent every Year either to 
Seer
 or 
Casseen.
 The Road here is very good, when once the Danger is past in entring into it, and that is easily evaded by the Pilots, who are always ready to conduct the Ships with safety into the Har∣bour. To the 
Eastward
 of this Island is very good Anchorage, but the Water is neither Healthful, nor is there any great store of Provisions. They ex∣ceed all their Neighbours in the quan∣tity and Art of making Butter, and furnish with it 
Casseen
 and 
Seer,
 some∣times 
Mocha
 and 
Aden
 with that valuable Commodity. Their Ships for Traffick are very few, not above 6 or 7 Grabbs or Gelva's belonging to the Island, most of which are imploy'd upon the King's Account. The Natives are of a swarthy Complexion, and of civil Demeanour, and would gladly invite the 
English
 to a settlement among them, but the meanness of the Trade will not permit them to accept the Pro∣fer.


Opposite to this Island upon the Main of 
Africa
 is Cape 
Guardifeu,
 which is very remarkable Land, and lies in 12 Deg. No. Lat. The Reason of mention∣ing this Cape is, because most Ships that come for this Sea in 
April,
 or later, desire for their safety to make that Land or Promontory.
 Near this is 
Mount Fe∣lix,
 which is only a small Mountain, but shews it self in appearance at a di∣stance, like a small Island, yet joins the Main by low Land; and the Ships keeping their Course along this Shore for about 150 Miles Westward from the Cape, at length they espy a small white Island, from whence they cross the Gulph towards 
Aden
 on the 
Arabian
 Shore, which now follows in order to be describ'd.


Upon this Coast of 
Arabia,
 are varie∣ty of places noted for Traffick, the first of which that I shall here take notice of is 
Dofar,
 which is situated towards the Eastern part of this Sea. The King of this place Ingages now and then in small Skirmishes, and Martial Disputes with his Neighbouring Princes, the Kings of 
Seer
 and 
Casseen,
 but their Contests are seldom very Bloody. And


his People are inur'd but very little to the Laws of Hospitality and Kindness,
 but are injurious in their Commerce, and Villanous to Strangers. The Coun∣try produces only some Olibanum, Co∣co-Nuts and Butter. The Religion of the Natives is 
Mahometan,
 of which they are such zealous Admirers, and are heated with such extatick Warmths, that they are not asham'd sometimes to pretend even to Inspiration, especi∣ally when they are seiz'd with a sit of Dancing. For among them prevails a particular Custom of Dancing with so much pains and Zeal,
 so much ferven∣cy and Passion, that their strength de∣cays, and their Spirits fail them thro' those violent Motions, and being at length quite spent, they fall as it were quite dead upon the Ground. All the while this merry Humour does possess them, they cry aloud, 
God is a great God, the only God, and
 Mahomet 
his Prophet,
 and fill the Air with such like pious and devout Expressions of their Law, 'till they are not able any longer to speak or stand. While they lie thus lifeless, as it were, and intranc'd upon the Ground, they talk, they say, with God and the


Prophet, who Communicates to them Divine Revelations; and the credulous Multitude who are easily perswaded to give assent to what they say, firmly be∣lieve that they are Heavenly Inspir'd. This is done in imitation, as I conceive, and to countenance the Practice of their False Prophet, who wisely contriv'd that a Bodily Disease should pass for the In∣fusion of the Spirit; and being subject to the Falling Sickness, declar'd that those Swoonings were Heavenly Raptures, in which he convers'd familiarly with the Angel 
Gabriel.


Next to this place Westward is 
Cas∣seen,
 which stands in 15 Deg. No. The Road here in the Western 
Mussouns
 is very safe, but it lies open to the East∣ward. The Town looks mean, and is no way beautified with stately Edifices, nor made strong by Fortifications, only 'tis dignified sometimes with the resi∣dence of the King, when his Revenues come from 
Socatra.
 For as his Royal∣ties are very small, and his Income inconsiderable, because his Subjects are both Poor and Slavish; so is he here∣by debar'd from maintaining a Prince∣ly Pomp, or making a show in any


Magnificent Appearance, and therefore very often turns Merchant himself, for hopes of Advantage, and for supporting his Royal State and Grandeur. Several Gel∣va's come hither freighted with Rice,
 Dates, Camlees, which are a sort of Hair Coats made in 
Persia,
 and Red and White Callicoes; which are barter'd for O∣libanum, Aloes and Butter. For the Necessities of the Natives incline them rather to an Exchange of Commodities, than a Traffick for Silver, which loses its Esteem here, as much as it is Ido∣liz'd in other parts. Some Coins how∣ever are current among them, 
viz.
 Dol∣lars, Abassees, and Mamoodees.
 That which is here esteem'd instead of Mo∣ney, is a sort of Seed, which passes in the room of small Coins, and is distri∣buted commonly by handfuls. Here the Natives are mainly addicted to those mean Vices of Cozenage and stealth, and think, they make a good purchase of any thing, which they can compass by Fraud and Cheating. Another sin to which they are often given, is so vile, that the foulness of it I cannot without Immodesty mention. The pro∣per Season of the Year for Trade is 
May, June
 and 
July.


A place next to this, much more no∣ted both for the Civil Deportment of the Natives, and for the Convenience of a Port, for a greater concourse of People, and for Traffick, is 
Seer,
 which is much frequented by Ships from seve∣ral Ports, 
viz. Muscatt, Gombroon, Suratt,
 and 
Gella,
 and some other places on the 
Abasseen
 Shore; from whence they bring Butter, Myrrh and Slaves; and those from 
Muscatt
 and 
Suratt
 transport with them Olibanum, Aloes, and what the Port affords.


Aden,
 which is situated in 12 deg. 20 
m. No.
 is one of the Ancientest, Fair∣est and most Pleasant Cities of all 
Ara∣bia,
 surrounded with Walls on one side, and Mountains on the other. It was for∣merly in the Possession of the 
Portuguese,
 when they were renown'd for their Con∣quests in the East, but by Treachery, the 
Turks
 made themselves the Masters of it, after some time, 'till the puissant King of 
Hyaman
 became Victorious o∣ver the 
Turks,
 and seiz'd it for his own Inheritance. This Prince is here Invest∣ed with the Title of the King of 
Hya∣man,
 (or 
Yeoman,
 as the Natives seem to pronounce it) which signifies 
Arabia


Felix;
 not that his Dominions stretch so far, but because the extent of his Ter∣ritories and vast Treasures, do much exceed all the rest of the Kings that in∣habit 
Arabia.
 For his Kingdom reaches near 400 Miles on the 
Red Sea,
 from 
A∣den
 as far as 
Geron.


Aden
 formerly surpass'd all the rest of the Neighbouring Ports upon this Shore,
 was a famous Magazine for the various Commodities of 
India, Persia, A∣rabia,
 and what was brought hither by the 
Abasseens;
 and was Inhabited by a Miscellany of People, 
Turks,
 and 
Arabi∣ans, Persians, Indians
 and 
Ethiopians,
 who resided here for the Advantages of that mighty Trade. The Houses were built both neat and strong, and the Castles from the top of the Mountains afforded a curious divertive Prospect: Nature gave it such a fortified Situation, that it was a Garrison without Art, and was able to defend it self with a small Force, from a potent Enemy that might Invade it, either by Sea or Land. 'Till the Eastern Luxury which is more in∣tent upon Indulgence and Ease, than building Forts and raising Sieges, made them neglect their Fortifications, and


leave it open and defenceless for the first bold Assailant. The proper Months for Trade here, are 
April, May, June, July,
 and some part of 
August,
 at which time all the Ships in the Sea take their Departure, because of the Change of the Mussouns, which always happen towards the end of that Month. They carry nothing from hence, but Coffee, Aloes, Olibanum and Myrrh; the three last of which are not the product of the Country.


I should now take leave of this place, and proceed to give some account of 
Mocha,
 were it not convenient, before my departure, to insist a little upon the Discovery of some Ports and Passages hereabouts, to instruct such as design to Travel into these Seas.


The Land of 
Aden,
 because it makes like an Island, was formerly reputed to have been one; from whence steer∣ing 
W.
 and 
W.
 by 
N.
 you will come to the 
Babbs,
 which in the 
Arabian
 Lan∣guage, signifies Gate or Door. The 
Babbs
 is a small Island opening to the 
Red Sea,
 and makes in form very like a Garr-Fish, being low and flat. Between this and the Main Land, is a


safe Passage, if you keep the Mid-Chan∣nel, where is 10, 11 and 12 fathom Wa∣ter. But the great Ships for better Se∣curity, chuse rather to go on the outside, where is seldom less than Forty Fathom, 'till they hale in for Shore, which is commonly done, as soon as they are past the 
Streights.
 Here are seven Islands, but none of them so remarkable as the 
Babbs.
 The 
Streights
 here are common∣ly called those of 
Babel Mandel,
 which are about 7 Leagues over from main Land to main Land, about 20 Leagues from 
Aden,
 and 12 or 13 from 
Mocha.
 The Course from the 
Babbs
 is about 
N.
 by 
West,
 and 
N. North West.


Before you come to these 
Streights,
 you will make a very high Table Land, and an opening to the Southward of it; which appears very like the passage in∣to the 
Red Sea;
 but then you will dis∣cover the said 
Babbs
 Island to rectifie you, thro' which steering 
North,
 or 
N.
 by 
W.
 as you see occasion; there is opening to the Southward of the said high Land, a great River that leads to 
Gella,
 which is the greatest Port on the 
Abasseen
 side without the said 
Babbs.


Steering up the 
Arabian
 Coast before


the Arrival at 
Mocha,
 is a seeming Wood, which is several Date-Trees and Gar∣dens, to the Northward of which is 
Mocha,
 which yields a more beautiful prospect at Sea, than on Shore. Here you must not come into less than 7 Fathom, nearer are so many dangerous Over-falls, that they will be apt to scare a young unexpert Pilot. When the Southermost Mosque is once brought to bear, 
E.
 by 
S.
 the Ships may luff up, or bear into the Road, and Anchor in 4, 5, 6, or 7 Fathom. Before this Road lies a long Ridge of Sands, which has seldom above two Fathom Water, which renders it dangerous for those that enter to go in, 'till they have the Bearings abovesaid.


Near the Southern Fort is a Channel, for the Grabbs that use these parts, that gives them a passage in or out; but is dangerous for 
Europeans
 without the assistance of Pilots.


Mocha
 lies in 13 Deg. 30 M. 
North,
 and has been of late the principal Port in the 
Red-Sea,
 and to which Ships Traffick from 
Surat, Cambay, Dieu, Ma∣labar,
 and other parts of 
India.
 Hither also come the Ships from several parts


of 
Europe; England, Holland, France, Den∣mark, Portugal; Portugal;
 as also from 
Casseen, So∣catra, Muscatt,
 and all the Gulph of 
Persia,
 which bring hither the Products of their several Countries; and are met by the Merchants of 
Barbary, Egypt, Turkey,
 by the 
Abasseens, Arabians,
 &c. who buy off their Goods for ready Mo∣ney, and make little other Returns but Coffee, Sena, and some Aloes, Hepe∣tica, and other small things of no great moment.


The Custom paid for their Goods by the 
Europeans
 is 3 
per Cent.
 both out and in, and they are prviledged to lay their Goods in their Houses which they vent here, without being constrain'd to bring them to the Custom-House. The Goods of all other Merchants are Ex∣amined, and the Customs stated, which are 5 
per Cent.
 that is 2 
per Cent.
 more, than what is requir'd from the 
Europe∣ans.
 This was formerly done in favour to those Merchants, but is of late turn'd much to their prejudice.


If the 
Europeans
 bring hither any Cloath or piece Goods, they are some of them open'd to discover what kind they are of, and that a just Account of


them may be carried to the Governour. But the Custom for them is paid ac∣cording only to what they are sold and bought at, which is accepted by the Governour; but then if the Broker fal∣sifies in his Accounts, and is ever found guilty of fraudulent Returns, he smarts severely, and is fleec'd for it after the Ships departure.


Whatever Commodities are bought or sold by Weight, must be brought to the Scales at the 
Custom-House,
 by which both Parties must be determin'd. The Weights here are those that follow,
 
viz.






 


C.


Q.


L.






Bahars are 
English,


3


3 or


420.






Frassells are


15 to one Baharr 28






Manns


10 to one Frassel.






Fuckeas


40 to one Mann.






Coffila's


10 to one Fuckea.






Dry Measure are these,
 viz.



Teman is 40 Memeeda's.


Medeeda is 3 Pints 
English.




By this Medeeda they sell Oil, But∣ter and Liquids; but it yields not a∣bove


two Pints and of Corn, &c. in dry Measures. They measure their Cloath, Silk, 
&c.
 by a Covit or Guz, which is 24 Inches, and Buy our Cloath by the Piece, of which they mea∣sure 4 or 5 together, and take our Ac∣counts and Packers Marks.


Their Coins are Dollars of all sorts, but they abate 5 
per Cent.
 on Pillar Dollars, because they esteem their Sil∣ver not very pure. The Dollar Weight with them is 17 Dr. 14 Gr. as it is only 17 D. and 12 Gr. with us. All their Coins are taken by Weight, and valu∣ed according to their fineness, and of Gold they have several sorts, 
viz.


The Ducket of



Venice.


Germany.


Barbary.


Turkey.


Egypt,
 &c.




The Comassees are a small Coin va∣lued according to the Governments Plea∣sure; but they keep their Accounts by an imaginary Coin of Cabeers, reck∣oning 80 to a Dollar.


The Natives were very civil and cour∣teous to the 
English,
 especially 'till the Year 1687, when the War commenc'd between the 
English
 and the 
Mogul,
 which was so severe among the poor 
Moor
 Merchants, and such a disturbance and loss to the Innocent 
Indians
 that Traded hither, that it has quite (in a manner) destroy'd the Traffick of this Port, and driven the Trade to several other parts in this Sea. This War has since occasion'd the utter Ruin of seve∣ral 
Indian, Turkey,
 and 
Arabian
 Mer∣chants. For when the 
English
 Sailers at that time perceiv'd the softness of the 
Indian Lascarrs;
 how tame they were to all their Cruelties, how pati∣ent and submissive to their Force and Arms, and how willingly they endured the spoiling of their Goods, rather than ingage their Lives in a bloody Contest; they no sooner return'd for 
England,
 but they Imbark'd again upon a new Design with some more 
Europeans
 to turn Pirates, and rob these harmless Traffickers in the 
Red Sea.
 And ac∣cordingly in the Year 1691, they took from the Merchants that Traded be∣tween 
Mocha
 and 
Suratt
 to the value


of 120000 
l.
 The succeeding Year they did the same; and at this time there are two or three small Ships more up∣on the quest for Rich Prizes, and ma∣king seizure of those Ships they meet with; which has so impoverish'd alrea∣dy some of the 
Mogul
's People, that they must either cease to carry on a Trade, or resolve to be made a Prey. Tho' the 
Mogul
 cannot justly charge the 
E. India
 Company with the barbarous Ac∣tions of these Pirates, yet the unhap∣py occasion of it may be very apt to excite in him very Ireful Resentments, because of the Misery of so many of his Subjects. And the 
English
 at 
Suratt
 have been already made sensible of some Inconveniences and Hardships conse∣quent upon it, by their Imprisonment in their Factory twice in two Years, while I stay'd there.


Coffee is the only Commodity in re∣pute in this Port,
 of which there is no scarcity at all. It grows in abundance at 
Beetlefuckee, Sonany, Asab,
 and other parts; but from these it seldom comes grabled, or well packt, which puts the Buyers upon a new Trouble. It may be bought one Year with another, at


about 45 Dollars 
per
 Baharr, and shipt. It is ripe at a proper Season of the Year, and is subject to Blasts, as our Corn and Fruits are. It thrives near the Water, and grows in Clusters like our Holly-Berries; the Berry it self resembles a Bay-Berry; two of which are inclos'd in one Shell, which separates when it is broken. The Leaf of it is like a Law∣rel's in bigness, but very thin. The Tree it self neither shoots out in large∣ness, nor is very long productive of Fruit, but is still supplyed by new planting of others. This Commodity is proper on∣ly to these Parts, and, as the 
Arabs
 tell us, is by the Bounty of Heaven given only to them, as a means to procure for them all those Necessaries, which they stand in need of from other parts. Few Commodities of any value are here be∣sides, except Sena, some quantity of which may be bought, and very cheap; as also Aloes Hepetica. From 
Casseen, Seer,
 and 
Socatra,
 come Aloes Socatra, and Olibanum; from 
Gella
 and other parts on the 
Abasseen
 Shore, Mirrh; from 
Socachim,
 Elephants Teeth, and Gold Dust, which are bought by the Mer∣chants of 
India.


Moseck
 is distant 
N. W.
 from 
Mocha
 about 10 Leagues, and is of no impor∣tance for Trade, except it be for Salt, since 
Mocha
 drew the 
Indian
 Merchants from it, and drein'd its Commerce; for the City of 
Mocha
 cannot boast of its Foundation above two hundred Years. This Port is situated near 
Zebid
 and 
Beetlefuckee,
 but 
Hodeeda
 is supply'd with Coffee from several places of Note for that Commodity.


Jutor
 was formerly a burning Island,
 and is at present uninhabited, and is distant from 
Mooseek
 about 3 Leagues.


Hodeeda
 is plac'd in about 14 d. 50 m.
 and is distant from 
Mocha
 about 60 Miles. In this is a Creek very coveni∣ent for Building Grabbs or Gelva's, and it is likewise very happy in a Port, in which is shipp'd abundance of Coffee for 
Judda, Mocha,
 and other places. It is under the Government of 
Lohia,
 the next Port of moment upon the Main.


Comoran,
 is an Island which is blest by Nature with a favourable Soil and ad∣vantagious Situation, but unfortunate in the Entertainment of Villanous In∣habitants, who are Characteriz'd with no better Names, than that of Robbers,


or Bandittoes. It lies in 15 Deg. 20 M. and is about 10 Miles long, and two broad. Ships of the greatest Burthen may Anchor safely, in a Bay or Road which lies on the Eastermost side of it, not subject to any danger by violent frets of Wind, or Tempestuous bluster∣ing Weather. It is Fortified with a Castle, in which are some few Guns and Men; and it produces no Commo∣dities of considerable Advantage, but supplies the Ships with good Water, Goats and Fish. The Passage from hence to the Main, is not above an 
English
 Mile.


Since the Port of 
Mocha
 was disturb'd by the 
English
 Ships in the 
Indian
 War, and the Merchants Goods which were bound for 
Suratt,
 were there seiz'd on by Captain 
A—s,
 This struck such Terrour in all those People that were formerly wont to Trade thither, that they declin'd the Port, and remov'd the Trade to a Town not very remote from it,
 nam'd 
Lohia,
 which is situated in 15 Degr. 4 m. and is now grown in∣to that Credit which 
Mocha
 had, and draws to it both the adjacent Merchants, and the Ships from 
India
 and other parts.


The entrance into the Harbour here, is difficult and dangerous without Pilots, but the Port is noted for its Conveni∣ence and Trade in small Vessels, and Ships for 
Judda.
 It is honour'd too with the Residenc of the Governour of all this part of the Country, and the Island before mention'd.


Gezon,
 which lies in 17 Deg. 
No.
 is the last Town of Note upon this Coast, appertaining to the King of 
Arabia Fe∣lix.
 'Tis eminent for its Trade of Pearl-Fishing, which is manag'd by 
Bannians,
 with that Advantage, that they raise themselves thereby to very great E∣states. The Island 
Fersham,
 which is situated from hence about 3 Leagues, is most remarkable for this Fishing, where∣in the Natives are imploy'd by the 
Ban∣nians.
 The Town it self is small, and only considerable for this Pearl-Fish∣ing, and for sending a great quantity of Corn to all parts of 
Arabia Felix.
 From hence to 
Comphida,
 is no Port of Moment, or that is any way remark∣able for Traffick; and if there were some convenient Harbours in this di∣stance, the Wild 
Arabs,
 who are expert Robbers and live by Spoil, and inhabit


those parts, would certainly divert all Merchants from coming near them.


The next place as we ascend towards the Head of the 
Red Sea
 is Comphida, which lies in 19 Deg.
 5 M. It was for∣merly subject to the 
Turks,
 and its pre∣sent Governour commands only about 50 Souldiers, which carries only a Face of Command to keep the People in awe, but is more probably design'd for pre∣vention of the stealing of Custom, be∣cause many persons chuse to land here, and from hence travel by Land to 
Mecca.


Judda
 is the principal Port in this Sea, beloning to the Grand Signior, ly∣ing in about 21 Deg. 30 M. This Port is inviron'd with dangerous Sands, which make the Passage into it difficult to Strangers, but is very safe for Ships when they come to an Anchor. The Air is healthful, and its Provisions sound and plentiful, for it affords choice Mutton, Beef, Fish, Grapes and other Fruits. It is the Sea-Port to 
Mecca,
 a place Re∣nown'd for the Nativity of 
Mahomet,
 the vile Impostor, who first drew Breath in this Barren Soil. And indeed the Land about that place is so useless and


unprofitable, and unfit for any Improve∣ments, that it seems to be accurs'd by Nature, and debarr'd of Heaven's Bles∣sings, by a constant scarcity of all things, unless they are imported from other Kingdoms. Therefore is the Grand Signior oblig'd to very great Expences, for its support, to furnish out a Maintenance for it yearly from 
Egypt,
 and send from thence 20 or 25 Sail of large Ships, laden with Provisions, Mo∣ney, 
&c.
 for its subsistence and the sup∣port of Trade.


Judda
 flourishes in a constant Traf∣fick from 
India, Persia,
 other parts of 
Arabia,
 and the 
Abasseen
 Shore; it is subject to the 
Turkish
 Government, and defended by their Arms and Valour; for its Fortifications otherwise, are but very weak, being only surrounded by Mud-Walls.
 There is a passage into this Town three ways, by so many Gates, two of which are not conside∣rable, but the third which is the Prin∣cipal, and leads towards the celebrated Birth-place of the Prophet, is so sacred, that no Christian must pass thro' it without forfeiture of his Religion, and Converting to the Profession of the 
Ma∣hometan



Law. Except he be a Man of Wealth, and then his Soul is not so va∣luable as his Money, which will freely be taken in Exchange for it, and makes all Offences venial here.


Hither the 
Arabians
 bring their Cof∣fee, which is bought here by the 
Turks,
 and shipp'd for the 
Sues.
 The Dollar weight here is 17 D. 10 Gr. Hither likewise resort every Year several Hog∣gees from all parts of the 
Mahometan
 Countries, who come hither as Pilgrims in a Spirit of Devotion, to visit their Fam'd City 
Mecca.
 And as soon as they are Arriv'd here, or at 
Yamboe,
 which is a Port a little higher in this Sea, they instantly strip themselves, out of a hu∣mour of mortification, and set out in a holy Pilgrimage for 
Mecca,
 with only a Longee about their middle, which is a piece of Callicoe about 3 Yards length But I leave off from any Description of these Customs, being ingag'd only to proceed in an Account of their Ports. From hence therefore the Ships Sail in 
November
 and 
December
 for the 
Sues,
 to which the Passage is render'd very tedi∣ous by their coming to an Anchor every Night. For Rocks and Sands, which are


very numerous between these two Pla∣ces, must needs be very dangerous to Pilots, that trust only to their outward Senses, and are guided by the Eye, without any use of either Lead or Line, or Compass. They place themselves up∣on the Ships Fore-Castle, to espy the Colour and Ripplings of the Water, and to direct them clear of all the Shoals. The Anchoring places all a∣long this Coast are very good, but the Towns are few, because the Country is much disturb'd by the Wild 
Arabs,
 whose Life is a Pilgrimage of Rapine and Spoil. Therefore if the Wind shifts at Noon, or if they cannot reach their Port before the Night comes on, they certainly bear away to the Port from whence they came, if there is no Har∣bour nearer.


From 
Judda
 to 
Yamboe,
 which is the next Port of any note, is reckoned a∣bove 10 Leagues, for it is situate in 25 Deg. 10 M. The Harbour is safe for Ships when they have once escap'd the Passage into it which is dangerous, by reason of the many Shoals and Sands. The Castle with which the Town is fortified, is rather built for a Terror to


the petty Insolencies of the 
Arabs,
 than as a Fort of Defence against a powerful warlike Enemy. This Town, which is reputed very Ancient, has lost abun∣dance of its former Glory, in that it once was dignified with the Title of Chief Port for the City 
Mecca,
 but is now confin'd a Sea-Port only to 
Medina,
 the Burying-place of their Victorious and Triumphant Prophet; from which it is distant about four Days Journey. The adjacent Country produces little but Grapes, for the use of the Natives, and of the Ships; therefore Stores and Provisions for 
Medina
 are here unloaded, that are brought for that end in Ships from 
Sues.


From hence is nothing remarkable besides the Barrenness and strangeness of the Country, 'till we come to the narrowing of the Sea which is next Mount 
Sinai;
 the Cape of which Sea is called 
Ross Mahomed,
 or the Head of 
Ma∣homet;
 from which to 
Tor,
 which is the Port of Mount 
Sinai,
 is about seven Leagues, and about the same distance from the 
Egyptian
 Shore.


Tor
 is the Sea-Port of Mount 
Sinai,
 distant from it about 40 Miles, where∣in


is a Castle of small Force, under the Government of the 
Turks.


At 
Sinai
 live the Caloyers, or a Con∣vent of Religious 
Greeks,
 who give a friendly Reception to all sort of Pilgrims that resort thither. This Monastery is said to have been built by 
Justinian,
 and Dedicated to St. 
Catherine.
 The 
Greeks
 distribute their Charity promis∣cuously, as well to the 
Arabians,
 as those of their own Nation, both to the Chri∣stians and the Mahometans. The 
Greeks
 here injoy too, a large Plantation of Date-Trees, the Fruit whereof is gene∣rally consum'd by the 
Arabs,
 who be∣have themselves imperiously towards these Christians, and mightily inslave them, meerly for allowing them the liberty of injoying their Monastery at the Mount.


Near 
Tor
 is a Bath called 
Hummum Mosa,
 or the Bath of 
Moses,
 the Water whereof is warm as New Milk. And at their return from 
Mecca,
 the Caravans in their passage stop here.


From 
Tor
 to the Head of the 
Red Sea,
 which may be about 100 Miles; nothing is to be seen very considerable, but that place which is so remarkable in


the History of the Holy Scriptures, and which these Natives,
 as well as the 
Turks
 and 
Greeks
 say, was the very place where the Children of 
Israel
 passed the 
Red Sea,
 in their flight from 
Pharaoh,
 which is about 40 or 50 Miles distant from the Head of it. The Passage is not above 15 Miles broad, and the Midd-Channel is about 35 Fathoms deep. 
Josephus
 giving an Account of this Wonderful Escape of the 
Israelites,
 tells us, 
L.
 2. 
c.
 7. how that 
Alexander
's Army had such another Passage through the Sea of 
Pamphilia,
 which divided it self to give way to his Souldiers, in his Expedition against the 
Persians,
 because there was no other way to come to destroy them.


The 
Egyptian
 Shoar all along that Coast which is opposite to this, is ob∣serv'd to be very steep, except it be a part of it, thro' which the Children of 
Israel
 journey'd, which is a very fine Descent aboout eight or nine Miles down to the Sea. On each side of which are impassible Mountains, like so many high Walls, which are called 
Gibbal Pharoon,
 or the Hills of 
Pharaoh.
 So that except the Sea had open'd for


the safety of God's People, they had no where to turn, either to the right Hand or to the left, but must have inevi∣tably perisht by the Hands of 
Phara∣oh
's Army.


Sues
 is an Ancient Town at the very Head of the 
Red Sea,
 and lies nearest the Latitude of 30 D. It is defended by a Wall and a Castle of some Force, design'd rather as a small Bulwark a∣gainst the Incursions of the wild 
Arabs,
 than to guard it from the Arm of a potent Assailant. It is the Sea-Port of 
Egypt,
 and under the Government of 
Grand Cairo,
 from which it is distant about 50, or 60 Miles. The best Ships belonging to the Port are bought at 
Su∣ratt
 by the 
Turks,
 who carry on the sole Trade of this place, tho' some Vessels of very good Burthen are built here too, tho by very unskilful Artists. 
Pliny
 in his 
Nat. Hist. L.
 vi. cap. 29. mentions a Town called 
Suasa,
 so called, as some think, from 
Shuak,
 one of 
Abra∣ham
's Sons by 
Keturah, Gen.
 25.2. and says it lies in that part of 
Arabia
 which is next to 
Egypt.
 This probably must be the same.


I have now finish'd these Travels upon the 
Arabian
 Shore, all along the 
Red Sea,
 as far as from 
Babel-Mandell,
 which is the opening into the 
Indian
 Ocean to 
Sues,
 which is at the Head of that Gulph, lying nearest 
N. W.
 and 
S. East,
 and distant above 1200 Miles. And have principally describ'd only the Ports on the 
Arabian
 Coast, without insisting much upon other matters, to give some light to Sailers, and such as Travel into some of those unfrequent∣ed parts, where they may find con∣venient Ports, and what is the Con∣dition of their Harbours, and something of their Trade.








THE CAPE OF 
Good Hope.


FEBRƲARY
 the 14th 1692/3,
 did the 
Benjamin
 set Sail towards the 
Cape
 of 
Good Hope,
 on her homeward bound Voyage, whither the Passage was safe and pleasant 'till we were driven upon the 
Chagoes
 by some undis∣cernible Tides, which are a company of sharp Rocks visible to the Eye,
 as we sailed along upon the shallow Wa∣ter; the sight whereof for the space of half a Day, and the distance we were at from any Land, had we unhappily miscarried, struck us with very formi∣dable Apprehensions of the extreme


Danger we were expos'd to all that while. But having fortunately made our way through those perilous Craggy Shelves, we kept our Course with good Success 'till our Arrival at the 
Cape.


The Sailers have commonly notice of this Land before they Espy it, by the Soundings which run out sixty Leagues into the Ocean, and the Almitrosses which is a large Sea-Fowl, and never fly very far from Land; and the Man∣ga Voluchoes, another Sea Fowl that keeps thereabouts. On 
May
 the 15th. 1693,
 when we approacht the 
Cape,
 in the Evening, the Amplitude made 9 D. 45 Min. 
N. Wly. variat.
 In the Morn∣ing 10 Deg. 14 Min. and by the 
Azi∣muth
 10 Deg. 6 Min. In the Morning the Table-Land bore E, S. The varia∣tion at the 
Cape
 alters much, for in the Year 1689, when we came out, the variation then was eleven Degrees, in the Year 1670 it was only six. At 
Java,
 the variation has not alter'd these hun∣dred Years, as is evident from Journals of that date.


On 
May
 the 16th. about ten at Night we came to an Anchor at the 
Cape,
 but the Commander being a Stranger in the


Bay, fir'd two Guns, to signifie we were in Distress, which presently brought two 
Dutch
 Masters on board us, who told us that we Anchor'd in bad ground; whereupon we weighed and stood near the Shoar, and there dropt our Anchor in better.


We found in the Road ten 
Dutch-East India
 Ships, most of them of good Burthen, richly laden, bound for 
Eu∣rope;
 these staid expecting two or three more from the 
Indies,
 and six had sail'd a little before from thence to 
Holland.
 And every Year the 
Dutch
 Trade to the 
Indies,
 employs near 20 Ships, and as ma∣ny return home;
 which with the Trade that they drive there, where they Traf∣fick with at least an Hundred Sail, ad∣vances their Profits to some hundred Thousands, I had almost said some Mil∣lions every Year. For by their very Commerce at 
Suratt,
 which is inconsider∣able, in respect of the Advantage which they reap from several other Factories in 
India,
 that not exceeding the twentieth part; they reckon an Annual Gain, af∣ter the deduction of all Expences of their Factory, of fifteen hundred thou∣sand Gildars, which in 
English
 Money


rises almost to an hundred and fifty thousand Pounds. This Account I had from one intimately acquainted with those Concerns.


The Harbour here is very safe and commodious for Ships, free from all in∣convenience and Danger; except it be towards mid Winter, which is there in 
June,
 at the Suns approaching the Tro∣pick of 
Cancer;
 then the 
North-West
 Winds blow sometimes so very fierce, that the Ships are unable to ride against them. For by a violent Gust from that Quarter, in 
A.
 1692, about the latter end of 
May,
 two 
Dutch,
 and one 
Eng∣lish
 Ship, not able to bear up against the fury of the Weather, were driven upon the Shoar and Foundred.


All the 
Holland East India
 Ships, both those outward and homeward bound, touch in here for fresh Provisions, and furnish the place with plenty of all Com∣modities, both from 
India
 and 
Europe.
 By which means there is scarce one part of all the Tripartite Continent, that is furnisht with that abundance of Con∣veniences, which the 
Cape
 can boast of. And that I may present the Reader with a more regular Account of this fa∣mous


Promontory, and give him a more methodical Idea of the place,
 I shall in∣sist upon the following Description of it in this manner. First, in observing its situation, its pleasant Air, and fertile Soil. Secondly in considering the Na∣ture and Customs of its Original Inha∣bitants. And thirdly, in shewing the Profit and Convenience, which this Plantation affords the 
Dutch.


First therefore the 
Cape
 of 
Good Hope
 is situated between thirty four and thir∣ty five Degrees of 
South
 Latitude,
 and is the furthermost Tract of our Conti∣nent towards the most 
Southern
 part of 
Africa,
 and esteem'd by all, the most Renown'd Promontory in the World. The 
Greeks
 and 
Latins,
 as far as we can see, have had no certain knowledge of it, much less those before them; yet from some Ancient Authors it is evident, that the 
Barbarians,
 that is, the strange Nations have made, or caused to be made the Circum-navigation of 
Africa,
 which could not be done without know∣ing of this 
Cape.
 
Bartholomew Diaz
 was the 
Portuguese,
 who first discover'd it in 
A.
 1487, which occasion'd 
Emanuel,
 King of 
Portugal,
 to give it the name of



Cape Bone Esperanse,
 because he hoped a Passage would be open'd to the 
E. In∣dies
 by the doubling of it; which ac∣cordingly happen'd to the mighty in∣riching of his Kingdom, and of his Sub∣jects who settled there.


It was the second time discover'd by 
Vasco da Gama,
 in 
A.
 1497, at the com∣mand of 
Don Emanuel
 King of 
Portugal.
 And was at those times esteem'd so dan∣gerous a Promontory, that the Naviga∣tors were wont to call it the 
Lyon of the Ocean,
 or the 
Tempestuous Cape,
 because of the ruffling Weather and boisterous Winds; which used to discourage their touching upon it,
 unless they were con∣strain'd by some Necessity. The Thun∣der and Lightning, and Impetuous Storms, which have been observ'd upon the 
Cape Sierra Leona,
 have made some conjecture that this place was called by 
Ptolomy
 and 
Hanno
 of 
Carthage
 the 
Cha∣riot of the Gods.
 And to this day, if the Ships from 
India
 are retain'd beyond their proper Season of returning, they sometimes beat the Ocean at the 
Cape
 for a Week or a Fortnights space, and after all that Toil and Danger are forc'd upon retiring to the Island 
Mauritius,
 'till the Winter is past.


The inaccessible Heights and craggy Clifts of some of the Mountains to∣wards the 
South,
 have made the 
Portu∣guese
 give them the name of 
Os Picos Fragosos, i. e.
 sharp-pointed, because they rear their lofty forlorn Heads so high in the Clouds.


The Neighbourhood of 
Cape Bone E∣speranse,
 to that vast Ocean towards the 
South,
 cools the Air to some Degrees beyond what the proportion of that La∣titude might otherwise seem to give. For in the same Degree 
North,
 as Mariners observe, particularly where there is not the Extent of so wide an Ocean, the cool∣ness of the Air is not so perceptible. The reason of it may be the spacious spread∣ing Tract of Sea, which gives the Air once agitated, more liberty to continue its motion, and constantly to increase its Coldness; which on the contrary, is straitn'd and repress'd on Land, by the meeting of Mountains, Trees, Houses, and other Obstacles, and therefore not so impetuous; neither so Cold, because the Sulphureous Vapours which arise from the Earth, and make fiery Exhala∣tions, often intermixing with the Ni∣trous, which make Wind, qualify them


in some measure. As at 
Suratt,
 the Winds are by much Hotter, which fly over the Land to us, than those that come from the Sea. The 
South
 Winds here there∣fore are observ'd to be the coolest, be∣cause they blow from the great Sea. The Air however, is not scorching here for this Reason; nor very Cold, be∣cause of its nearness to the Fountain of Heat.
 It has no excesses, but what are tolerable to Children, nor any thing of∣fensive to Old Age. 'Tis temperate and sweet, healthful and pleasant; and is very agreeable to the Constitution of the 
Dutch,
 as well as the Natives, to whom it gives Activity and Vigour. It quarrels with no kind of natural Temper, and cherishes all sorts of Animals, as well as Plants. Nor did I ever know any that had been in this Paradise of the World, who denied it the Character of one of the loveliest Regions they had ever seen.


And this fair Country which the Blacks inhabit, is blest with a Soil as pregnant as the Days are pleasant, and prepar'd for any Improvements. Beeves and Sheep, Hogs and Goats feed here upon the Herbage of the Field, which


makes them flesht, and very well tasted. And all those sorts of Grain which are proper for Food, or for making strong Drink, thrive here, and grow in that plenty, that no part of 
Europe
 can a∣bound with them more. Which is all to be ascrib'd to the indefatigable Dili∣gence and Industry of the 
Dutch,
 who being forc'd to a good Husbandry of the Ground by the scantiness which they live upon at home, continue their thrifty Cultivating humour, when they are remov'd to a Soil where they may Cultivate what quantity they please; for they are a People remarkable for Improvements, for their commendable Pains and Care where ever they In∣habit.


But here grows the fruitful Vine, as well as the Wheat and the Barley, and the 
Dutch
 delight themselves in the double variety both of 
French
 and 
Eng∣lish
 Liquors, of Beer and Wine of their own growth, with the sprightly Juice of the one, and the healing Oily qua∣lity of the other. The Rivers and Ponds are full of Fish, of great variety and very delicate. The Country is co∣ver'd with Woods and Forests, which


abound with store of Beasts and Fowls, as Deer, Antilopes, Baboons, Foxes, 
&c.
 Ostriches, whose Eggs are tran∣sported to various Countries, Herons, Partridges, Feasants, Pelicans, Geese, Ducks. Tygers and Lions are very numerous, and so bold, that they range sometimes within Gun-shot of the Fort, and for that reason seldom return back, and do often prey upon the Cattle, for which cause they are kept within shel∣ter in the Night.


Two 
French
 Ships returning from the 
Indies
 in 
A.
 1689, with very rich Car∣goes, were invited to touch at the 
Cape,
 by the store of delicate Provisions which they heard were there. But the taste of that fresh Mutton cost them both their Ships and Men. For the speedy Intel∣ligence which the active 
Dutch
 had sent abroad of the Eruption of the War that Year, arriving at the 
Cape
 before any News could reach the 
French,
 betray'd them to the vigilance of the 
Hollanders,
 who seized their Ships as soon as they were well Moored in the Bay.


The next description which I come to, 
Secondly,
 is of the Ancient Inhabi∣tants of this Promontory, in what re∣lates


to their Nature and Customs. They retain the vulgar name of 
Ho∣tantots,
 because of their constant repe∣tition of that word in their hobling Dances.


There is a vast difference between the nature of these People that dwell upon this place, and the Country they Inhabit; for of all parts this affords a Dwelling most neat and pleasant, and of all People they are the most Besti∣al and sordid. They are the very Re∣verse of Human kind,
 Cousin Germans to the 
Halalchors,
 only meaner and more filthy; so that if there's any medium between a Rational Animal and a Beast, the 
Hotontot
 lays the fairest Claim to that Species. They are sunk even below Idolatry, are destitute both of Priest and Temple, and saving a little show of rejoicing, which is made at the Full and the New Moon; have lost all kind of Religious Devotion. Nature has so richly provided for their convenience in this Life, that they have drown'd all sense of the God of it, and are grown quite careless of the next.


They are more Tawny than the 
In∣dians,
 and in Colour and Features come


nearest the 
Negroes
 of any People, only they are not quite so Black, nor is their Cottony Hair so Crisp, nor their No∣ses altogether so flat. For Nature pleases her self as well in the variety of Indivi∣duals of the same kind, as in a great num∣ber of Species of all sorts of Animals.


It might seem here a rational Conje∣cture for the reason of the 
Negroes
 Black∣ness, that they are burnt by the Sun's Beams, which we experimentally find tinctures the fairest Complexions, when it comes near them, which recover a∣gain by withdrawing to a cooler Air. And therefore that those who are most expos'd to the Sun's Heat should al∣ways be the Blackest. For Blackness and Whiteness are not suppos'd natural to any People whatever, 'tis presum'd to be the effect of the Climate, because those that are Fair by living a long time under or near the Line, shall in two or three Generations, as 'tis af∣firm'd, become tawny and Black, tho' they Marry only with fair People. But methinks there is something in Nature which seems to thwart this current O∣pinion. For under the same Parallels are People of quite different Colours; as for instance, the 
Hotantots,
 who live


between thirty four and thirty five De∣grees are Black; the Inhabitants of 
Can∣die,
 who are under the same Elevation of the Pole, are White. The People of 
England
 are white, and the Natives near 
Hudson
's 
Bay,
 which is as Cold and 
Northerly
 a Climate, are Black. And neither the Colony of the 
English
 near 
Hudson
's 
Bay,
 nor the 
Dutch
 at 
Cape Bone Esperanse
 receive any altera∣tion in their Colour, but are fresh and fair as in 
Europe,
 and yet the Natives in both parts are Olive-colour'd. Some are apt to ascribe this to the Air and Climate or Earth, which in some pla∣ces produces Patagons, who are Giants, as in other, Pygmies; but this seems weak and unaccountable. Others re∣solve much of it into the effect of Food and Diet, which I believe may be of some power, and efficacy in this mat∣ter upon this Account. Because at 
Suratt,
 I observ'd a young 
Indian
 very Black, taken into the 
English
 Service, who by tasting Wine and Eating Flesh, grew paler sensibly than he was before. The strong Aliment by a frequent mix∣ture of its lively Juyces with the Blood and Spirits, which for a long time had been kept low by a Phlegmatick Nou∣rishment,


did actuate and purify them by degrees, and thereby shew'd in some∣time the effect of their fermentation by a faint Varnish upon the Face. Be∣sides, it is a Remark of the Ancients, but not methinks very sound, whereby they took notice, that 'tis the Humidity of the Elements, which defends the 
Indians
 against that Action of the Sun, which burns the Complexion of the 
Negroes;
 and makes their Hair grow like Cotton; whereas some of the 
Indi∣ans,
 whose Hair is long and uncurled, live as near the 
Aequator,
 and endure as intense a Heat as the 
Hotantots
 and several Negroes of 
Africa,
 whose Hair is crisp and frizl'd. And therefore something must be added besides the Sun's Heat, for distinction of Com∣plexion and of Hair under the same Pa∣rallels. 
Lewenhoock
 observes that the Blood of the 
Negroes
 is of a different Contexture from ours. And 
Malpighi
 observ'd a small Membrane not transpa∣rent between the 
Cutis
 and 
Cuticula,
 which caus'd the Blackness.


The 
Hotantots
 are as squalid in their Bodies, as they are mean and degene∣rate in their Understandings. For


they are far from being Curious either in their Food or Attire, any further than what they find Nature reaches forth to them. They think it a need∣less Toil to spend time in dressing of the Hides of Bulls, or in Spinning and Weaving the Wool of Sheep, for Ornaments and Covering to their Bo∣dies. They are satisfied with the same wrought Garments that Nature has clad the Sheep with, and therefore without more Labour or Art, they take them from the Backs of the Sheep, and put them presently upon their own, and so they walk with that Sheep-Skin Mantle about their Shoulders, or some∣times thrown like a Hood over their Heads, which seem to be the Ancientest Garments, according to 
Gen.
 2.21. 
un∣to
 Adam 
and his Wife did the Lord make Coats of Skins.
 They generally turn the Wool inwards, that the outside of the Garment may defend them from Rain, and the inside from the impres∣sions of Cold. The Ornaments about their Heads are small Shells, or little pieces of Lead or Iron fasten'd to their friz'ld Hair, or put into their Ears. The Hair of their Heads, and of all their


Bodies are besmear'd with Kitchin-Grease, tho' never so stinking and Loathsome, which when dissolv'd and heated by their Bodies, sends from thence such an unsavoury Smell, as may be scented at a Furlongs distance, and nearer hand it never fails of a strong Emetick to a weak Stomach. Stinking Grease is their sweet Oil, and the Dust of the Streets the Powder of their Hair. They Anoint their Bodies to render their Nerves supple and active, and to fortifie the Pores against the Violence of the ambient Air. For they are both nimble and swift of Foot, and of Cou∣rage to outface and worst a Lion. Be∣fore their Nakedness hangs a small Skin about a foot broad, tied by a string about their middle, which the motion of their Bodies, or of the Air, sometimes turns aside.


The Apparel of the Women upon the upper part of the Body is the same with the Men's; but round their Legs are twisted Sheeps Guts two or three Inches thick, which are serviceable upon a double account, both for Food and Ornament. The Guts, which are


made more savoury by the Dirt which sticks to them, affords them as good a Meal as the Flesh of the Sheep, and are eaten with as good a Gusto.


The Huts they dwell in,
 which are made of Bul-Rushes, or Branches of Trees, are fashion'd round almost like a Bee-hive, reaching about five Foot high, and nine broad, with a small Passage in the side to creep in at, and a Hole in the middle for the Fire.


They disallow Polygamy in all, but in their Chief, who may entertain three Wives at once. And the kind Wives, after the Death of every Husband,
 if they Marry again, cut off a Joint from the little Finger, and proceed to the middle, if they Bury many. The same is imitated by some fond Indulgent Husbands, but on neither of them is there any incumbent necessity, only as they are led by Humour at those times.


The Male Children at Eight or Ten Years of Age, are Cut in their Privy Parts,
 and depriv'd of one of their Testicles. The same is likewise done at 
Cape Comoron,
 for increasing their Valour and Activity. But here, I be∣lieve


upon another Score, 
viz.
 For prevention of a too Luxuriant In∣crease by Generation;
 because when their Children Increase beyond their Desires, and the just number which they design, to prevent a heavier Charge upon the Parents, they dispatch the Supernumeraries to the other World, without any Remorse for the horrid Crime,
 or Consciousness of the ex∣ecrable Sin of Murther, which is the Reason, I presume, of the 
Hotantot
's losing part of their Virility, that they may debilitate that Native Heat, which powerfully prompts them to Propaga∣tion. This Barbarity has prevail'd a∣mongst a much politer People than the 
Hotantots,
 even the 
Chineses,
 who hold a Transmigration, and alledge this Rea∣son for killing their Children, when they abound with them, which is, to make them spring up the more Happy. When the King of 
Sciam
 too has any Design upon the Honour or Estate of a 
Mandarin
 or Great Commander, he cau∣ses him to undergo a total Castration, that their Titles and Riches, for want of Issue, may fall into his Hands.


There is a vulgar Opinion which has formerly been receiv'd,
 that the Na∣tives of this 
Cape
 were 
Hermophradites,
 which was founded only upon Con∣jecture; for two Gentlemen, who were resolv'd not to be liable to this Er∣rour, assur'd me the Report was false, upon the Curiosity they had of know∣ing the Reason of it, which was be∣cause the Female Parts were cut in the Fashion of small Teats hanging down.


Those that can be induc'd to labour,
 and undergo any Toil among the 
Ho∣tantots,
 are made Slaves of by the 
Dutch,
 and imploy'd in all servile Drudgeries. But their Native Inclina∣tion to Idleness and a careless Life, will scarce admit of either Force or Re∣wards for reclaiming them from that innate Lethargick humour.


Their common Answer to all Mo∣tives of this kind, is, that the Fields and Woods afford plenty of Necessaries for their Support, and Nature has Am∣ply provided for their Subsistence, by loading the Trees with plenty of Al∣monds, which grow in the Forests, and yield them Food; and by disper∣sing up and down many wholsome


Brooks and pure Rivolets to quench their Thirst: So that there is no need of Work, when such innocent Diet offers it self daily without Pains, and on which they can live without Care. And thus many of them idly spend the Years of a useless restive Life. But the Governour of the Fort, and seve∣ral 
Dutch
 Inhabitants of the Town pre∣vail upon some of them, and make Con∣verts of them to labour and hardships. Thus the 
Hotantots
 have degenerated into the strangest kind of Rationals, and have successively surviv'd the No∣ble and common Instincts of Humani∣ty; but in their Innocence of Life, the Customs of the Ancient 
Britains
 did in many things resemble the Inhabitants of this Promontory, in their drinking Water, and the simplicity of their Food, which was upon Acorns or Ber∣ries, or such natural Productions; some∣times upon Milk, or what they could gain by Hunting. A great part of their Bodies too was uncover'd, espe∣cially their Arms and Legs, and their Cloathing was the same with that of the 
Hotantots,
 made generally of the Skins of Beasts.


The 
Third
 thing observable at the 
Cape,
 was the Profit and Advantage which that Plantation affords the 
Dutch.
 As this Climate is most de∣lightful, and the Native Turf capable of producing any thing that may ad∣minister either to the Exigence or De∣light of Man; so is it suited with the greatest convenience imaginable to the important Negotiations of the 
Dutch,
 whose Ships that Design for 
India,
 and those that return from thence to 
Hol∣land,
 are refresht here with all Con∣veniencies, as in the mid-way between those two distant Regions.


The Industry of the 
Hollanders
 has inlarg'd their Borders so far upon the main Land of this Delightful Fertile 
Cape,
 that were they ever put to those straits as to be forc'd to Decamp, and leave their Native Country, here they might fix in a Soil of so much more de∣sirable Habitation, that they might thank the Fates that caus'd the Change, and bless the Authors of their Misery. Here they might live without any dan∣ger of the Seas Incroaching upon their Banks, to threaten continually a second Deluge, and free from all dread of


Invasion from any Neighbouring Land-Tyrant. And might spread them∣selves over spacious Plains, which would afford them Work sufficient for all their Husbandry, and Pastures Pleasant and large enough for all their Cattle. And because nothing can please these People so much as Trade and Traffick, therefore here they might find conve∣nient Harbours for their Ships, by which they might keep up their Spi∣rit of Merchandizing, and establish their Commerce to the 
Indies
 and o∣ther parts of the World. The Refu∣gees of 
France,
 who are received here with the same priviledge the 
Dutch
 en∣joy, acknowledge the happiness of their Transportation; and boast that their Misfortunes are turn'd into their Felicity, since they are blest here with peaceable Dwellings and kind Accom∣modations, who had not formerly where in safety to lay their Heads.


The Encouragements of such as come hither to Cultivate the Land for their own Livelihood and Benefit of the grand Proprietors, is thus stated, as I understood it. Those that design to settle here, are allow'd their Transpor∣tation


from 
Holland
 gratis. After their Arrival they are invited to range and view the Country, and survey such parts as lie wild and unmanur'd, where they may choose such a Portion as they fancy they are able to stock and Ma∣nure, and will yield them a Commo∣dious settlement for their Families. This is to be a Patrimony intail'd upon their Children, without any Rent or other Acknowledgment to the 
Dutch East In∣dia
 Company, but the Sale of their Goods to the Governour, and at his Price. This by the way presses hard upon the Tenants and keeps them un∣der, by running the chief Profits of what they possess into the Company's hands. The Governour and Council agree with the Country-man for his Goods and Cattle at a very low rate, and sell them again to the Ships that put in there, as dear as they please; because all Men are strain'd from vending any Commodities to Strangers without the Council's leave. But however the Industrious Planters want neither plenty of Wine for their Tables, nor variety of Tame and Wild Fowls for their ordinary Entertain∣ments, of which they have often ra∣ther


too much Store than any Scarcity, because the Company has no occasion for them, and therefore they lie dead upon their Hands. Some upon this ac∣count quit the place, and very few of any Substance but easilier may increase their Goods than their Treasure.


Those whose Poverty renders them unable to stock their Land, the Kind∣ness of the Governour provides with Ne∣cessaries 'till their Abilities can reach a Payment. Which has mightily increas∣ed the number of Inhabitants within a few Years. For whereas about nine Years since, they could scarce reckon above four or five Hundred Planters, they can now number almost as many Thousands; abundance of whom were sent hither by the 
French
 Persecution, who are much delighted with the Con∣venience of their Dwelling.


They have stretcht their Plantations in the Country above seventy five 
Eng∣lish
 Miles, and see still a vast space of untill'd Land before them. In this Di∣strict they rear their Cattle, sow their Corn, plant Vines, and sedulously im∣prove all things of worth to the best advantage. So that within the Revo∣lution


of a few Years, many valuable Commodities will be Exported thence, to the other Quarters of the Universe.
 Their very Wines, in which they will suddenly increase both to a great plenty and variety, are now able to supply their Ships, and to furnish the 
Indies
 with some quantity, where they sell it by the Bottle at a Roupie. 'Tis Colour'd like Rhenish, and therefore they pass it under that specious Name in 
India,
 but the Taste of it is much harder and less palatable; its Operations are more searching, and the strength of it more intoxicating and offensive to the Brain.


The Impositions which are laid upon Wine and other Liquors that are sold by Retail, seem almost incredible,
 es∣pecially when the small number of People that are presum'd to drink them, is consider'd. For in the Town of the 
Cape
 are not reckon'd above 500 Inha∣bitants, besides those that are brought in Ships and come out of the Country; and yet the Annual Impost upon 
Eu∣rope
 Beer and Wine is four thousand Gilders; upon 
Cape
 Wine four thousand one hundred; and Brandy, Arak, and distill'd Waters, pay twenty Thousand


Gilders Yearly to the Governour of the place for a License to sell them. All which Taxes summ'd together, make up above twenty eight Thousand Gil∣ders Yearly, which according to our Ac∣counts, raise between two and three Thousand Pounds, for the liberty of selling Liquors by Retail. This ex∣orbitant Fine upon the Taverns and Tipling Houses makes them exact ex∣travagant Rates from the Guests that drink the Liquor, who are indeed the People that pay it. For he that re∣solves to drink Brandy must pay at the rate of ten Shillings a Bottle for it; and the 
Cape
 Wine which in the Cask is sold for less than six Pence a Quart, is in the Tavern half a Crown, and such proportionably are the excessive Prices of the rest. A tame submission is the only Remedy for these Impositions, from which there is no Appeal or Relief, which is apt to imbitter the Lives of the People, nor can any be very happy, who are subject to the Tyranny of a Government that is under no Restraint. The Arbitrary Proceedings of the 
Dutch
 Commissaries in 
India,
 have been much resented, and have likewise rais'd loud



complaints
 against them by the 
injur'd Fa∣ctors,
 but have met with very little 
redress.


The Governour of the 
Cape, Min Heer Simon Vanderstel,
 labours much in Im∣provements and Accommodations for the Inhabitants and Sea-men,
 and to render it valuable to the Company. The Sail∣ers are well furnisht with fresh Water and fresh Provisions; and in the Bay is caught great store of Fish, which is Pickled and put up in Barrels, and sent home instead of Pickled Herrings.
 The Watering for Ships is contriv'd with such Convenience, that it is scarce e∣qualled by any in the World. For from the Mountains are convey'd in narrow Channels clear Water down to the Shoar, from whence in Leaden Pipes it is carried above forty Foot in the Sea, and there rais'd so high above its Sur∣face, that the Ships Long-Boats can row under the Pipes, and fill their Vessels with much Ease.


The fam'd Garden abundantly sup∣plies the Ships with variety of Roots and green Herbs,
 which contribute not a little to the Health, and even preserva∣tion of Life, in these tedious 
Eastern
 Voyages. Here is that variety of Excel∣lent Fruits, of Pulse and Roots, which


either 
Europe,
 or 
Asia
 afford. Here are those large Walks, those stately Hedg∣es, and Alleys of Cypres, and Beds of Flowers, which make it Beautiful and Pleasant as the Garden of a Prince, and useful as that of a Peasant. The Conve∣niencies it abounds with may denomi∣nate it a Kitchih Garden, but its De∣lights a Garden of Pleasure. It is of large Extent, at some distance from the high Mountains, but cut out upon a rising Hill, water'd with pure Springs descending from the Mountains, which make their Passage thro' various Channels that are cut out in every Quarter. The Garden in all its Walks is kept so very neat and clean, that even in the Winter Season, scarce a Leaf is seen upon the Ground. The Trees are Curiously Prun'd, and the Hedges Trim'd with such exactness, that no one irregular Excrescence ap∣pears, or Branch shooting out beyond his Fellow. Much of the Fruit in it comes to maturity twice a Year, and many Trees by their nearness to the Sun, are verdant and Beautiful all the Year. Three and Thirty Slaves, besides 
Euro∣peans,
 are daily imploy'd in looking af∣ter it. This forc'd a Confession, even from the 
Jesuits,
 in their 
Siam Voyage,
 of


allowing it an equality, if not prece∣dence, to their most celebrated Gardens they had in 
France.


That the Inhabitants might be sub∣ject to no surprisal from any Enemies nigh their Plantations,
 the Governour with a few Attendants and Victuals ne∣cessary for such an Enterprize, travell'd by Compass for several Weeks, to find its Northerly bounds and Situation, 'till he was stopt by impassible Mountains, which forc'd a Return from any farther progress that way. In this Journey he travell'd over vast Tracts of Land, very fit for Agriculture, but all Waste and Untill'd; and was very well satisfied, that those inaccessible heights of Moun∣tains which he saw, would stand as im∣moveable Bulwarks against all In-land Invasions; so that nothing was to be dreaded, but Attacks upon them from the Sea.


For their Defence from any Onsets by Water,
 is built a strong Fort near the Sea, with Bastions and Guns mounted for its security, and Officers and Soul∣diers to guard it from an Enemy. 'Tis beautified with stately Convenient Lodg∣ings within; as well as fortified without.


Near the Fort is a small Town,
 con∣sisting


of about an Hundred Houses; strong and neatly built with Stone Walls and pretty Apartments.


The present Governour, who lives with his Council in the Fort, is a very kind and knowing Person, is maintain'd in Grandeur, and lives Honourably. His publick Table wants no plenty either of 
European
 or 
African
 Wines, or 
Asian
 Li∣quors; and whatever the Land or Wa∣ter, or Air affords in that place, is serv'd up in his bountiful Entertainments. To Complete the Magnificence of which sumptuous Fare, all the Dishes and Plates upon the Board are made of Massy Sil∣ver. And before the departure of their Fleets, the 
Dutch
 Commanders are all invited to a publick Repast, where they Drink and Revel, bouze and break Glas∣ses, what they please; for these Frolicks are the very life of a Skipper; and the Governour by indulging these Wild licentious Humours, ingratiates with them more, than by any thing else he could devise.


I have now consider'd the Situation and Air of this pleasant Promontory; the Nature and Customs of the 
Hotantots;
 and the Profit and Convenience which this Plantation affords the 
Dutch;
 and


should now leave it, only a passage or two may divert the Reader, which hap∣pen'd while I was there.


While we staid here, we met with 3 
Spaniards,
 who came from the 
Moneiloes
 to 
Batavia,
 and from thence imbarkt up∣on a 
Dutch
 Ship that was loosing from thence to the Cape. The Principal of these Spaniards was sent out privately by the K. of 
Spain,
 in the Imployment of Visitor General. He was free in his Dis∣course, and not easily warm'd into Passi∣on, and could well discern both other Mens Failings and dissemble his own. But he was very zealous in Proselyting all he discours'd with, with the Assurance of Ease and Wealth in 
Spain
 while they liv'd, and Immortal Happiness after Death. But he Corrupted his Parts by false Maxims, which he borrow'd from an insufferable Pride, which not being Contradiction proof, could not well bear opposition from an Heretick.


This Ancient Gentleman was hot in con∣verting us by his Arguments, whilst an∣other young one endeavour'd it mighti∣ly by his Relicks, which were hung in a small Box about his Neck, and were sa∣cred Preservatives against all Perils and Misfortunes. They were such as these. A


piece of St. 
Leonards
 Thumb, of St. 
Peter
's Nail, and a little of St. 
Bridgets
 Hair. Which things tho they seem'd to us in∣considerable, yet were of Value and E∣steem for those Excellencies that were found in them. For as Barbarous Nations commenc'd Civil upon their Infranchis∣ment at Antient 
Rome;
 so things Con∣temptible and Prophane, become August and Sacred by their Adoption into the 
Romish
 Church. However the Relicks had as little Charm in them towards us, as the Arguments. But at length the young Gentleman produc'd a 
Tamback
 Ring, which I knew was accounted a va∣luable Rarity in the 
East.
 This Tambac is a kind of Metal,
 whose scarcity ren∣ders it more valuable than Gold; as the 
Corinthian
 Brass had its Price augmented by its Rarity. 'Tis thought to be a kind of natural Compound of Gold, Silver, and Brass, and in some places the mixture is very Rich, as at 
Borneo,
 and the 
Monei∣loes,
 in others more allay'd, as at 
Siam.
 But it is much more remarkable for its Vir∣tues against all noxious Blasts, from the unhappy effects of which it effectually preserves him that wears it. This is com∣monly ascrib'd to it in 
India,
 and thus far receiv'd a Confirmation, that very late∣ly


some Persons walking abroad there, were Blasted on a suddain, among whom, those that wore those Rings were saved, and the rest killed. And to pre∣serve me from such Misfortunes, the Gentleman was pleas'd to afford me one of them. Our President at 
Suratt
 was presented while I was there with a Knife Haft of this Metal, which was thought a noble Gift.


At the same time a 
German
 Physitian, who had Travell'd for ten Years in the 
East,
 brought with him from 
China
 the Root 
Nisan,
 a pound of which sells there for two hundred and seventy Dollars.
 It is frequently used in Sickness, especially Deliquiums of the Spirit, which recom∣mends it mightily to the King and his Nobility. He was afraid of its decay be∣fore he could Arrive in 
Holland,
 and left it therefore to try its Fortune at the 
Cape,
 as an additional Ornament to that spacious and pleasant Garden. Yet 'tis affirm'd, that this Soil was no Stranger to this Root, before that this was Planted here.


We Sail'd from the 
Cape
 on the 2d of 
June,
 1693. in the Company of ten 
Dutch East-India
 Ships bound for 
Europe,
 and on the 4th of 
July
 made 
Ascention.








THE Island 
ASCENTION.


TO the 
Westward
 of St. 
Helena,
 ap∣pear the Isles of 
Sancta Maria,
 and of the 
Trinity,
 uninhabited, and serve for Signs unto the Mariners.
 To the 
N. West
 of this Island, towards the Coast of 
Brasil,
 is the Isle of 
Ascention,
 so denomi∣nated by 
Tristan Acunna
 its first Discove∣rer,
 who in his Return from the 
Indies,
 in the Year 1508, espyed it upon 
Ascen∣tion
 Day. It lies towards the Coast of 
South America;
 is extended in length a∣bout four Leagues, in breadth one, and distant from 
America
 about 100.


This is made generally a place of Re∣freshment to the 
East-India
 Ships, home∣ward bound, lying in about 8 Degrees of 
South
 Latitude, directly in their way for 
England.
 The Land is Mountainous, as most other Lands are that are situate re∣motely from the Continent. And except∣ing some very few places, it is all steril and Desart, and the Surface Cinereous, cover'd with a kind of Sinders or Ashes, which gives occasion to some, of think∣ing


it formerly to have been a 
Fogo
 or Burning Island: Yet in some parts the Soil seems fit for Culture and Fructifi∣cation. But because it is wholly desti∣tute of Springs and fresh Water, this prevents all Designs of any Inhabitants fixing there, tho' the Native Turf were never so promising and fruitful. How∣ever it affords some Accommodation and Refreshment for Ships tending to∣wards 
Europe,
 to which also it gives a very safe and convenient Harbour.


The most inviting stay for Ships here,
 are the store of Turtle with which the Island abounds, some of which are grown to four or five hundred weight, but others are of less Dimensions; on these the hungry Marriners feed delici∣ously, for the space of ten or 15 Days sometimes together. They esteem it no less nourishing and healthful, than delightful, nor need they incur the dan∣ger of any Surfeit by the plenty of this dainty Food; but Chronical Distem∣pers, and inveterate Diseases, have by this sort of Dyet been often abated; and those unwelcome Guests, by a constant use of the Food, have been forc'd to withdraw from their old accustomed


Habitations. The Purgative quality in which it ends, carries away the Disease with it, and repairs the Body to its former strength and Constitution.


Besides these, here are Birds in great quantity, but very unpalatable, and so distastful to the Sailers, that they rarely touch them; by which usage they are kept in a gentle tameness and famili∣arity, and never stir from their Nests for fear, of any Passengers approach, but sit billing and pecking at such as pass by. Among these the Boobies are most numerous, a Fowl so stupidly tame, that it freely endures to be toucht and handled, without any timorousness or fear.


Some few Goats are also left here, a Creature of such a thriving Nature, that it finds Nourishment many times from what no other of the Animal Ge∣nerations can subsist on; and therefore in 
India
 sustain themselves by grazing on the Milk-bush, the ordinary Hedge of that Country, the Juyces of which are so Malignant and Corrosive, that the tender parts of Man's Body are highly offended by the very touch. The Goats grow not much in flesh up∣on


this Island, because the leanness of the Ground, and want of Moisture, al∣low them no more than a bare subsist∣ence, which yet secure their Lives from the violence of Famin and of the Ma∣riners.


The method made use of in taking the Turtle,
 is carefully to observe those particular times they come on Shoar, to lay or hatch their Eggs, at which times they turn them by surprizal upon their Backs, which is a Posture they are utterly unable to recover from, and are thereby frustrated of all Defence or Escape, and are a ready Prey to any that resolves to seize them. When the sensible Creatures find themselves in this desperate Posture, by which they know themselves in a lost and hopeless state, they then begin to lament their Condi∣tion in many heavy sighs, and mourn∣ful Groans, and shed abundance of water from their Eyes, in hopes, if possible, to secure their Safety by their Tears, and Mollifie the cruel Assaults upon their Lives. They are of celebra∣ted strength, much beyond the Pro∣portion of their Bulk, so much that I have seen one of a small size, not a∣bove


eight Inches Broad, able to su∣stain the weight of a Man. And the inward strength of their Animal Spi∣rits is equal to that of their outward Contexture, which is not easily abated or dissolved. For after the Neck of one of these had been quite cut off, ex∣cept only a small piece of Skin by which it hung to the Body; and after its Bowels were ripp'd up, and its Heart was taken out, and plac'd upon the Deck of the Ship, it both open'd its Mouth, and the Heart for a long time after had a motion; which some of the Spectators affirm'd would continue for the space of two or three Hours; and some of them have been known to live twelve Hours after their Heads have been cut off. The parts of Reptiles con∣tinue, I think, animated for some consi∣derable time after they are dissected from one another, because of the viscous Quality of their Animal Spirits, but for the Heart of so large an Animal as this, to move for some Hours after it was torn from the Body, seems a little more strange and surprizing. However, I made this Experiment my self upon a Cock-Roach, which is a sort of large unwieldy


Flie, whose Spirits may be presum'd to be most volatile, the Head of which I sever'd from the Body, and kept it apart in a small Box for twenty four Hours, after which time looking on it, I saw it perfectly move some parts, but with a very faint slowness. As we see the Flesh of a Viper, after it is beheaded and imboweled, will move for the space of 24 Hours.


Of the Turtle or Marine Tortoise,
 there are three sorts, the Hawk-Bill, the Logerhead, and the Green Turtle, which swim in the Water, and creep upon Land. 'Tis of such an Amphibious Na∣ture, that you may fancy it Beast, or Bird, or Fish, as you please; for it lives in the Ocean like a Fish; it feeds upon Grass on Shoar, as an Ox; and lays Eggs, as a Bird, sometimes the quanti∣ty of a Bushel. The two Fins of it pla∣ced before, are in the shape of Wings; those two behind are broad and long like Feet, and its Head and Eyes, which it opens and shuts, resemble those of a Hawk; so that both in its shape and other qualities, the Body of it is divi∣ded among those Creatures whose pro∣per Elements are Land, Water, and


Air. The flesh of it is White, and Eats beyond any Veal, and admirably contributes to the Cure of the Scurvey, and as it's commonly affirmed, the Im∣pure Disease. But the 
Dutch,
 notwith∣standing the delicacy, will not touch it; and the Barbarity of the 
French,
 af∣ter they have been satiated with their Plenty, expose them to starve and stink above Ground, by leaving many of them turn'd upon their Backs, upon their departure from the Island. The 
English
 treat none cruelly, but turn on∣ly such as are necessary for their Re∣freshment, being loath to express a se∣verity to the very Beasts, especially such whose Deaths contribute so consi∣derably to the Health, and support of their own Lives. Great plenty of these Shel-Fish are found in the 
West Indies,
 the Genitals of which dried, and drunk in Wine, are prescribed as singular Dissolvers of the Stone. The store of them upon this Island, where so little Herbage grows, seems to supply the Necessity of green Herbs for Curing the Scorbutick Humours in the Mar∣riners, to which nothing does contri∣bute more; as we happily experiment∣ed


in the Voyage. For three or four 
French
 Vineroons designed for St. 
Hele∣na,
 were so lamentably over-run with the Scurvey, after we had spent two or three Months at Sea,
 that they were unable either to walk or stand upright; and yet three days eating of Purslain and other Herbs, after we were landed in 
Africa,
 rectifyed the ill Humours in the Blood, restor'd their Limbs, and recover'd their Stomachs and lost Health again. And were those made more fre∣quently the Diet of these that live on Land, as they are sometimes of those at Sea, I doubt not but the Scorbutick Humours, and all that Train of Disea∣ses that follows them, would be less numerous and prevailing than they are.


Upon this Island is a certain place nam'd the 
Post-Office,
 from the Letters left there by the last Commander that came thither, giving an Account of the time he came there, when he departed from the Island, and what other News of moment he thinks convenient. The Letter is commonly thrust into a Bottle corked close, which the succeeding Commander breaks in pieces to come to it, and leaves another


in its stead. But I will leave this Barren Island, and proceed on the Voyage.


About the middle of our Passage from the 
Cape
 to 
Europe,
 the Captain Commandant of the Fleet called a Coun∣cil of all the Commanders, and then enjoyn'd a particular Day to be set a∣part by every Ship, as a publick Thanks∣giving for our past safety, and for im∣ploring the Favour and Benediction of Heaven upon the Fleet for the rest of the Voyage; and desir'd from me a Form of Prayer, which was tran∣slated into 
Dutch
 for that purpose. This was a pitch of Piety, which well be∣came his Care and Station, but was far beyond the common strain of a Sailer's Devotion.
 I doubt not but it was very Instrumental in our avoiding those threatning Dangers that incom∣passed us in our Voyage, and from which we had a very Fortunate Delive∣rance to 
Europe.
 For besides the Storm which increas'd to such a Rage, and on a sudden grew so insupportable and Fierce, that it separated the whole Fleet, and every Ship was forc'd to make the best of her way for her own safety; the 
Benjamin,
 besides this, had another


Deliverance as happy, which was in her Escape from two 
French
 Privateers,
 the one a Head, the other a Stern, by the Commander, Captain 
Leonard Brown
's prudent Management of himself in that juncture. For having formerly shor∣ten'd Sail, in hopes that one of them might be our Friend, as soon as ever he discern'd they were the Enemy, he order'd all Hands aloft, and command∣ed the Sails to be spread in a trice, by which he made them suppose, that our Ship was very well Man'd, and that we must therefore needs be a Man of War. This stratagem had its desired effect, for upon it they both left us; tho' the next Day following, they took a stout Fourth Rate, the 
Diamond Frigat.


On 
September
 the 18th 1693,
 we came into 
Kingsale
 in 
Ireland,
 where, as a Testimony of our Gratitude to our great Deliverer in the Voyage, the Captain, Officers, and Sailers,
 contribu∣ted amongst them, betwixt twenty and thirty Pounds, part of which, about four Pounds, was design'd as a small Obla∣tion to the Minister, and the rest was given to the Poor of the place. Which was to be Recorded by a publick In∣scription


in the Church, as an Encou∣ragement to others to imitate the Pre∣cedent that was given them.


The 
English
 welcom'd us on Shoar with many generous Civilities, and shew'd to us the Ancient Temper of the 
English
 Nation, in their frank Ho∣spitality, and the Spirit of liberal En∣tertainments. Tho' they lately smart∣ed with intestine Broils, yet now they were at Peace, were unanimously Loy∣al, and universally Kind; not sowr'd with Faction, nor grown sordid by Co∣vetousness, but here we found that Love and Allegiance which seem'd indeed to be the Genius of all the Protestants of that Kingdom. After we had stay'd here five Weeks, for want of a Con∣voy, we at last set Sail, and on the 5th of 
December
 arriv'd safe at 
Graves∣end,




FINIS.
















AN APPENDIX CONTAINING



I. The History of a late Revoluti∣on in the Kingdom of 
GOL∣CONDA.


II. A short Description of the King∣dom of 
ARRACAN,
 and 
PEGU.


III. A Collection of Coyns now Currant in the Kingdoms of 
IN∣DOSTON, PERSIA, GOL∣CONDA,
 &c. AND


IV. Observations concerning the Nature of the Silk-Worms.




LONDON,
 Printed for 
Jacob Tonson,
 at the 
Judges Head
 in 
Fleet-street.
 16
6
















THE HISTORY OF A Late Revolution IN THE KINGDOM OF 
GOLCONDA.


THE Account of this Revolution, and those other matters which are discours'd of in this Appen∣dix, might have fallen in very luckily in some part of the preceding Voyage,


had I been so fortunate as to have had the perusal of the Papers while the Book was a finishing; but not coming to my Hands 'till it was Printed, I thought it best to affix them to it, as both agreeable to the Subject, and con∣taining things in them very remarkable and New: And must needs own the peculiar Obligation I am under to a very worthy Gentleman, Mr. 
Daniel Sheldon,
 in the free and kind Commu∣nication of these Memoirs. I shall not therefore detain the Reader with a∣ny further account of this matter, but pass on to what I am satisfied will be very agreeable to him, 
viz.
 The Histo∣ry of this Revolution in 
Golconda.


The present King of 
Golconda
 was Son to an 
Arabian
 of good Family and Esteem, but low in Estate and Fortune; to raise which, resolving to Travel, and seek Employment from some Foreign Prince, he came to 
Golconda;
 and, by the Favour of some persons of Quality, had the opportunity of presenting him∣self and his Service to King 
Cotub sha;
 who, being pleased with his Person and manner of Address, gave him a small Government, wherein he behav'd


himself so well, that he was advanc'd to one of the most considerable Com∣mands in the Kingdom, in which and his Prince's favour he continued 'till his Death: After which his Estate (being very great) was seiz'd on by the King, who is the general Heir of all his Nobles and Persons employ'd by him (none of those Countreys having any Heredita∣ry Estates) so that his Son was reduc'd to a very poor Condition; but, ha∣ving that left which could not be ta∣ken from him, 
viz.
 his Father's Wit and Courage, he resolv'd to follow his Example, hoping to find his Fortune. Full of which hopes he enters himself into 
Munsub
 (that is, the Kings Pay) and had allow'd him twelve or fifteen new 
Pagotha
's (which is about four Pounds sixteen Shillings, or six Pounds Sterling) 
per
 Month, with which, and the hopes of better Preferment, he made a shift to maintain himself. The King 
Cotub-sha
 had at this time no Son, but three Daughters; the Eldest of which was Married to Sultan 
Mamood,
 Eldest Son to the 
Great Mogul, Aureng-Zebe:
 The second to an 
Arabian
 of great Quality, 
Meera Mamood;
 and the


third was unmarried: To this unmar∣ried Daughter an 
Arabian
 of high Birth and Quality called 
Siud Sultan,
 was an importunate Suitor; and the King grown Old, and oppress'd with the Fa∣ctions of those to whom he had left the management of Affairs (having all his time wholly minded Pleasures, and left Business and the Concerns of the King∣dom to the Cares of others) and mor∣tally hating Sultan 
Mamood
 (who by a cruel War, almost to the utter Ruine of him and his Kingdom, had forc'd his Consent to the Marryage of his Eldest Daughter, hoping thereby, after 
Cotub-sha
's Death, to add the Kingdom of 
Golconda
 to the Empire of the 
Great Mogul)
 and having no Kindness for his second Daughter or her Husband, but being extreamly fond of his Youngest, he design'd to Marry her to one whose Quality, Parts, and Courage, might make him able either to break or ma∣nage the Factions of his Court; with∣stand Sultan 
Mamood,
 who he resolv'd should not succeed him; and one, who being rais'd by his Favour, he thought would wholly depend upon it, and there∣by only expect the Succession. And


this Young Servant to his Daughter, being an 
Arabian
 (who in these Coun∣treys are thought the Wisest and fit∣test for Government) and of the Cast of the 
Siuds
 (that is of the Family or Kindred of 
Mahumet,
 and there∣fore much reverenc'd by all) likewise of a brisk and lively Wit and Spirit: He thought him a fit Person by whom to manage his Designs, and conse∣quently to Marry his Daughter; there∣fore countenanc'd his Adresses to her; but the young Man was so dazled with the prospect of so glorious a Fortune, that he could not see his right way to it; for, presuming too soon upon the King and Princesses Fa∣vour, instead of contriving how to in∣crease and strengthen his Interest, by gaining the Consent and Support of the great Ministers of State; he car∣ried himself so insolently towards them, that he utterly disoblig'd, and made himself hateful to them; and they fear∣ing the Tyranny of one who, when their Equal, began to exercise it over them, resolv'd to disgrace and ruin him, by hindring the Match. The chiefest Persons about the King, were 
Moso


Cawne, Siud Meer Zapher,
 and 
Musshuke,
 these three managed the King and his great Affairs; for 
Meera Mamood,
 the King's Son in Law, being not in Fa∣vour, was not in Business; yet not so quite laid aside, but that he had free Access to the Court and Presence, and was by all respected as one, that ha∣ving Married the King's Second Daughter (Circumstances consider'd) was likely enough to succeed him. Therefore having great hopes (and not enduring the Insolent Carriage of this new Favourite, nor to think of his Marrying the King's beloved Daugh∣ter) put himself in the Head of the Faction against him: And the Old Courtiers perfectly knowing the King, and the usual and surest ways of work∣ing him to their Designs, soon unsetled the unwary young Man in his Af∣fections, and then threw him from the height of his Prince's Favour, to the contempt and scorn of the meanest Subject. For they possessed his Ma∣jesty with an Opinion, that he was an high Spirited, Ambitious Man, and aim'd at great things; that he was at the Head of a great Party and Facti∣on


at Court; that if he were once strengthen'd with so near an Alliance to the King, he might do whatsoever he design'd; what he design'd they knew not, but he gave them great Reason to fear, it was not his Maje∣sty's safety, nor the Kingdom's Peace; and Affairs being wholy manag'd by their Directions, and all Officers at Court about the King being their Creatures, they made their Information seem more than probable. The King being naturally jealous, and frighted with the Shadow of any thing that he thought might disturb his Pleasures, was quickly perswaded not to marry the Princess to so dangerous a Person, and immediately upon the breaking off the Match, one of the three Persons before mention'd, ('tis not certainly known which of them, but thought 
Musshuke)
 advis'd his Majesty to find out some one for the Princess of small Fortune, but noble Birth and Courage; a comly Person, and of a generous and chearful Disposition, and inclin'd ra∣ther to Pleasures than Business; for, if he was qualified with high Birth, and the Endowments of Nature, it lay in


the King's Power to supply the Defects of Honour, Riches, 
&c.
 and Men of such Dispositions (being given to Plea∣sure) were seldom ambitious or de∣signing; therefore such a one being Created meerly by his Favour, would wholly submit by it, and enjoying what he most desir'd, (his Pleasures) would not disturb himself or them with the thoughts of Business, or Cares of Government, but be Obedient and perfectly contented with the Condition he was in, without aspiring to un∣timely Greatness. The Advice was liked, and communicated to the two o∣ther Counselors, who (considering it was a way for continuing them in their Governments, and all Affairs and Busi∣ness in their management) confirmed the King, by approving of the Coun∣sel given him; and having his Order to find out such a Person, the Young 
Arabian
 Souldier (whose Father's E∣state had been seiz'd on by the King) was propos'd as one every way qua∣lified according to the King's desire. He is therefore sent for by 
Ziud Meer Zapher
 to his House, and (the King be∣ing plac'd where he might perfectly


see and hear, without being taken no∣tice of) 
Ziud Meer Zapher
 entertain'd the Young Souldier with some Discourse concerning the Greatness and Merits of his Father; how much he was belov'd and favour'd by the King; told him he was sorry to see the Son of so great a Man in so low a Condition; promis'd his Assistance in getting some handsom Command for him; bid him there∣fore be chearful and not dejected and Melancholy: And after he thought the King had fully view'd, dismiss'd him. When he was gone, the King told 
Ziud Meer Zapher,
 he was not so comly a Person as he was presented to be, nor had he that Life and Vigour in his Countenance, that he would wil∣lingly have in the Person he made choice of. To which 
Meer Zapher
 re∣ply'd, that his Majesty rather saw his Misfortunes than the Man himself; for, being the Son of so great a Person, and having liv'd in all the plenty of his Father's Great Estate, to be now reduc'd to the poor Condition and Al∣lowance of an Ordinary Horse-man, must of necessity make melancholy Im∣pressions both upon his Body and


Mind; but if his Wants were supply∣ed with Money to maintain him ac∣cording to his Birth and Quality, he would quickly come to, and appear like himself, and to be such a one as his Majesty sought for. The King re∣solves to try, and therefore orders 
Meer Zapher
 to contrive how to fur∣nish him with as much Money as he would have, without letting him know the Bountiful Hand that reliev'd him. Immediately some 
Xeruffs,
 (or Money Merchants) are sent for, and 
Meer Za∣pher
 gives them directions to offer and let him have as much Money as he would take, promising to see them re∣paid again; but strictly Commanded them (upon the forfeiture, not only of their Money, but Lives) not to let him know they had any such Order to fur∣nish him. Away the 
Xeruffs
 go and give him several Visits, under a pretence of desiring his Assistance in some Business they had with some great Men; for, he being a Man of high Birth and Quality (such Persons tho' never so poor, being by all much respected in those Countries) would have better Access, and be sooner heard and ta∣ken


notice of. After two or three Vi∣sits, growing more familiar with him, they told him he looked Melancholy and Discontented, and desir'd to know if it were for want of any thing with which they could furnish him; if Mo∣ney, they would supply him with a∣ny Sum he would please to take; and desir'd him to try them for two or three Thousand Old 
Pagotha's,
 (which is about a Thousand or fifteen Hun∣dred Pounds Sterling) His Wants made him ready enough to take Money, but (considering who they were that of∣fer'd it, and that such kindnesses from such Men were always paid for at the dearest Rates) though his Condition was bad, he was unwilling to make it worse, by putting himself into such Mens Clutches; for, being once in their Debts, he could not foresee any hopes of ever getting out, and there∣fore would not sacrifice his Liberty, and the little Content he had left, to his Inclination (which but two ear∣nestly perswaded him to enjoy the present Conveniences of the Money offer'd, without troubling himself with the Thoughts of future Payment) but


resolv'd to content himself in his Wants, till they were by some better and more agreeable way provided for: So re∣fus'd their Money, but accepted of their Kindness in the most grateful and obliging manner he possibly could. But at last the importunity of the 
Xe∣ruffs,
 and his own Wants, prevail'd up∣on him to receive a considerable Sum, for which (to his great Admiration) they were so far from taking Security, (as accustomary) that they perswaded him not to spare his Money, but to live like the Son of so great a Father, offering him more, when that which he had received was spent. The young Man, naturally inclin'd to Gallantry and high Living, being thus plentiful∣ly supplyed with the Means, resolves to please and appear like himself with a handsom House, Retinue, Palan∣keen, Horses, and all things fit for a Person of his Quality; more wonder∣ing at the Merchants for lending, than at himself for Spending so much Mo∣ney. All this while 
Siud Meer Zapher
 had his Eye upon him, and quickly perceived the alteration he expected both in his Person and Humour, and


that he began to be very much e∣steem'd and respected by all that knew him: So desires the King to see him again, which he does, and now so well likes him, that he gives 
Meer Zapher
 Order to let him have as many oppor∣tunities of seeing him as he could; and the oftner he does see, the more he is pleas'd and taken with him: There∣fore resolving to Marry his Daughter immediately to him, one Evening he sends the 
Deveer
 or Secretary of State, with an 
Omrah
 (or Noble Man) called 
Jabber Beague,
 and a Guard of Horse, to fetch and Conduct him to Court. The Young Gallant was entertaining some Friends and himself with some Dancing Women, when News was brought him that some great Officers belonging to the Court, were at the Door; away went his Friends and Women by a Back-way, and he to meet the Secretary and 
Jabber Beague,
 to conduct them in: As soon as he saw them (well knowing who they were) he was very much troubled, not imagining why so Eminent Per∣sons with a Guard of Horse, should come to visit him: And his Fears


were very much increas'd by a rich Vest with which the Secretary pre∣sented him with from the King: 
For verily believing it was poison'd, he desir'd them to Excuse him, for being so sur∣priz'd, that he could not tell whether to receive the King's Present as his Honour or Disgrace and Ruine; for his Father's Services being long since Rewarded and for∣got, and he having never yet the opportu∣nity of doing his Majesty any, he could not expect any honourable Notice could be ta∣ken of him; and yet he was in hopes he less deserv'd Punishment than Reward, since he could not call to mind any one Crime he had committed in his whole Life, that might give his Majesty the least, or any Of∣fence: And if his late living in a more plentiful way than formerly had been taken notice of, and was displeasing, he did as∣sure them he had no other design in it, than to appear according to his Birth and Quality; that upon the least Command or notice he would have retir'd to his former Obscurity; that he had done no unjust thing to get the Money he spent, but would have been willing to have given, either his Majesty or them an Account how he did get it. Then he told them he always


had been, and still was so truly Loyal to his Prince; that he should upon all occasions, freely have ventur'd his Life for his Ser∣vice, and now durst lose it for his Pleasure. So snatching the Vest for to put it on, he desir'd the Secretary to present his humble Duty to the King, and tell him he very much fear'd he would have more reason to Cherish and Preserve such Subjects as he was, than to delight and sport himself in the Contrivance of their Deaths.


The Secretary was, by Order, strict∣ly to observe both what he said, and how he behav'd himself, and there∣fore did not interrupt him, but per∣mitted none but himself and 
Jabber Beague
 to help him on with his Vest; after which with a low 
Salam
 (or Reve∣rence) he told him they were not sent by the King to Execute any Sentence of his Displeasure, but to conduct him to his Favour, and the greatest Ho∣nour he could bestow upon him; there∣fore desir'd him to go along with them chearfully and immediately. So with them he goes, not very well assur'd of his Safety, 'till they brought him a goodly Horse with rich Furniture, and desir'd him to mount, which he did,


and betwixt the Secretary and 
Jabber Beague
 rode to Court, where he was the same Night Married to the Prin∣cess: And the whole business was ma∣naged with so much privacy, that 
Mee∣ra Mamood
 (who had Married the King's second Daughter) had not the least knowledge of it, 'till it was pub∣lickly declared to whom the King had Married the Young Princess: Which made 
Meera Mamood
 almost mad with Rage, railing at the King, and his Nobility; but perceiving no body took notice of it, but those that laugh'd at and despis'd him, he left the Court and Kingdom, and went to 
Delly,
 where making his Addresses to 
Aureng-Zebe,
 the 
Great Mogul,
 he was kindly enter∣tain'd, and allow'd a Royal Pension. The King is every Day more and more satisfied with his Son in Law, yet (be∣ing resolv'd not to trust him with any Command or Business, nor to give him any opportunity of inriching himself, or getting more Money than he spent) gives him no 
Munsub
 (that is no Com∣mand of Souldiers, nor Government of any place or Province) and orders one of his Eunuchs constantly to pay his


Expences be they never so great, but not to furnish him with any Money, thereby to give him opportunity of lay∣ing up any. The Young Sultan ha∣ving an Excellent Understanding, quick∣ly perceiv'd the Design, and wisely re∣solv'd to comply with it, and be whol∣ly govern'd and manag'd by the King's pleasure, without taking any notice of his Jealousie: So he seems not to care for, nor so much as to think of any Command, Business, or getting of more Money than would pay for his Pleasures, which did not only fix the 
Omrahs
 (or Nobles) and Governours to him (they verily believing that if he were once King, they should be all such in their general Governments) but made the King himself even dote on him, as a Man sent from Heaven to Marry his Daughter, being just such a Person, as in his thoughts he had wish'd for. He therefore contrives by all the ways he could desire to secure the Succession to him, for, being sick and worn with Age and Pleasures (to which he had been all his time wholly addicted) and think∣ing he should die, he summons all his 
Omrahs
 before him, and publickly de∣clares


for his Successor 
Sultan Abdulla Hoosan
 his Son in Law; conjuring them by the last Request of their Dying King to settle him (after his Death) in the Throne, and to submit to his Government; making them, one by one, not only promise, but swear upon their Alcharon to perform what he had com∣manded; after which he immediately dyed, having liv'd above Eleven Years since the Marriage of his beloved Daughter, who in that space of time had comforted him with a Son and two Daughters. The King was no sooner dead, but his second Daughter (Wife to 
Meera Mamood)
 having made a small Party, seizes upon, and secures the Palace on the behalf of a Son her Husband had by a former Wife, (for by her he had none) whom she endea∣vour'd to make King; but 
Moso Cawne, Siud Meer Zapher,
 and 
Musshuke,
 quick∣ly suppressed the Tumult she had made, and immediatel proclaim'd 
Sultan Abdul∣la Hoosan Potshaw,
 or Prince 
Abdulla Hoosan
 Emperour.


After all the Ceremonies both of a Funeral and Coronation were per∣form'd, the King begins to think of


gratifying those that had made him so; for tho' he had long observ'd 
Moso Cawne,
 and 
Siud Meer Zapher,
 to be cor∣rupt and ill Governours, yet they had done him good Service, and he could not, without lessening his Name in the World, but continue, and something increase their Honour and Commands: (nor perchance was it in his power to lessen them in either, since those that had made him King, might still be made able to make another so) yet it very much troubled him to think he should add to the too great Power they already had; therefore taking some little time to consider what was fit for him to do, at last he concludes, that the way to lessen these two powerful Noble-men, was to make them both too great, for very well knowing they mortally hated one another, and would never endure each others greatness, but be always striving which should throw the other out of his Prince's Favour, he therefore resolv'd so to divide the Ad∣ministration of Affairs between them, that they should be sure to check one the other, and to carry himself so e∣qually, that it should not be discern'd


which he most favour'd; by which he both answer'd the Opinion the World had of his Bounty, (a thing much re∣garded) in rewarding them with Ho∣nour and great Imployments, and yet secur'd himself from the danger of two such powerful Subjects, by making them too great ever to agree in an At∣tempt against him; and setting them both up at so equal and spreading a height, that they must of necessity justle one another down; concluding they could not be dangerous to him, while they were so to one another; and sought only by the advantage of his Favour to ruine each other. To 
Moso Cowne
 he therefore gives the Title of 
Cawne Cawna,
 and being a Man of Courage, makes him General of his Army. To 
Siud Meer Zapher
 he gives the Title of 
Emir Zemla,
 and being a Man of Business, makes him 
Duan
 (in which Office is comprehended both that of a Chancellour and Treasurer) so that the General being to receive the Army's Pay of the 
Duan
 was sure to find delays and affronts, and the 
Duan
 being by his Place to inspect into the Disposal of the King's Money, and Payment of the


After the King had honoured and Re∣warded others likewise that deserved well of him, he seems wholly to re∣tire from Business to his Pleasures; but posted himself at so convenient a Di∣stance, that he had perfect Knowledge of every thing that pass'd. In this time of leasure he would often sequester himself from all kind of Company, to meditate and write; and its since cer∣tainly known, that when he was thus retir'd, he took particular notice of all the Abuses in the State, and the best ways of redressing them; likewise set down in Writing several Rules and Maxims for his future Government.


In the mean time the two great men (or rather Kings) strove who should procure the finest Women, best Min∣strels and Dancers to divert the King, thinking by such Charms to continue him in the Lethargy they thought he was in. But what the Wise Prince foresaw soon came to pass; for they (not enduring each others Greatness, and inrag'd at the equal Favour of the King) endeavour'd, by finding out mat∣ter of Accusation aginst, to ruin each o∣ther; and the 
Duan
 (being by his place


to inspect into the Payment of the Ar∣my) receiv'd many Complaints against the General, whose wretched love of Money made him defraud the King and his Souldiers of great Sums. Of this the 
Duan
 complains to the King, who seems not to believe, and takes little notice of it. The 
Duan
 therefore resolving to bring such Evidence as should convince the King of the Truth of his Complaint, seizes the General's 
Braman
 or Accountant, who kept all the Accounts of the Army; at which the General is so inrag'd, that taking some Souldiers with him, he is resolv'd to go and cut the 
Duan
 in pieces; but the 
Duan,
 being a notorious Coward, is the more careful to have Valiant Men about him, and always paying them well, they now serve him faith∣fully, stoutly defending him against the General, 'till the King sent and Commanded him to retire. At first he was so out of his Wits, that he would not, but (being perswaded by better temper'd Men, and his Friends) at last he return'd to his own House, leaving the 
Duan
 half dead with Fear; who coming to himself, goes immedi∣ately


to the King, and desires him to consider with what safety he could be in his Palace, if such Outrages were committed in the Garrison. The King calmly tells him, he will take care both for his own, and his future safety, by preventing such Violences for the time to come, and by perfectly reconciling the General to him; and tho' the 
Duan
 knew that to be impossible, yet seems to go away contented. The King sends to the General to let him know that he had undertaken a Reconcilia∣tion, and therefore would have him frame himself to it; but he storms, and calls the 
Duan
 a thousand Names; at last better remembring, calms himself, returns the King Thanks, and a sub∣mission to what he shall Command. Some few days after the King sends for him (as accustomary) and he (ha∣ving by that time considered the rash∣ness of what he had done) is unwilling to go, but (being perswaded by some he thought Friends, there was no dan∣ger, and that the King had inwardly more kindness for him than for the 
Du∣an)
 to Court he goes, and was no soon∣er entred the 
Palace Yard,
 but is seiz'd


on, and clapt into Irons and Prison.


The Charge against him was for slighting the King's Commands; da∣ring to assault one of his Counsellours within his Garrison; purloyning the King's Treasure, and converting it to his own Use; and for refusing to pay several Sums of Money to the Embas∣sadours of the 
Great Mogul,
 very much to the Dishonour of the King; (he ha∣ving pass'd his word for the punctual Payment of them) for which and some other things he was Imprison'd, and had all his Estate seiz'd on; in his House being found in ready Money, Five Hundred Thousand new 
Pagotha
's (which is about Two Hundred Thou∣sand Pounds Sterling) besides Jewels, wherein he was very Rich, having for many Years been Governour of the 
Diamond
 Mine of 
Coulour.
 Immedi∣ately after he was seiz'd on, the King muster'd the Army, pays them their Arrears, gives the Command to 
Mus∣shuke;
 but, to their great satisfaction, in∣rolls them in his own Rolls, and pro∣miseth to take care of them himself for the Future. The 
Duan
 is infinitely pleas'd at the fall of the General, and


thinking he had no Equal in the King's Favour, takes upon him to meddle in every Man's matter, depriving seve∣ral of the Benefit of their Places, by taking their Business out of their Hands; and the King lets him go on without taking notice of small Presumptions, so that by degrees he grows so confident of his own Authority, and the King's neglect, that he begins to do things of the greatest Consequence, without ac∣quainting his Majesty; and at last (ha∣ving made himself hateful, by doing and undoing every Man's Business, according to his own Interest and De∣signs) his Ruin was so generally wish'd, that there was a necessity of removing so great a grievance; which gave the King a fit opportunity of doing what he had so long design'd. Notice is there∣fore given, that such a Morning the King intends to appear at the 
Durbar;
 (that is at the place where he usually shows himself to his Nobles) so that the 
Duan
 and all the rest of his 
Omrahs
 (or Nobles) were to come according to Custom to make their 
Salam.
 When the King was sat, and had a little look'd about him, he commands the 
Duan
 to


stand before him, and began to speak to him in so obliging a manner, that every one at first verily thought he de∣sign'd him some fresh Honour, and not Disgrace; telling him how particular a kindness he always had for his Per∣son; how great a Confidence in his Fi∣delities and Abilities; insomuch that he had left almost the whole Affairs of his Kingdom to his management, ma∣king him, as it were, King in Power, and contenting himself only with the Name: But that, to his extreme Dis∣content, he found himself quite de∣ceived in him; for he had made use of the good Opinion he had of him, and his own great Abilities, only to Affront his King, and oppress and wrong his fellow Subjects. Then in the sharpest Language he could speak, tells him of all his Insolencies and Affronts, by pre∣suming to do things of the greatest consequence without acquainting him; likewise reckons up all the Miscarriages of his Administration; then telling him, that he preferring his own Honour, and the good of the Publick, even be∣fore his own Life, he could not expect he should spare his, but Sacrifice it to


his own Vindication and publick Justice, on the behalf of his oppress'd and in∣jur'd Subjects: However as a Reward of some former good Services he had done, he gave him his Life and the Go∣vernment of such a Province, com∣manding him immediately (upon the forfeiture of both) to retire to his Go∣vernment, and for the future not to meddle with any Business but what concern'd it. And so, without further Disgrace, dismiss'd him, not permit∣ting any to affront him, but command∣ing all to respect him as the Governour of a Province.


The King, with Reputation, and the infinite satisfaction of his People, having thus lad aside his two Partners in the Government (as if he thought himself then and not before a King) leaves his Retirement; dismisses the lew'd Women and Dancers; and breaks the Charms of his former Pleasures, with the Thoughts of Business; which he wholly minds and delights in; appears frequently at the 
Durbar;
 inspects into the whole Affairs of his King∣dom; calls for all the Accounts of


his Revenues, the auditing of which he leaves to 
Musshuke
 (who is now the Favourite) rewards bountifully; punishes not with Death, but other ways, very severely; giving his People great assurance of being happily Go∣vern'd for the future, by a Wise and most excellent King.










THE KINGDOM OF 
ARRACAN.


CRossing the Gulph of 
Bengala,
 and the Out-lets of 
Ganges,
 from the Kingdom of 
Golconda
 towards the 
East,
 you arrive in the Kingdom of 
Arra∣can;
 by some called 
Orracan,
 and by Father 
Tosi,
 sometimes the Empire of 
Mogo;
 which is a Title lately as∣sum'd by the King,
 probably upon his late Conquests over the Emperour of 
Pegu,
 to whom he was formerly Tributary and Dependent. It is bound∣ed on the 
North-West
 by the King∣dom of 
Bengala,
 some Authors making



Chatigam
 to be its first Frontier City; but 
Texeira,
 and generally the 
Portu∣guese
 Writers, reckon that as a City of 
Bengala;
 and not only so, but place the City of 
Bengala
 it self upon the same Coast,
 more 
South
 than 
Chatigam.
 Tho' I confess a late 
French
 Geographer has put 
Bengala
 into his Catalogue of ima∣ginary Cities, and such as have no real Existence in the World; but I wish he had given us a more particular ac∣count of his Reasons. Along the Coast which is wash'd by the foremention'd 
Golph,
 it is extended as far as the Cape, called by the 
Portuguese, Nigraes,
 where it touches upon 
Pegu,
 and is inclos'd by it on the 
South
 and 
East.
 Towards the 
North
 it borders upon 
Ava
 But to fix all these limits to a determinated Point, is altogether impossible, by rea∣son of those frequent Alterations, and new Conquests, that are made on the one side or the other daily.


The Metropolis 
Arracan,
 from whence the Kingdom it self takes its Denomination, is situate in the middle of a Valley, containing no less than fif∣teen Miles in compass, and being in∣viron'd on all sides with a continued


Ridge of steep and craggy Mountains, which serve it instead of Walls; and appear on the inside as such, being ar∣tificially cut to resemble the Fortifica∣tions of a strong City. The Outlets, which serve for Gates, are hewn out of the Rocks by main force, and being defended by Bulwarks, make the City impregnable. Besides these outward Fortifications, it is defended by a Castle of that incredible strength, that the King of 
Brama
 coming against it with Three Hundred Thousand Men, and Forty Thousand Elephants, was forc'd to raise the Siege with Disgrace. Thro' the Valley runs a large River, which 
Maginus
 calls 
Chaberis,
 which dividing it self into several little Rivolets and Streams, passes thro' all the streets, af∣fording thereby a wonderful Advantage to the City, by the ready Conveyance of all sorts of Merchandises and Pro∣visions unto every part thereof. At its parting from the City, which is said to be about Forty Five, or Fifty Miles from the Sea, all these little Rivolets are Collected again into two Channels, which opening towards the 
North
 and 
South,
 at length fall Westward into the


Gulph of 
Bengala,
 that towards the 
North
 at 
Orietan,
 and the other at 
Do∣bazi
 or 
Duabacam,
 both which places are much frequented by Merchants; but the alternate Ebbings and Flow∣ings of the Sea are so violent, especial∣ly about the time of the Full Moon, that the Ships can hardly ride safely in the Ports. But before we leave 
Arra∣can,
 to speak of these places, it will be convenient to say something of its Buildings, which are indeed ordinari∣ly mean; tho' there are several spaci∣ous 
Piazza
's or 
Bazars,
 which afford both Conveniences for Markets, and tolerable Prospects to the Spectators. For Timber they make use of 
Bambou
 Cane, and instead of Nails, tie the pieces together with the smaller sort of the same Cane, which when slender and Green, is so pliable, that it may be wreathed and twisted as you please. The Princes and Nobiliry make use of a different sort of Wood, and are very profuse in adorning the Insides of their Houses with exquisite Carvings and Guildings. Nor are their common sort destitute of Ornaments to set off and Beautifie them. The Palace Royal is


vastly large, but not so beautiful for its structure. It is supported with large and tall Pillars, made of whole Trees, and cover'd over with Gold, with Chambers above built with the most precious and odoriferous Wood the 
East
 will afford, as Red and White Sandal, and a sort of 
Bois de Aquila.
 In the Middle, and as it were Center of the Palace, stands a great Hall, which they call the 
Golden House,
 because the Inside is wholly over-laid with Gold, from the Bottom to the Top, and o∣ver a rais'd place hangs a Canopy of Massy Gold, round which hang above an Hundred 
Combalenghe,
 as they call them, which are large Wedges of the same Mettal, made in the Fashion of Sugar-Loaves, each of above Forty Pound weigbt. Here also are to be seen seven Idols of massie Gold like∣wise, of the heighth of an ordinary Man, and about two Fingers in thick∣ness, but within hollow; which are al∣so adorn'd with precious Stones, Ru∣bies, Emeralds, Saphirs, and Diamonds, of an exiraordinary Bigness, upon their Foreheads, Breasts, and Arms, and a∣bout their Middles. In the midst of


this Hall stands a square Stool, of three Hands breadth, all of pure Gold, which supports a Cabinet of pure Gold also, and overlaid with precious Stones, con∣taining the two 
Caneques, i. e.
 two fa∣mous Pendants made in the Form of two Pyramids, of two Rubies of the length of a Man's little Finger, and the Circumference at the base, as wide as that of an ordinary Pullets Egg.


The Quarrel about these Jewels is said to have caused as much Blood∣shed among the Neighbouring Kings hereabouts, as might have been suffici∣ent for the obtaining an entire Em∣pire; the Contest being not so much for the value of the Jewels, as that they are suppos'd to bring along with them a right, or at least a claim of Do∣minion over the Neighbouring Princes. And now they are in the Hands of this King, but never worn by him, except upon the Day of his Coronation. In a∣nother Apartment stands the Statue of the King of 
Brama,
 treacherously Murther'd by his Subjects, so natural and to the Life, that it causes Admira∣tion in all the Spectators, which are ve∣ry Numerous, he having obtain'd the


Reputation of a great Saint, and being fam'd for Curing the Diseases of those that resort to him; especially the Bloody Flux. In the whole City are numbred no less than six Hundred 
Pagods,
 or I∣dol Temples, the Inhabitants amount∣ing to an Hundred and Sixty Thousand, besides Merchants and Strangers; the City, as indeed the whole Kingdom, being said to be very Populous. Not far from this Palace, there is a great Lake, with many small Islands therein, which are Inhabited by their Priests, which they call 
Raulini.
 There are also constantly a great number of Boats running up and down in it, but hin∣der'd from all Communication with the City by a Bank, so contriv'd, that should they be Besieg'd, and overpowr'd by their Enemies, so as to be constrain'd to yield the City to them, they could overwhelm both it and them in a whole Deluge of Water, by breaking down that Bank.


From this City, passing down that Branch of the River,
 which runs to∣wards the North, you come to 
Orie∣tan;
 the whole Course of the River be∣ing extreamly delightful, the Banks be∣ing cover'd with tall Trees always


green and shady, which bending their Head towards the Water, make one continued Arbour, and defend the Tra∣vellers from the scortching Sun. And the variety of Apes or Peacocks flying or skipping from branch to branch, adds very much to the pleasure of the Passage. 
Orietan
 is a City of great Concourse of Merchants from most Countries of the 
East, Pegu, China, Ja∣pan, Malacca;
 and from 
Malabar
 West∣ward; and other parts of 
India.
 'Tis govern'd by a Deputy appointed by the King at his Coronation, receiving a Crown from his Hand, and always enjoying the Title of King himself; this City being one of those Twelve, the Capitals of Twelve Provinces, sub∣ject to the Kingdom of 
Arracan;
 which are always govern'd by Crown'd Heads. Not far from this City arises the Mount of 
Maum,
 which imparts its Name to a Lake washing the Foot thereof; thither are sent all those that are Exil'd by the King, who causes strict Guards to be kept in all the Pas∣ses, and further to prevent the flight of the Criminals, cuts off their Heels. The Mountain is hardly passable for


Travellers, being not only craggy and impervious, but so infested with wild Beasts, that it is a difficult thing to escape them.


From the Mountain of 
Maum,
 cros∣sing the Gulph you come to another City 
Peroem,
 which being situate near the Sea, and having a good capacious Har∣bour, is a Town of great Traffick. 'Tis likewise the Residence of a Governour, who exercises absolute Authority with∣in his Precincts, and keeps a Court an∣swerable to the Majesty of a King.


Ramu
 is another City of equal Con∣dition with 
Peroem,
 from which it is not many Days Journey distant, but he Way betwixt them very dangerous, whether by Land or by Water; The Sea being subject to sudden tempestu∣ous Storms, and that by Land lying cross the Mountains of 
Pre,
 which se∣parate 
Arracan
 from 
Pegu,
 as dangerous, by reason of the Wild Beasts, as the for∣mer. What is further taken notice of in there parts, is a Mountain called 
Pora,
 which in the Language of the Country signifies God, or an Idol; which Name it borrows from an Idol plac'd upon the very top thereof, sitting cross-legg'd


upon a Pedestal, to which those Hea∣thens resort with great Devotion. By this place runs a large River, from which some Engineers would have perswaded the King to have cut a Chan∣nel as far as 
Arracan;
 but he absolute∣ly refus'd to hearken to the Proposal, because he thought he should thereby expose the place of his Residence to the Incursions of the 
Great Mogul,
 who might with Ease convey his Forces down such a Channel.


The next Town of Note along a tem∣pestuous Coast, is the City of 
Dianga,
 or 
Diango,
 which seems to belong to the Kingdom of 
Bengala,
 but made by Fa∣ther 
Tosi
 a principal City of this. Indeed this City, as well as 
Chatigam,
 which was undoubtedly once a City of this Kingdom, and the Government there∣of commonly allotted to the King's se∣cond Son, has run the risque of Frontier Towns, frequently to change its Master, and to be sometimes in the Hands of one of the Neighbouring Princes, and sometimes in those of the other. The greatest part of its Inhabitants are 
Por∣tuguese
 Fugitives, who live here, and injoy great Priviledges and Immunities


granted by the King. The Fathers of St. 
Augustine
 have here likewise a firm Residence, with a good House, and very decent Church. Many of them likewise make their abode in two neigh∣bouring Villages, 
Arracale,
 and 
Angar∣racale.


Other places along this Coast subje∣cted to this King, are 
Coromoria, Sedoa,
 
Zara,
 and Port 
Magaeni.
 To which let me add the Island of 
Sundiva,
 which is an Island in the Gulph of 
Bengala,
 scarce twenty Miles remov'd from the Conti∣nent of that Kingdom. 'Tis about an Hundred Miles in Compass, and affords such vast quantities of Salt, that it needs no other Commodities to give in Ex∣change for any of those of the Neigh∣bouring Countries, being able with it a∣lone, to lade two Hundred Vessels every Year. 'Tis so well fortifi'd by nature alone, without the Assistance of Art, that 'tis al∣most impossible to seize it without the consent of the Inhabitants; which made the 
Portugueses
 cast an Eye upon it, with intent to make it a Retreat for them∣selves. Accordingly in the Year 1602, they took it from the 
Moguls,
 who some time before had depriv'd its lawful


Prince thereof; who, after they had 
 it, confirm'd their Title to it, by a free Grant of all his Right and Claim thereto. But they never quietly en∣joy'd it, first the Inhabitants molesting them; and when they were Defeated, the King of 
Arracan,
 fearing the growth of their strength in those parts, endea∣vour'd to dislodge them; and tho' at first he was constrain'd to raise the Siege, and to make an Agreement with them, yet in the Year 1603, they were com∣pell'd to yield it to him, and retire into 
Bacala,
 and other parts of the Kingdom of 
Bengala.


Upon the Northern parts of this King∣dom, lie the Cities of 
Assaram, Tipora,
 and 
Chacomas,
 all said to be the Capital Cities of so many Kingdoms, but all sub∣ject to this of 
Arracan.
 Indeed I take their Kings to be no more than Deputies, or Vice-Roys, and Governours of these Ci∣ties, plac'd there with the great vaunt∣ing Title of Kings, by the King of 
Ar∣racan;
 as we are assur'd of those Gover∣nours afore mention'd, and that there are no less than Twelve of the same Dig∣nity in his whole Dominions. Nor do I meet with any thing remark'd of any of


them, but that being places upon the Frontiers, they are constantly provided of good Garrisons: Unless I may have leave to add what Mr. 
Tavernier
 has Recorded of three of the Subjects of 
Tipora,
 which he calls 
Tipra,
 that he found them such notable Topers, that they never gave out 'till they had drunk him dry; and at last when all his Wine was spent, seem'd to express a great deal of concern that they could have no more. He tells, 'tis true, further, that there is a Gold Mine in the Dominions of this Prince; but so very course that it is not fit to be exported; that the King ex∣acts no Subsidies of his Subjects, but ob∣liges the prime of his Nobility to work six Days in the Year in his Mines in lieu of them. There are besides, some Silk-works here, of which they make good Advantage.


Taking the Southern Stream from 
Ar∣racan,
 it conducts you to the City 
Doba∣zi,
 which is a place of very great Traf∣fick, being a Port much frequented by Strangers. Thence continuing your Voyage along the Coast you arrive at 
Chudabe,
 which being situate near the Sea, and having a commodious Port, is


also a place much frequented by Stran∣gers.


Not far from hence lies Cape 
Nigraes,
 and by it the Island 
Munay,
 famous for the Religion of the place,
 being filled with Pagods and Temples, one whereof is called 
Quiay Figrau,
 or, the 
The Temple of the God of the Atoms of the Sun,
 and a∣nother 
Quiay Doceo, the Temple of the God of the afflicted of the Earth;
 and especi∣ally for being the place of Residence for the chief of the 
Raulini,
 whom they sometimes call 
Xoxom Pungri.
 This 
Xox∣om Pungri
 is the chief of all the Eccle∣siasticks in the Kingdom, this Title im∣porting as much among them, as 
Pope
 at 
Rome;
 on him depend all Spiritual Causes, and he is had in so great vene∣ration, not only by the People, but even by the King himself, that he always places him at his Right Hand; and ne∣ver speaks to him without a profound Re∣verence. This Island is likewise spoke of by 
Ferd. Mendez Pinto,
 but as in the Dominions of the Emperour of 
Pegu.
 He tells us too that he happen'd to be in those parts at the Death of one of those great Men, whom he calls only the 
Roo∣lim
 of 
Munay,
 and sets down at length


he Ceremonies of his Interment, with those of the Election and Inauguration of his Successor; which would be too te∣dious here to recite. Let it suffice that the King and all the Grandees of the Court, together with all the Ecclesia∣sticks, according to the Antient Custom of 
Pegu,
 were oblig'd to attend the Fu∣neral; the Expences of which, which were defraid by the King, amounted to an Hundred Thousand Ducats; besides the Garments which the King and No∣bility gave to Thirty Thousand Priests. See 
Ferd. Mendez Pinto,
 ch. 60, 61, 62.


Leaving 
Munay,
 and doubling the Cape 
Nigraes,
 you come to 
Siriam,
 which 
To∣si
 makes the last City of 
Arracan,
 tho' o∣thers account it a City of 
Pegu.
 Howe∣ver they differ not in the Situation there∣of, all placing it upon the Borders of the two Empires. But Father 
Tosi
 adds, that it was thither the Emperour of 
Mogo
 re∣tir'd with his Victorious Army, laden with the Spoils of the City of 
Tangu,
 Sub∣ject to the King of 
Brama;
 where he found not only a vast Treasure, but the white 
Elephant,
 and the two 
Caneques
 be∣fore mention'd. The City of 
Siriam,
 is not at present in that Splendour and flou∣rishing


Condition it has formerly been, having once been the Metropolis of a Kingdom, and the place of Residence for the King and Court; and encompass'd with very strong Walls, the Foot steps whereof remain to this Day. But the last King thereof, being in the Year 1567, besieg'd therein by the King of 
Pegu,
 with an Army of Fifteen Hundred Thou∣sand Men, and having sustain'd a tedious Siege, to the Destruction of no less than the third part of the Enemies Army, when he could no longer hold out, ra∣ther than fall into their Hands, destroy'd himself by Poison, leaving the City with all its Nobles and Treasury a Prey to the Conquerour, who Transported them to 
Pegu.
 From this place to 
Arracan,
 you may pass by Barges along a small River that runs between them.


In short, this Kingdom of 
Arracan,
 or Empire of 
Mogo,
 is said to comprehend twelve lesser Kingdoms, and twenty four Provinces, of which, besides those already mention'd, my Authors have not given me so much as their Names.






Inhabitants OF 
ARRACAN.


THE Inhabitants of 
Arracan,
 for their Shapes and Features seem most to affect those, which are most contemned by those of other Nations; they prize a broad and flat Forehead; to effect which, they bind a Plate of Lead hard upon the Fore-heads of their Children as soon as they are born, which they do not re∣move 'till it has had its effect. Their Nostrils are large and open, their Eyes small, but Quick; their Ears reach down to their Shoulders, like the 
Malabars;
 and no Colour is so pleasing to them as a dark Purple. In their Feasts they have always plenty of Provisions, but such as are nei∣ther pleasing to the Eye, nor grateful to the Palate. They mix with their choi∣cest Dishes, Rats and Mice, and Serpents, 
&c.
 which, to those that are not accu∣stom'd to see such things upon their Tables,


are very offensive. Fish they never eat, but when putrid and Corrupted, affirm∣ing them then to have the sweetest Re∣lish. Of these also they make a kind of Mustard, which they call 
Sidol,
 taking out the back-bone, and beating their Pu∣trid Flesh into a Consistency, after it has been dried in the Sun, and with this they sprinkle all their Victuals. The poorer sort especially, make use for this purpose, of a Fish so rotten, and of so ill a savour, that no man can pass by the places, where 'tis prepar'd, without stopping his Nose: The Richer use Crab-fish less Corrupted, with some other Ingredients mixt there∣with, which makes it less unsavoury. Their manner is to set upon the Table a Hundred or two Hundred small Dishes at once, that every one may taste what he likes best; but Bread they have none, in∣stead of that serving themselves of Rice, either parch'd or bruis'd; or otherwise order'd by them in the Flower.


When they are sick, they make use of the Physician, but send for the 
Raulini,
 who are their Priests; who coming to them blow upon them with their Mouths, and repeat some certain Prayers over them; which, if it immediately effects not the


Cure, (as you may believe it seldom does) then they make use of the oppor∣tunity of making their Advantage of the Patient. They tell him he must offer a Sacrifice to 
Chaor-Baos,
 i. e. the God of the four Winds; who, they perswade them is the Author of all Distempers. This Sacrifice they call 
Ca∣louco,
 consisting of fat Capons and Hens, Hoggs and other Creatures, according to the Abilities of the Sick Person; and must be repeated four times, to every Wind distinctly, if he does not recover before; upon all which the 
Raulini
's feast themselves, with a great deal of Jollity. But if all this does not avail to the driving away the Distemper, then must the Wife or nearest Relation of the infirm Person, make a solemn Vow to perform, if he recovers, another Ceremony, which they call a 
Talagno.
 The performance whereof is thus; the Person that makes the Vow, having pro∣vided a Convenient Chamber, and hanged it with the richest Tapestry, and erected an Idol upon an Altar at the end thereof, with other necessary Pre∣parations, upon the Day appointed, the Priests and Relations of the Sick, re∣pair


to the place, and are entertain'd with most sumptuous Feasts for Eight Days together, all sorts of Musick at∣tending all the time. But what is the most absurd part thereof, the Person that makes the Vow, is oblig'd to dance as long as he is able to stand, and when his Legs will support him no longer, he must take hold of a piece of Cloath, fasten'd to a Beam for that purpose, and continue dancing 'till he has quite ex∣hausted his Spirits, and he drops down as a Dead Man in the place. Then is the Musick redoubl'd, and all the Spe∣ctators second it with their Rejoicings, and are ready to Envy him the happi∣ness he then Enjoys, supposing him all the while he lies in this Condition, to Converse with the Idol. This Exer∣cise he is bound to repeat as long as the Feasting continues; but if his weak∣ness will not permit, then must some near Relation succeed in his place; and if at last the Person recovers after the 
Talagno
 is compleated, he is carried to the Pagods, and anointed with Oils, and Odoriferous and costly Perfumes, from the Head to the Foot. But if not∣withstanding all these Sacrifices and


Vows, the Sick Person die at last, the 
Raulini
 have another fetch, they tell them all these Sacrifices were well ac∣cepted by the Gods, and the Reason why they granted not the Sick a long∣er life, was, because they design'd him a greater Favour by taking him to them∣selves, and recompencing him in ano∣ther World.


Not less Superstitious and absurd are they in their manner of Interment.
 For the Dead Corps being brought into the middle of the House, the 
Raulini
 walk∣ing round about it, cant over certain Prayers, whilst others perfume the place with Incense; the greatest part of the Family in the mean time keeping strict Watch, and beating upon a broad piece of Brass. This they tell you they do, lest to the great Disgrace and Damage to the Party deceas'd, a 
Black Cat
 should pass over him, for then he would be constrain'd to return to life again with Ignominy, and be depriv'd of that hap∣piness they suppose him to Enjoy in a∣nother World. Before the Deceas'd be carried out of the House, they invite to a Banquet, a sort of People called 
Graii,
 of which if they are not at lei∣sure


to accept, it causes a most doleful Lamentation among the Relations of the deceas'd, taking that for a certain Sign that his Soul is Condemn'd to Hell, which they call the 
House of Smoak.
 The Coffin is adorn'd accord∣ing to the Abilities of the Person, and being firmly perswaded of the Trans∣migration of Souls into other Bodies, they never fail to paint upon it the Fi∣gures of Horses, Elephants, Eagles, Cows, Lions, and the most noble Crea∣tures they can imagin, as it were to di∣rect the departed Soul to the best Lodg∣ing. Unless out of pure Humility, the deceas'd order before-hand, Rats and Frogs, and the vilest and most despi∣cable Animals to be drawn in their stead, as the most suitable Receptions for his polluted Soul. In this manner the Body is carried out into the Fields, and there burnt to Ashes, the 
Raulini
 kindling the Fire, and the Relations attending clad all in White, which is their Mourning Attire, except a black Hatband round their Heads.


Their Religion in general is nothing else but an absur'd Heathenish Supersti∣tion; and they are disturb'd at the


most common things, looking upon the Barking of a Dog, or the like, as the Omen and Presage of some notable Event. Upon which the 
Raulini
 are immediately consulted, who know how to Entertain them with a Thousand Fopperies. They have their Domestick Idol, besides those in their publick Temples, which are so numerous, that in one alone are said to be no less than Twenty Thousand. To this Dome∣stick God, they constantly before they Eat, offer a part of their Provision; and wear his Mark burnt into their Arms, or Sides, or Shoulders with a hot Iron; and by him Swear. Those that are of ability, send Portions like∣wise to the publick Temples, which are built in the form of a Pyramid or Steeple, higher or lower, according to the Pleasure of the Founder. In the Winter time, they Cloath their Idols that they may not take cold, in hopes of a mighty Recompence for such an act of Charity to them. At a certain time of the Year, they celebrate a Fe∣stival, which they call 
Sansaporan,
 in commemoration of the Dead, wherein they make a solemn Procession in Ho∣nour


of one of their Idols, called 
Qui∣ay Poragray,
 which is carried in an hea∣vy Chariot, with Ninety of the 
Rau∣lini
 clad in yellow Sattin, attended thro' all the Streets of the City; many, as he passes, throwing themselves under his Chariot Wheels, and others hanging themselves upon Iron Hooks, fasten'd for the purpose, and Sprinkling him with their Blood. And in such high Veneration are held these Martyrs of the Devil, that every Man thinks himself happy, on whom one drop of their Blood shall chance to light. Nay, the very Hooks on which they hang, are with great Reverence taken down by the 
Raulini,
 and as 
sacred Relicks,
 care∣fully preserv'd in their Pagods.


Their 
Raulini,
 or Priests, are divided into three Orders, distinguish'd by the names of 
Pungrini, Pangiani,
 and 
Xo∣xom,
 somthing resembling the Distin∣ction of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. They are cloath'd in Yellow, having their Heads Shaven, and all below the 
Pungrini
 uncover'd; but these wear a Yellow Mitre, with the point turn'd, and falling backwards. They are tied to live single, both by Vow, and un∣der


Penalty of Degradation, and being reduc'd into the number of Laicks, and taxed as they. They live partly in Cloisters founded by their Kings, or great Men, which are generally very sumptuous, and partly in their own Houses, and of their own Estates; but all under one Head their 
Xoxom Pun∣gri
 before mention'd. To these are re∣commended the Children, as well of the Nobility, as of the inferior sort, to be Educated in the Knowledge of their Religion and Laws; and they are said to be exceeding Hospitable to Strangers. They have amongst them many Hermites, not unlike the 
Jogues
 before spoken of; whom they divide in∣to 
Grepi, Manigrepi,
 and 
Taligrepi,
 who for some severe and rigorous Penances inflicted upon themselves, are had in great Esteem among the People.








THE GOVERNMENT, &c. OF 
ARRACAN.


THIS King, for the vastness of his Treasure, and strength for War, is as considerable as most of the Prin∣ces of the 
East,
 and within less than an Hundred Years space, has much inlarg'd his Dominions by his Conquests, as well in 
Pegu,
 as 
Bengala.
 But in his Wars against the 
Portuguese
 he was never successful, a Fleet of his, of no less than five hundred and Forty Sail, being defeated by them in the Year


1605. And not long after coming a∣gainst the Fort of 
Siriam
 with a Fleet of Twelve Hundred Sail, together with a Land Army of Thirty Thousand Men, with three Thousand five Hundred great and small Canon, he was thrice beat both by Land and Sea, and forc'd to retire.


The Government is chiefly in the hands of Twelve Princes, to whom he gives the Title of Kings, residing in his Principal Cities, in Twelve Mag∣nificent Palaces built for the King him∣self; in all which are great Seraglio's, the Governour being oblig'd Yearly to chuse Twelve Girls, born that year within their Precincts, who are brought up at the King's Charge, 'till they are twelve Years old, at which age being brought to his Court, he chuses by the smell of their Garments, in which they have been made to sweat, those whose Scent pleases him, disposing of the rest to the Gentlemen of his Court.


He assumes to himself as great Titles as any of his Neighbours,
 stiling him∣self 
Padxa,
 or 
Emperour of
 Arracan, 
Possessor of the White
 Elephant, 
with the


two
 Caneques, 
and by vertue of them, rightful Heir of
 Pegu, 
and
 Brama; 
Lord of the Twelve
 Boioni 
of
 Bengala, 
and the Twelve Kings who lay the highest Hair of their Heads under the Soles of his Feet;
 with others of the like im∣portance. His ordinary residence is at 
Arracan,
 but in the Summer time 'tis usual with him to spend two Months in a kind of Progress by Water from thence to 
Orietan;
 in which he is at∣tended by all the Nobility, in Boats so artificially contriv'd, with distinct Apartments, and Conveniences for the Court, that they appear rather a float∣ing Palace or City, than a Fleet of Boats. Nor does he at this time omit the Administration of Justice, but hears Causes, and attends publick Business, as much as in his Palace. One Pretence for his Marine Progress, is to visit the Pagod of their Supream Deity, whom they call 
Quiay Poragray,
 and to whom the King daily sends a sumptuous Din∣ner. By this and several other Instan∣ces, they shew themselves very Super∣stitious; and this Superstition frequent∣ly leads them into Acts of the most in∣humane Cruelty.
 'Tis related of one


of them, that being told he could not long survive his Coronation, which is usually perform'd with the greatest Ceremony and Pomp imaginable, the Twelve 
Royolets
 attending, and the 
Xoxam Pungri
 setting the Crown upon his Head, he deferr'd that Ceremony Twelve Years after he came to the Crown. But being press'd to it by his Lords, and not able handsomly to put it off any longer, he consulted a 
Mahumetan,
 whether there was any way to avert the Omen; who, with a barbarous intent to destroy those whom he counted Enemies of his false Pro∣phet, advis'd him to make a Compo∣sition of six Thousand of the Hearts of his Subjects, four thousand of those of White Cows, and two thousand of those of White Doves, which, being used as an Electuary, would protect him from that Presage. This the King believing, built a House, the Founda∣tions whereof, to make it still more au∣spicious, were laid upon Women great with Child; and in that, butcher'd no less than Eighteen Thousand innocent Persons, to preserve his own hateful Life.


Of the Descent of these Kings, we have no account in any Author I have seen; nor whence they derive that Ap∣pellation of 
Moghi.
 Only we are told by 
Tosi,
 they are very careful to pre∣serve the Blood unmixt, upon which account the King is oblig'd to Marry his Eldest Sister.










THE KINGDOM OF 
PEGU.


THE Kingdom of 
Pegu
 is bound∣ed on the 
North
 with the Coun∣tries of 
Brama,
 
Siammon,
 and the 
Ca∣laminham;
 towards the 
West
 it is part∣ly separated from 
Arracan
 by the Moun∣tains of 
Pre,
 and partly wash'd by the Gulph of 
Bengala,
 extending it slf a∣long the Coast from Cape 
Nigraes,
 be∣ing about 16 Deg. of Northerly Lati∣tude, as far as the City of 
Tavay,



whose Elevation is said to be 13 Deg. On the 
East
 it joins with 
Lao,
 on the 
South
 it touches upon the Territories of 
Siam.
 But these Bounds are by no means fixt and determin'd, being sub∣ject to many Alterations, as it has pre∣vail'd over its Neighbours, or they on the contrary over it. In the Year 1690, one 
Brama,
 King hereof, by his Victo∣rious Arms extended its limits beyond those known to his Predecessors, sub∣duing the King of 
Siam,
 and reducing him to be Tributary to the Crown of 
Pegu.
 But this continued no longer than to the time of his immediate Suc∣cessour.


The Soil, being water'd with seve∣ral Rivers, one whereof arising from the Lake 
Chiamay,
 takes a Course of between four and five hundred Miles before it falls into the Sea, is very rich and fertile, abounding especially with Rice and good Pasturage for their Cat∣tle. The River is known by the Name of 
Pegu,
 after that of the Country and City which is washt by it; but for the Advantages it brings, and its constant Annual Inundations, 'tis not unfitly


stiled by 
Maffeius,
 the 
Indian Nile.
 Its Overflowings are indeed almost incre∣dible, reaching Thirty Leagues beyond its usual Course; and by leaving be∣hind it a kind of Slime or Mud upon the Ground, so Enriches their Soil, and increases their Crops of Rice, that a hundred Ship Loads thereof have been Exported in a Year, without so much as being miss'd.


But a great augmentation of the wealth of the Country, which, before a late De∣solation in its Wars against 
Arracan
 and 
Siam,
 was esteem'd as great as of any Kingdom in the 
East,
 are the Precious Stones, such as Rubies, Topazes,
 Sa∣phirs, Amethists, 
&c.
 all which the Inhabitants comprehend under one com∣mon Name of Rubies, and distinguish them only by their Colour, calling the Saphir the Blew; the Amethist the Violet; the Topaz the Yellow Ruby; and so of the rest. But that which pro∣perly obtains that Name, is a Jewel transparent, sparkling Red, and towards the extremities thereof, or near the sur∣face, something incling to the Violet of the Amethist. Some take it to be the


same with the 
Hyacinth
 of the Ancients,
 and a notable Critick would perswade us, that 
Jacut,
 the Name given it by the 
Arabians
 and 
Persians,
 is deriv'd from the word 
Hyacinthus.
 'Tis found in several places of the 
Indies,
 as also in 
Europe;
 but those most valued, are the Stones of 
Ceylon
 and 
Pegu▪
 the chiefest place for them in this 
, being the most barren part thereof, 
viz.
 a Mountain near 
Capelan,
 or 
Cablan,
 be∣tween 
Siriam
 and 
Pegu;
 as likewise those Hills which stretch from this Kingdom to that of 
Cambodia.
 They are distinguish'd into four sorts or spe∣cies, the Ruby, the Rubacel, the Ba∣lace, and the Spinel; of which the first is much preferr'd before the rest. The natural shape is generally Oval or Glo∣bular, being scarce ever found with Corners. Their Value, as that of the Diamonds, increases proportionably to their Weight, being weighed by 
Ratis,
 whereof one is reckon'd three Grains and a half, or seven eighths of a Caratt, and a Stone of this Weight has been fold for twenty Pagods; one of two 
Ratis,
 and one of eight, for eighty five Pagods; one of three 
Ratis,
 and one


fourth, for an hundred eighty five; one of four 
Ratis,
 and five eighths, for four hundred and fifty; one of five 
Ratis,
 for five hundred twenty five; and one of six 
Ratis
 and half, for nine hundred and twenty Pagods. But if the Stone exceed this Weight, and be clean and perfect, there is no certain value to be set upon it. Of the Vertue of this Stone, as well as the Diamond, 'tis pleasant to read the Conceits of some fanciful Men,
 as that 'tis a Soveraign Antidote against Poison, either wore, or taken inwardly in Powder, and a great Preservative against the Plague; that it chears the Heart, expels Sor∣row, restrains Lust, drives away fright∣ful Dreams, lessens sleep,
 inspirits the Blood, and incites to Anger; and, what is beyond all these, by its chang∣ing Colour, foretels approaching Dan∣gers or Calamities to him that wears it; and the more darken'd and ob∣scur'd it appears, the greater will be the Misfortune. To this purpose one 
Wolfgangus Gabelchoverus
 relates of him∣self, That travelling with a Wife, a Rubie set in a Ring, which he wore upon his Finger, chang'd colour seve∣ral


times, 'till at last it seem'd to have lost its splendour, and was turn'd al∣most quite black; whereupon he took it from his Finger, and laid it aside, his Mind presaging some great Evil hanging over the Head either of him∣self or Relations; which happen'd ac∣cordingly, for in a few Days, he tells us, his Wife fell sick and died; after whose Death, his Ruby immediately recover'd its Ancient Lustre and Beau∣ty. The Balace Ruby is suppos'd by some, to have taken its name from 
Pa∣latium,
 or Palace; because it is, as it were the Palace or Matrix, in which are form'd the true Rubies. Others think the Name is deriv'd from 
Bala,
 which in the 
Persian
 Language signifies high or topping, which a∣grees to the natural Form of the Stone, which is commonly oblong or pointed; the most probable Conjecture is that of 
Marcus Paulus Venetus,
 that it is borrow'd from the Country, where they are found in the greatest Plenty, which he says is by the Inhabitants called 
Balaheia.
 Tho' I must confess, I could have wish'd he had given us some better hints, whereby to find out that Country.






THE INHABITANTS OF 
PEGU.


THE Inhabitants are of Colour,
 rather Tawny than Black, not unlike those of 
Arracan;
 but in their manners more corrupt, than any I have yet met with. Their very Women seem to have lost all Natural Modesty, go∣ing almost quite Naked, with only a thin Covering about their Middles, so carelesly bound about them, as not to cover their shame. They tell us indeed, in excuse for it, they were injoin'd to go so by an ancient Queen of the Coun∣try; who to prevent a worse Vice in


the Men, commanded them to use this means of stirring up and inflaming their Desires towards them. Their Habita∣tions are as slovenly as their Manners corrupt,
 making no Scruple to lodge in the same Room with their Hoggs; and as for their Diet they always take care to season it with 
Sidol,
 mention'd in the Description of 
Arracan,
 so nau∣seous and offensive, that none but them∣selves can endure so much as the smell thereof. Their Marriages are likewise loose and uncertain; for the Man, as it were buying his Wife, being oblig'd to pay a Dowry to her Parents; if af∣ter he has some time Enjoy'd her, he dislikes either her Person or Conditions, he has liberty of divorceing her, and remitting her back to her Relations. On the other side, if the Woman or her Friends dislike her Husband, they may take her away from him, repay∣ing only the Dowry he gave to them. When any Stranger comes to reside a∣mongst them, they offer him his choice of their Daughters, one of which he hires at a certain rate, according to the time of his stay, to cohabit with him; and at his departure, she returns again


to her Parents, without the least dis∣grace. Nay, should the same stranger return again into the Country, tho she should be Married to another Man, her Husband is oblig'd to restore her to him for the time of his continuance there, and when he leaves the place, receive her again.


They are Superstitious to the highest Degree, and great Worshippers of the Devil, making, as the 
Manichees
 of old, two Authors of Beings; one the Author of all Good, which is God, and the o∣ther of all Evil, which is the Devil.


Upon this Principle they are as zea∣lous in the Worship of the Devil as of God, and use as much Art and Pains to obtain his Favour. When any sick∣ness, or other Calamity befalls them, their first Addresses are to him, mak∣ing Vows to him, if he will free them from their present Misery, and cease to afflict them for the future. Nor dare they omit the solemn Performance of these Vows, upon their Recovery. But chusing a Man, whom they call the 
Father of the Devil,
 as being one of the greatest of his Priests, and best under∣standing,


or at least pretending to do so, what will be most acceptable to him, to direct them, make a great Feast, attended with Musick of all sorts, to pacifie and appease this incensed Ad∣versary. Many of them will run about the streets in the Morning, with one hand full of Rice, and a Torch in the other, crying aloud, 
They go to give the Devil his Breakfast, that he might not hurt them all that Day.
 Others, before they eat, throw part of what they have over their Shoulders to feed him. And with such a panick Fear are they struck at the thoughts of this 
Author of Evil,
 that they will run, as if they were re∣ally possest, from a Man in a Mask, lest he should prove a Devil come out of Hell to torment them. And at a place call'd 
Tavay,
 they have a Custom to replenish their Houses with Victuals, and then leave them for three Months, that the Devils may come and dwell in them, feeding upon what they have provided; and to be propitious to them all the rest of the Year.


They have an Order of Religious among them had in much esteem, who


do frequently oppose this Diabolical Worship, but are not able to root out of the minds of the People, what their Fears have so deeply imprinted there. These Religious they call 
Telapoi,
 who are not unlike 
Mendicant Fryers,
 living upon the Alms of the People, and so highly venerated by them, that they would be glad to drink the Water wherein they wash their Hands. They are usually of the very dregs of the People, but assume to themselves great stare and Majesty, walking thro' the streets with a grave compos'd Counte∣nance and Gate, in long Robes girt with a leathern Girdle four Fingers broad, at which hangs a Bag in which they bestow what they get. Their Heads are always cover'd, but they suffer not a hair to grow on them, or any other part of their Bodies. Their Habitations are in the Woods, in little kind of Nests or Cages upon the Tops of the Trees, for fear of the Tygers that infest those Parts. Every New Moon, others say, every 
Monday,
 they preach to the People, calling them to∣gether by the sound of a Bell, or Ba∣son; and for the Subject of their Dis∣courses,


they generally make use of some Precept of the Law of Nature, as 
not to steal, not to commit Adultery, not to bear false Witness,
 &c. a strict performance whereof they think suffi∣cient to Salvation, however extrava∣gant they may be in matters of Opini∣on and Speculation. Nor do these lati∣tudinarian Principles fail of a very good effect, making them very Charitable, and Hospitable to Strangers; nor in the least displeas'd when any of their People embrace Christianity, and are baptis'd. When they die, they are most sumptuously interr'd at the Ex∣pence of the People, being burnt in a very costly Pile of the most precious Woods that can be got. Their Ashes they cast into the River, but the re∣mainder of their Bones they bury near the Hut where they liv'd.


In matters of Faith, besides that Manichean Principle before mention'd, they hold divers others, hardly con∣sistent with it; as an eternal Succession of Worlds, without Creation; and a multiplicity of Gods to govern them; as for Example, they say this present World is to be under the Government


of Five several Gods, of which four are already pass'd; and now above two thousand two hundred Years e∣lapsed since the Death of the last of these; so that they expect suddenly the coming of the Fifth, after whose Decease, the World it self is to be de∣stroy'd by Fire, that a new one, Phae∣nix-like, may spring out of the Ashes. The Souls of Men, they say, after se∣veral Transmigrations, attain the Per∣fections and Felicity of their Gods; which is no other than a state of An∣nihilation. For first they pass thro' the Bodies of living Creatures, Beasts, and Birds, 
&c.
 and they are receiv'd into a place they call 
Naxac, i. e. the place of Torments.
 Whence they being, after a long Confinement, set free, they are admitted into 
Sevum,
 a second re∣ceptacle for departed Souls; a place of all sorts of sensual Pleasures, and a true 
Mahometan
 Paradise. Having ac∣complish'd their time in this likewise, they arrive at their last and irrever∣sible state, which they call 
Nibam,
 which imports as much among them as a total Privation of the Essence both of Soul and Body, or a state of Annihi∣lation.


But this is to be said for them, that they are not so wedded to any of these Opinions, as not to be willing e∣nough to hearken to, and embrace o∣ther Doctrines, when they are made known to them.


They have a strong Opinion of the Sanctity of Apes and Crocodiles; in∣somuch that they think them infallibly happy, who chance to be devoured by them.


Every Year they keep five solemn Festivals, which in their Language are by a general name called 
Sapans,
 and distinguish'd by the Names 
Giachie, Ca∣tena Giaimo, Segienod, Daiche
 and 
Donon;
 the first of these is solemniz'd about thirty six Miles from the City of 
Pegu,
 the King, Queen, and whole Court be∣ing oblig'd to be present, with great Pomp and Splendour. The second is observ'd in the City of 
Pegu,
 where the chief Men erect Pillars and Py∣ramids of different Fashions, round which in the Night they hang light∣ed Torches and Wax Candles, and the like, to enlighten those that come to Worship the great Idol. The Third is kept in Honour of a particular Idol,


before which the King, Queen, and their Children, present themselves in Triumphal Chariots. The Fourth is the Feast of Water, the King, Nobles, and all the People sporting themselves by throwing Water one upon another; and 'tis impossible to pass the Streets without being soundly wet. Lastly, the Fifth is celebrated only at 
Macao,
 but the King and whole Court are always there; and their greatest Recreation and Entertainment is to see the Courti∣sans in their Barks upon the Water; the Prize of the first being a Statue of Gold; to the second, one of Silver; and all the rest are expos'd to the Derision of the Spectators.


The King of 
Pegu
 has been reckon'd by some Authors, next to the 
Great Mo∣gul,
 and the Emperour of 
China,
 one of the greatest Princes of the 
East.
 Espe∣cially during the Reign of 
Brama,
 who was able to bring an Army into the Field, consisting of above a Million and half of Men, and not arm above one in ten of his Subjects. And his Son lay Siege to 
Joudia
 the Capital City of 
Si∣am,
 with an Army of Nine Hundred Thousand Men; and had certainly ta∣ken


it, had not the besieg'd found means to 
drown the Country
 round about; which Inundation swept away all that vast Army, except Seventy Thousand Men, many that escap'd drowning being af∣terwards destroy'd by the 
Siameses,
 sal∣lying out upon them, shut in by the Water, in 
Barges;
 but the rest, after much hardship, without either Horses or Baggage, got back to 
Martaban.
 This Misfortune was follow'd by several o∣thers; for being incens'd by his Losses, he grew Cruel and Tyrannical against his own Subjects, provoking them thereby to Rebel against, or at least Revolt from him.




















Fort St.
 George 
January
 1st, 
Anno, 1679/80.


A Collection of 
Coyns
 now Currant in the Kingdoms of 
Indostan, Persia, Gulcondah, Vizapore, Japan, Syam, Pegu, Atchein, Quedda, Arabia,
 &c. With their several Weights, Fineness and Values here at this present, 
&c.






N
o


Ps.


 


oz.


dw.


gr.


 


Matts


Pa


fa


ca:


Pa


fa


ca:


Pa


fa


ca:






 


 


 


 


 


 


Indostan.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






1


1


The Gold Mohurpo.


 


7


2


fine.


9


7/8


 


 


 


3


22


3


 


 


 






2


1


The Silver Rupee.


 


6


19


 


9


½


 


 


 


 


10


3


 


 


 






 


1


The Copper Pice.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


3


33


 






 


 


The Cowree Shell.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


Persia.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






3


1


The Silver Abass 5 sh.


 


5


20


 


9


 


 


 


 


 


8


 


 


 


 






4


1


Ditto of 4 Shahees.


 


4


16


 


8


½


 


 


 


 


6


3


 


 


 






5


2


The Silver Mamoode.


 


2


8


 


7


¾


 


2


4


 


4


8


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


Golcondah.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


19


5






6


1


The Silver Rupee.


 


7


2


 


9


½


 


 


 


 


11


 


 


 


 






7


 


Ditto Half.


 


3


13


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


5


3


 


 


 






8


4


Quarter.


 


1


18½


 


 


 


 


2


5


 


11


 


 


 


 






9


4


Eighths.


 


 


21¼


 


 


 


 


1


2½


 


5


3


 


 


 






10


8


Sixteenths.


 


 


10 5/8


 


 


 


 


 


4¼


 


5


3


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


1


2


3






 


 


The Pagoda of


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






11


1


Madrass.


 


2


5


 


8


⅛


 


 


 


1


 


 


 


 


 






12


1


Polliacatt.


 


2


5


 


8


5/8


 


 


 


1


 


3


 


 


 






13


1


Gulcondah.


 


2


4½


 


8


½


 


 


 


 


35


3


 


 


 








14


1


Ditto half Pa.


 


1


2½


 


8


5/8


 


 


 


 


18


1


 


 


 






15


1


Cavere Pack.


 


2


5


 


8


½


 


 


 


 


35


4


 


 


 






16


1


St. Thoma.


 


2


5


 


8


¼


 


 


 


 


34


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


5


15


5






 


 


The Gold Fannam of


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






17


2


Madrass.


 


 


2¼


 


4


3/8


 


1


 


 


2


 


 


 


 






18


1


Polliacatt.


 


 


6


 


2


7/8


 


1


2


 


2


4


 


 


 






19


2


Trevelore.


 


 


6


 


4


9/16


 


2


⅛


 


4


1½


 


 


 






20


1


Carullepollam.


 


 


6


 


4


9/16


 


2


⅛


 


2


1


 


 


 






21


1


Trippote


 


 


6


 


3


 


 


 


 


 


1


3


 


 


 






22


1


Madrepack.


 


 


6


 


3


¼


 


 


 


 


1


3


 


 


 






23


1


Apperingee.


 


 


3


 


10


 


 


 


 


 


2


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


10


 






 


 


The Copper Cash of


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


1


Golcondah.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


2


Madrass.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


1


Polliacatt.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


1


Metchlepatam.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


Vizapore.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






24


1


The Silver Coyns the same with Gul∣condah, except the ¼ Rupee of Seere Cawn.


 


1


18½


 


9


½


 


 


 


 


2


4


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


2


4








 


 


The Gold Pagoda of Sanagree.


 


 


 


Vizapore.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






25


1


 


 


2


4


 


8


¼


 


 


 


 


34


3


 


 


 






26


1


Chengie.


 


2


4½


 


8


¼


 


 


 


 


34


 


 


 


 






27


1


Porto Novo.


 


1


16


 


8


½


 


 


 


 


27


 


 


 


 






28


1


Jellice ½ Pa.


 


1


2


 


8


¼


 


 


 


 


17


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


3


4


3






 


 


The Gold Fannam of


 


 


 


 


 


 


va


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






29


1


Candera.


 


 


6


 


5


¼


 


 


 


 


3


 


 


 


 






30


2


Arrellure.


 


 


6


 


3


¼


 


 


3


 


3


 


 


 


 






31


1


Neggapatam.


 


 


6


 


3


¼


 


1


 


 


1


3


 


 


 






32


1


Madre Naigue.


 


 


5¼


 


3


 


 


 


 


 


1


5


 


 


 






33


2


Jelcurcoo.


 


 


6


 


3


½


 


2


3


 


5


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


14


2






 


 


 


 


 


 


Atchein.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






34


2


The Gold Mace.


 


 


9½


 


7


 


 


5


⅛


 


10


1½


 


10


1½






 


 


 


 


 


 


Quedda.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






35


2


The Gold Copan or Mace.


 


 


10


 


8


 


 


6


 


 


12


 


 


12


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


Goa.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






36


1


The Gold St. Thoma.


 


2


5½


 


7


¼


 


 


 


 


32


2


 


 


 






37


 


The Silv. Sherephene.


 


7


4


 


7


 


 


 


7


 


7


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


Japan.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


1


3


2








38


 


The Gold Copan.


 


11


10


 


8


½


 


 


 


5


6


 


 


 


 






 


1


Ditto Quarters.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


Syam.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


The Silver Tecull.


 


7


4


 


9


½


 


12


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


Ditto Halves.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


Quarters,


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






42


 


Eighths.


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


1


3


 


 


 






 


 


Gold Matts 23 — 
Ps.
 their fineness, as p N
o
 
viz.
 p m
o


 


 


 


 


N
o
 


Matts


N
o
 12th.




Ma.


 


 


 


 


 


 












OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Nature of the 
SILK-WORMS.


IN 
India
 the 
Silk-Worms
 in 
Novem∣ber
 are in Eggs 12 Days. Or ac∣cording to the Natives Account, one 
Aggoa,
 from which the Silk then made, is called 
Aggoued-bund,
 and is the best that is made all the Year. After twelve Days from the first of 
November,
 the Worms are hatch'd, or come out of their Eggs, and are laid upon Matts.


The four first Days after they are laid upon Matts, they give them Mul∣berry Leaves, cut into small thin pieces, to feed upon Four times a Day, 
viz.
 Morning, Noon, and at 3 and 9 a Clock.


The 5th Day they must not be fed at all.


The 6th day the Worms will be somewhat bigger, and must be fed with big pieces of Leaves, and that four times a Day, according to the times before mention'd.


The 7th, 8th, 9th, feed them as on the 6th day.


The 10th Day they must not be fed at all.


The 11th Day they must be fed with larger pieces of Leaves, and four times a day, as formerly.


The 12th day they are to be fed with whole Leaves, and four times a Day.


The 13th and 14th they must not be fed at all.


The 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, they must be fed with whole Leaves, and four times a day.


The 19th Day, feed them five times, 
viz.
 Morning, Noon, at 3, and 9 a Clock, and at Mid-night, and con∣tinue to feed them so to the 26th in∣clusive.


The Worms from about the 14th day, will begin to be green, and at the 26th day will be about 2¼ Inches long.


The 17th day they will be of a Co∣lour like Yellow and White, and then you must not feed them any more, because they begin to spin.


The 28th day, they must be put upon Ledges of Matt, fasten'd to a large piece of round Matting, the Led∣ges being about an Inch high from the Mat, and running round like a Screw, beginning at the Center of the Mat, and running round at about a hand∣ful or three Inches distance to the Cir∣cumference. When the Worms are put upon those Ledges, they set the Mats leaning in the Sun, about 8 in the Morning, and let them stand for 1½ Hour; then they put them into the House or Shade, leaning against the Wall; after, at 4 a Clock in the After∣noon, they put them again into the Sun, and let them stand 'till Sun-Set; then they put them in the House or Shade, leaning against a Wall, and in this Day and Night's time, they will have made their Houses.


The 29th Day they take the Worms with their new Silk Houses, and put them upon other Mats, flat, without any Ledges or Partitions, and so lay several Mats upon Frames one over another.


The 30, 31, 32, and 33 days, they spin within their Houses of Silk, and then they take each Worm with its House, and shake it at their Ears, and those that are alive, they are good, and fit for Breeders, which are kept for such, and those that make no noise are dead, having spun away their Life. Sometimes ⅛ ¼ 1/16 live; sometimes more, and sometimes less; for great Heats and Colds kill many.


The 34, 35, 36, 37th days, they con∣tinue spinning.


The 38th day the Worms eat thro' their Houses, and are like a Butterfly; after which they take up their Houses, and put the Worms upon new Mats; the Males they know by their slender∣ness, and the Females by the contra∣ry, which, being plac'd near each o∣ther, join; but if there be more of one sort than the other, then after they have done with the lesser number, ei∣ther










Males or Females, they join them with the rest, and let them lie all Night.


The 39th day they throw away the Males.


The 40th the Females lay their Eggs, after which they throw them away likewise. So that the whole Life of these Worms, is but 12 days in the Egg, and 40 days out of it; in all 52 Days.


The next Silk is made in 
January;
 and then the Worms are fourteen days in the Egg, and 40 afterwards before they die. This Silk is called 
Maug-Bund,
 and is the Sixth, and worst sort of Silk. The making of it ends about 
February
 the 14th.


The next is made from 
February
 the 14th to the 24th of 
March,
 and is cal∣led 
Cheita-bund.
 The Worms stay in the Eggs 8 days, and live 32 days af∣ter. This is esteem'd the second sort for goodness.


The next is 
Sauk-Bund,
 esteem'd the fifth sort for Goodness. The Worms stay in their Eggs 8 days, and live 32 days after. The making of this Silk ends about the 6th of 
May.


The next is 
Assoree-Bund,
 esteem'd the 4th sort for Goodness. The Worms continue in the Eggs and die, as the two last sorts. And the making of the Silk ends about the 4th of 
June.


The next is 
Sowaud-Bund,
 and is e∣steem'd the third sort. The making of this also ends about the last of 
Ju∣ly.


In 
August
 and 
September
 no Silk is made, and but very little in 
October.


This is the Nature of the 
Silk-worms
 in the 
Indies
 where the Heat of the Sun renders them much more fruitful than with us; for in 
India
 the Worms breed and spin their Silk six times in the Year, and in 
England
 only once, be∣cause here they remain in the Egg from the latter end of 
August,
 'till a∣bout the latter end of 
May.
 There likewise they are sooner brought to per∣fection, and begin to work sooner, 
viz.
 28 days after they are hatcht, but in 
England
 not 'till the 40th. Where also they are by a third part more tedious in breaking out of their Houses, from the first day of their Spinning, than they are in the 
East,
 which is there done in ten days, but here only in fif∣teen.


The Silk-worm derives its Birth from the Seed of the Butterfly, which is as small as the Heads of Pins, and does somewhat resemble Rape-Seed, being flatted on both sides. This In∣sect, by whose Industry we have the Silk, which is spun out of its Bowels, and artificially form'd by its Mouth into the Fashion of a Clew, differs not very much from a Caterpillar, either in the Shape or Bulk, baiting that this is more Hairy, and its Web is weaker, and of another Colour. And yet for want of Mulberry-Leaves (which is the most proper Food for the Silk-Worm) when they are forc'd to sub∣sist by the Leaves of the Rose-Bush, Lettice, or some others (which some∣times are made use of) this Nourish∣ment either weakens the Thread they Spin, and makes it as useless as that of the Caterpillars, or else they will not work at all. But that which seems most remarkable and wonderful in this Animal, is its change of shape, and one would think of Species, in the transformation of it from a Reptile to a Volatile, from a creeping Worm into a Butterfly. The Grain or Seed


of these Creatures was transported in∣to 
Italy,
 above three hundred Years a∣go, by two Religious Persons, but their Silk was of a longer Date, and brought above a Thousand Years since among the 
Europeans,
 who cal∣led it in Latin, 
Sericum,
 from an O∣riental People, called 
Seres,
 who were very industrious and careful in its Improvement.




FINIS.













