A brief account of the province of Pennsilvania in America lately granted under the great seal of England to William Penn, &c.
Penn, William, 1644-1718.
Approx. 13KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2016-02 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A54105




Wing P1256



ESTC R35101





ocm 14990687




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A brief account of the province of Pennsilvania in America lately granted under the great seal of England to William Penn, &c.
Penn, William, 1644-1718.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


[London :


s.n.,


1681]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Pennsylvania --  History --  Colonial period, ca. 1600-1775.
2013-12 
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images 
2014-06 
Colm MacCrossan 
Sampled and proofread 
2014-06 
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited 
2015-03 
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion 






P1256


R35101


14990687


103043












A Brief Account of the Province of 
Pennsilvania
 in 
America,
 lately granted under the Great Seal of 
England
 to 
William Penn,
 &c.


THe King having been favourably pleased after a long Solicitation, in Right of my Fathers Services, and a considerable part of his Estate, to confer and settle upon me, and my Heirs, a Tract of Land in 
America,
 by the name of 
Pennsylvania;
 with the powers requisite to the well government thereof; I thought good to publish this abreviated account of the former Relation, as less troublesom to Send or Read, for their Satisfa∣ction, that are soberly desirous and resolved for those parts of the World.




I.
 Something of the Place.


The Place lies 600 Miles nearer the 
Sun
 than 
England,
 for 
England
 begins at the 50th. Degree and ten Mi∣nutes of 
North
 Latitude, and this place begins at 40. which is about the Latitude of 
Naples
 in 
Italy,
 or 
Mom∣pellier
 in 
France:
 I shall say little in its praise to excite desires in any; whatever I could truly write as to the Soil, Air and Water, this shall satisfie me, that by the Blessing of God, and the Honesty and Industry of man, it may be a good and Fruitful Land.


For Navigation, it is said to have two Conveniencies, the one by lying Ninescore Miles upon 
Delaware
 River, that is to say, about 70 Miles, before we come to the Falls, where a Vessel of 200 Tuns may Sail, (and some Creeks and small Harbours in that distance, where Ships may come nearer than the Rivers in the Country) and above the Falls for Boats, the other Convenience is through 
Chespapeak-Bay,
 the head falling within this La∣titude.


For Timber & other Wood, there is Variety for the use of man, as 
Oak, Chesnut, Wallnut, Popler, Cedar, Beech,
 &c.


For 
Fowl, Fish
 and 
Wild Deer,
 they are reported to be plentiful in those parts, and 
English
 Provision grows there, and is to be had at reasonable Rates: The Commodities that the Countrey is thought to be capable of, are 
Silk, Flax, Hemp, Wine, Sider, Wood, Madder, Liquorish, Tobacco, Potashes
 and 
Iron;
 and it doth actually produce 
Hides, Tallow, Pipestaves, Beef, Pork, Sheep, Wool, Corn,
 as 
Wheat, Barly, Rye,
 and also 
Furrs,
 as your 
Beaver, Peltree, Mincks, Racoons, Martins,
 and such like; store of which is to be found among the 
Indians,
 that are profitable Commodities in 
Europe.


The way of Trading in those Countries, is thus, they send to the 
Southern
 Plantations, 
Corn, Beef, Pork, Fish,
 and 
Pipstaves,
 and take their Growth and bring for 
England,
 and return with 
English
 Goods to their own Countrey; their 
Furrs
 they bring for 
England,
 and either sell them here, or carry them out again to other parts of 
Europe,
 where they will yield a better price: And for those that will follow Merchandize and Navi∣gation, there is conveniency, and 
Timber
 sufficient for Shipping.






II.
 The Constitutions.


For the Constitution of the Countrey, the Patent shows. 
First, That the People and Governour have a
 Le∣gislative 
Power; so that no Law can be made, nor Money raised, but by the peoples consent.


2dly. 
That the Rights and Freedoms of
 England (the best and largest in 
Europe) shall be in force there.


3dly. 
That making no Law against Allegiance
 (which should we, twere by the Law of 
England
 void of it self that Moment) 
we may Enact what Laws we please for the Good, Prosperity and Security of the
 said Province.


4thly. That so soon as any are Ingaged with me, we shall begin a Scheam or Draught together, such as shall give Ample Testimony of my sincere Inclinations to Encourage Planters, and settle a Free, Just and In∣dustrious 
Colony
 there.






III. The Conditions.


My Conditions will relate to three sorts of People. 
1st.
 Those that will buy. 
2dly.
 Those that take up Land upon Rent. 
3dly.
 Servants. To the 
first,
 The shares I sell shall be certain, as to number of Acres; that is to say, every one shall contain five thousand Acres, free from any 
Indian
 Incumbrance, the Price a Hundred Pounds, and for the Quit Rent but one 
English
 Shilling, or the value of it yearly for a hundred Acres, which such as will may now or hereafter buy of to an Inconsiderable matter; but as I hold by a small Rent of the King, so all must hold of me by some Rent, for their own Security, and the said Quit Rent not to be paid till 
1684.
 Or such as can only reach to small parcels, may ten of them buy, each 
500
 Acres, or any other part of a share, so they be added together to make a Township. To the 
second
 sort that take up Land upon Rent, they shall have liberty so to do, paying yearly one Penny 
per
 Acre, not exceeding two hundred Acres. To the 
third
 sort, to wit, Servants that are carried over, fifty Acres shall be allowed to the Master for every Head, and fifty Acres to every Servant when their time is expired, as well Women as Men: And because some Ingage with me that may not be disposed to go, it were very advisable for every four Sharers to send an Overseer, which would well pay the Cost.


The Divident may be thus, if the Persons concern'd please, a Tract of Land shall be survey'd; say fifty thousand Acres to a hundred Adventurers, in which some of the best shall be set out for Town, or Cities, and there shall be so much ground alloted to each in those Towns as may maintain some Cattle, and produce some Corn: Then the Re∣mainder of the fifty thousand Acres shall be shared among the said Adventurers, whereby every Adventurer will have a considerable quantity of Land together; likewise every one a proportion by a Navigable River, and then backward into the Countrey The manner of Divident I shall not be strict in; we can but speak roughly of the matter here, but let men Skilful in Plantations be consulted, and I shall leave it to the Majority of Votes among the Adventurers when it shall please God we come there, how to fix to their own content.






IV.
 These Persons that Providence seems to have most fitted for Plantations, are


1st. Industrious Husbandmen, and day Labourers, that are hardly able (with extream Labour) to main∣tain their Families and Portion their Children.


2dly, Laborious Handicrafts, especially Carpenters, Masons, Smiths, Weavers, Taylors, Tanners, Shoe-makers, Ship-wrights, 
&c.
 where they may be spared, or are low in the World; and as they shall want no en∣couragement, so their Labour is worth more there than here, and their Provision Cheaper.


3dly. A Plantation seems a fit place for those Ingenious Spirits, that being low in the world, are much Clog'd and Oppressed about a Livelyhood, for the means of Subsisting being easie there, they may have time and opportunity to gratifie their Inclinations, and thereby improve Science and help Nurseries of People.




4thly. A fourth sort of men to whom a Plantation would be proper, takes in those that are younger Brothers of small Inheritances; yet because they would live in sight of their Kindred in some proportion to their Quality, and can't do it without a Labour that looks like Farming; their Condition is too straight for them, and, if married, their Children are often too numerous for the Estate, and are frequently brought up to no Trades, but are a kind of hangers on, or retainers to the Elder Brothers Table and Charity; which is a mis∣chief, as in it self to be lamented, so here to be remedied; for Land they have next to nothing, which (with moderate Labour) produces Plenty of all things necessary for Life, and such an Increase as by Traffique may supply them with all Conveniencies.


Lastly, there are another sort of persons not only fit for, but necessary in Plantations; and that is, men of universal Spirits, that have an eye to the good of Posterity, and that both understand and delight to promote good Discipline and just Government among a plain and well-intending people; such Persons may find room in 
Colonies
 for their good Counsel and Contrivance, who are shut out from being of much use or service to great Nations, under settled Customs.






V.
 The Journey and its Appurtinances, and what is to be done there at first coming


Next let us see, what is fit for the journey and place, when there, and also what may be the Charge of the Voyage, and what is to be expected and done there at first That such as incline to go may not be to seek here, or brought under any disappointment there, the Goods fit to take with them for use, or sell for profit, are all sorts of Apparel, and Utensils for Husbandry and Building, and Houshold-stuff. And because I know how much people are apt to fancy things beyond what they are, and that imaginations are great flatterers of the minds of men: to the end that none may delude themselves with an expectation of an immediate amend∣ment of their Conditions; so soon as it shall please God they arrive there, I would have them understand, That 
they must look for a Winter before a Summer comes;
 and they must be willing to be two or three years without some of the Conveniencies they enjoy at home: And yet I must needs say, That 
America
 is another thing than it was at the first Plantation of 
Virginia
 and 
New-England;
 for there is better Accomodation, and 
English
 Provisions are to be had at easier rates. However I am inclin'd to set down particulars, as near as those inform me that know the place, and have been Planters both in that, and in the neighbouring 
Colonies.


1st. The passage will come for Masters and Mistresses to about five Pounds ten Shillings a Head, for Ser∣vants five Pounds a Head, and for Children under seven years of age fifty shillings, except they suck, then nothing.


Next being (by the Mercy of God) safely Arrived in 
September
 or 
October,
 two men may clear as much Ground by Spring (when they set the Corn of that Country) as will bring in that time twelve Month for∣ty Barrels, which amounts to two Hundred Bushels, which makes twenty five Quarters of Corn; so that the first year they must buy Corn, which is usually very plentiful: They may so soon as they come, buy Cowes, more or less, as they want, or are able, which are to be had at easie Rates; For Swine, they are plentiful and Cheap, these will quickly Increase to a Stock, so that after the first year, what with the Poorer sort, sometimes labouring to others; and the more able Fishing, Fowling, and sometime buying, they may do very well, till their own Stocks are sufficient to supply them and their Families, which will quickly be and to spare, if they follow the 
English
 Husbandry, as they do in 
New-England,
 and 
New-York,
 and get 
Winter
 Fodder for their Stock.


To conclude, I desire all my dear Country Folks, who may be inclin'd to go into those parts, to consider seriously the Premisses, as well the present inconveniencies, as future Ease and Plenty, that so none may move rashly. nor from a Fickle, but Solid Mind, having above all things an Eye to the Providence of God in the disposal of themselves: And I would further advise all such, at least to have the Permission, if not the good liking of their near Relations, for that is both Natural, and a Duty Incumbent upon all, and by this means will Natural Affection be preserved, and Friendly and Profitable Correspondence be maintained be∣tween them; in all which I beseech Almighty God to direct us, that his Blessing may attend our Honest In∣deavour, and then the Consequence of all our Undertaking will turn to the Glory of his great Name, and the true Happiness of us and our Posterity, 
Amen.


William Penn.












POSTSCRIPT.


WHoever are desirous to be concern'd with me in this Province, they may be treated with, and further satisfied at 
Philip Ford
's in 
Bow-lane
 in 
Cheapside,
 and at 
Thomas Rudyard
's, or 
Benjamin Clark
's in 
George-yard
 in 
Lombard-street London.









