The pleasant adventures of the witty Spaniard, Lazarillo de Tormes of his birth and education, of his arch tricks ... : being all the true remains of that so much admired author : to which is added The life and death of young Lazarillo ...
Lazarillo de Tormes. English.
Approx. 166KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 111 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2016-02 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A55115




Wing P2529



ESTC R34555





ocm 14509974




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The pleasant adventures of the witty Spaniard, Lazarillo de Tormes of his birth and education, of his arch tricks ... : being all the true remains of that so much admired author : to which is added The life and death of young Lazarillo ...
Lazarillo de Tormes. English.
Hurtado de Mendoza, Diego, 1503-1575.
[13], 203 p., [1] leaf of plates : ill.  


London :


Printed by J. Leake ...,


MDCLXXXVIII [1688]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
2013-12 
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images 
2014-06 
Colm MacCrossan 
Sampled and proofread 
2014-06 
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited 
2015-03 
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion 






P2529


R34555


14509974


102456














THE Pleasant Adventures OF THE WITTY 
SPANIARD, Lazarillo de Tormes.
 Of his Birth and Education; Of his arch Tricks in the Service of the Blind Man, the Priest, the Squire, and several others; Of his dining with 
Duke Humphrey, &c.
 Of his Voyage to the 
Indies,
 his Shipwrack, and of his being taken out of the Sea, and shown for a Monstrous Fish: And lastly, Of his turning Hermit, and writing these Memoirs. 
Being all the true Remains of that so much admired Author.
 To which is added, The Life and Death of 
Young Lazarillo,
 Heir apparent to 
Old Lazarillo de Tormes:
 By which it plainly appears. That the Son would have far exceeded the Father in Inge∣nuity, had he not come to an untimely End in a 
House-of-Office.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
J. Leake,
 and Sold by most Booksellers in 
London
 and 
Westminster,
 MDCLXXXVIII.










depiction of a boy or Lazarillo de Tormes kneeling beside a statue of a bull, into which a male figure or blind man pushes his head; in the background a female figure














LICENSED,


September
 19. 1687.








TO THE READER.


THE History of the famous 
La∣zarillo,
 needs no Pream∣bulatory Discourses to make it pleasing. The 
French, Dutch, Italians,
 and, in a word, almost all Nations have wel∣com'd him into their Language.




The nicest Criticks allow him to be a witty Fellow; and judge his Adventures may be read with as much Edificati∣on as his Country-mens, 
Guzman,
 or the Brain∣sick Knight of the 
Man∣cha.


He was no such Fool to fight with a Wind∣mill; or take a Flock of Sheep for a mighty Ar∣my. All his conflicts were with his hard For∣tune, against which it be∣comes

 every wise Man to combate.


If a Man wants Diver∣sion, and be out of Hu∣mour; he need only read what happened between him and the worthy Squire his Master, to put him into a fit of Laugh∣ter.


The Editions, which have as yet appeared, of this Book in 
English,
 are so full of flat and tedious Expressions (besides the frequent and bold profa∣nations

 and appeals to Heaven) as have necessa∣rily required this new Translation; wherein no∣thing has been left out, but needless and obsolete words, and such matters of Fact, as 
Lazarillo
 was never guilty of, as you'll see in the Advertisement which follows, to which I refer you if you need further satisfaction.








THE CONTENTS.




PART I.


CHAP. I. LAzarillo
 relates his Birth, to∣gether with the Amours of 
Antoinette Peres,
 his Mo∣ther, with the 
Moore Zaide. Page 1


CHAP. II. Lazarillo
's Mother places him in the Service of a blind Man. This Man's Conditions, and the pleasant Tricks that were plaid betwixt them. 
Page 7




CHAP. III.
 The sad Story of the Pot of Wine. 
Page 14


CHAP. IV.
 The Story of the Bunch of Grapes; and the Sausage, which in roast∣ing was changed into a Worm-eaten Root. 
Page 20


CHAP. V.
 Of the 
Leap
 which the blind Man made. 
Page 27


CHAP. VI. Lazarillo
 enters himself into the service of a Priest. His Master's covetous Humour described. 
Page 30


CHAP. VII. Lazarillo
 relates the Story of the Tinker's coming to him. 
Page 39


CHAP. VIII.
 How 
Lazarillo
 counterfeited the Mice. 
Page 44


CHAP. IX.
 How the Priest discovered the Snake, and 
Lazarillo
's being turned out of his Service thereupon 
Page 51




CHAP. X.
 How 
Lazarillo
 enters himself into the Service of a 
Squire,
 and what happened thereupon. 
Page 58


CHAP. XI.
 How 
Lazarillo
 dined with 
Duke Humphrey Page 62


CHAP. XII.
 An account of the 
Squire
's Bed. 
Page 68


CHAP. XIII.
 He turns Mumper again. His Ma∣sters Discourse thereupon. 
Page 74


CHAP. XIV.
 He dines his Master the 
Squire,
 as well as himself, with what he had begged. 
Page 80


CHAP. XV.
 The Extremities to which the 
Squire
 and 
Lazarillo
 were reduced. 
Page 86


CHAP. XVI.
 The Reasons which moved the 
Squire
 to come to 
Toledo. Page 92


CHAP. XVII.
 How the 
Squire
 was interrupted. An Inventory of his Moveables.

 He leaves his Servant 
Lazarillo
 in the Lurch. 
Page 99


CHAP. XVIII.
 How 
Lazarillo
 enters into the Ser∣vice of a Friar, and afterwards into that of a Pardon-monger. 
Page 106


CHAP. XIX. Lazarillo
 serves a Painter; a Church∣man; and after these a Serjeant; and lastly becomes a Common Cryer. 
Page 116


CHAP. XX. Lazarillo
 marries Mr. 
Arch-Dea∣con
's Maid. 
Page 119


CHAP. XXI. Lazarillo
 gets acquainted with some 
Germans
 of the Train of 
Charles V.
 and what happened on this Oc∣casion. 
Page 123








PART II.


CHAP. I. LAzarillo
 grows an ill Husband. Death of the Arch-Deacon. 
Lazarillo
's Misery after his Death. 
Page 131


CHAP. II. Lazarillo
 resolves to make a Voyage to the 
Indies.
 He meets with the 
Squire,
 who relates to him his Adventures. 
Page 138


CHAP. III.
 The 
Squire
 continues the Relation of his Adventures. 
Lazarillo
 and he associate in the Voyage to the 
Indies. Page 145


CHAP. VI. Lazarillo
 makes Shipwrack at his Return from the 
Indies.
 Cer∣tain Fisher-men carry him tho∣roughout

 all 
Spain
 as a monstrous Fish. How they were discovered and punished. 
Page 152


CHAP. V.
 How 
Lazarillo
 became an Hermit and wrote these Memoirs. 
Page 164.






BOOK II.


COntaining the Life and Death of 
Young Lazarillo,
 who was no way inferior to his Father, 
Old Lazarillo,
 in all sorts of Rogueries. 














THE Pleasant LIFE, AND Rare 
Adventures,
 of the Witty 
SPANIARD, Lazarillo de Tormes.




CHAP. I. Lazarillo
 relates his Birth, together with the Amours of 
Antoinette Peres,
 his Mother, with the 
Moor Zaide.


MY Name is 
Lazaro de Tormes;
 and am the Son of 
Thomas Gonsales
 and 
Antoinette Peres,
 both Natives of

 
Tejares,
 a Village near 
Salamanca.
 I was born on the River of 
Tor∣mes,
 whence I took my Sur-name.


My Father (Peace be with his Soul) had the charge of a Mill, which stood on this River, where∣in for the space of Fifteen Years, he laboured like a Man that under∣stood his Trade. My Mother be∣ing one day in the Mill, big with me, fell in Travel, and was there delivered of me. Whence you may see, 'tis not without Reason, I call my self 
de Tormes.


I was about Eight Years old, when my Father was accused of bleeding the Sacks of Corn, which were brought thither to be ground. He, good Man, being loath to add Lying to his other Crime, confess∣ed the Fact, and patiently under∣went his deserved Punishment.


An Army was raised about this time against the 
Moors,
 and my Fa∣ther who found himself a banish'd

 Man from his Country, for the Mishap aforesaid, enter'd himself into the Service of an Officer; who dying in this War, my Father, like a faithful Servant, followed his Master, soon after, into the other World.


What could my Mother do, a poor comfortless Widow, after the Loss of so dear a Husband? She re∣solves to live amongst vertuous people, determining now to be∣come vertuous her self; wherefore she leaves the Country, to inhabit in the City; takes a little House, and keeps a small Ord'nary, and turns Landress to certain Grooms; into whose Stables having often oc∣casion to resort, she grew into Fa∣miliarity with a certain 
Moor,
 who look'd after the Horses under the Grooms: And they were so good Friends in a little time, that the 
Moor
 came often in the Night to us, whence he did not depart till

 the Morning; he sometimes also came in the Day-time under pre∣tence of buying Eggs, though we never sold any; and, in short, fre∣quented our House as it if had been his own.


This Familiarity, at first, dis∣gusted me; his black and ugly Countenance making me afraid: But when I perceived, his Visits made our Pot boil, I soon pacified my self; for he seldom came empty-handed.


But at length, Matters went so forward, that my Mother brought forth a young 
Black,
 it being my charge to rock and play with him. I shall never forget, how one Day my Father-in-law, the 
Moor,
 sport∣ing with his little Son; the Child observing my Mother and I were White, and his Father Black, he ran away affrighted to my Mother, and stretching out his Finger, cry∣ed, 
Mamma, the Devil.
 Where∣at

 the 
Moor,
 laughing, said, 
Thou Bastard, art thou afraid of thy Father?
 As much a Child as I was, I could not choose but reflect on these Words of my little Bro∣ther; saying within my self, 
How many are there in the World, who laugh at others, for want of knowing themselves?
 At length the Trade which 
Zaide
 drove (for this was the 
Moor
's Name) came to the Master of the Horse's Ear; and Matters being searched into, it ap∣peared that my Father stole half of the Oats allowed the Horses, not sparing the Horse-Cloths, Shooes, Bridles, and every thing else which he could carry off fairly; which things he would daily bring to my Mother for the bringing up my young Brother, all which was proved against him; and I being examined, through Fear confess'd, I had, by my Mother's order, sold several of these things: Whereup∣on

 my Father-in-law was con∣demned to be severely whipt, and my Mother strictly charged, on pain of an Hundred Stripes, to enter no more into the Stables, nor admit the unfortunate 
Zaide
 into her House.


My poor Mother submitted to this cruel Sentence without mur∣muring; and to avoid the giving Occasion to ill Tongues, she changed her Lodging, and placed her self as a Servant in an Inn.


In this laborious Condition, she made an hard shift to bring up my younger Brother till he could go alone; and, as for my part, I was at that Age, that I was very useful in tending the Guests.








CHAP. II. Lazarillo
's Mother places him in the Service of a blind Man. This Man's Conditions, and the plea∣sant Tricks which were play'd be∣twixt them.


A Blind Man came and lodged in this Inn; and hearing some discourse of me, judged I might be a fit person to lead and tend him; and therefore he de∣manded me of my Mother; who not suffering her self to be much entreated, only told him, that I was the Son of a good Father, who dyed in the defence of the Faith against the Infidels, at the Battle of 
Gelves;
 and, that she hoped, I should prove no less an honest Man; and, being a poor Orphelin, entreated him he would become a Father to me. The blind

 Man promised more than she could expect; or he, indeed, perform; whereupon, I immediately entred into my Office.


He remained some Days at 
Sala∣manca;
 but finding his Gain small there, he resolved to part thence. Having therefore taken my leave of my Mother, we left that Place.


Coming on the way as far as the entrance on the Bridge, there stands a Statue of Stone, represen∣ting a Bull: My blind Master bad me draw near it, saying, 
Lazarillo, Put but thine Ear to this Bull, and thou shalt hear a strange kind of Noise;
 which I had no sooner done, but this old Rogue push'd my Head with that devillish force against it, that I thought he had split my Skul in a Thousand pieces: Scarce had I the use of my Senses for Three Days together; and he, for his part, was bursting out ever and anon into Laughter (which

 was no small aggravation of my Pain) telling me, 
That a blind Man's Boy, should have one Trick more than the Devil himself.
 Up∣on this, I began to consider, That 'twas time for me to open mine Eyes, and look to my self, being a poor Boy that was left alone to shift in the World.


We continued on our Journey, and he instructed me by the way in the 
Canting
 Language, which, to his great joy, I soon learn'd: And he further said to me, 
See, Friend
 Lazarillo, 
I can neither give thee Gold nor Silver, but thou shalt not want such Counsel as is of far greater Value:
 And truly, his Words were weighty; and though he was blind, yet he taught me to know the World.


He was a mighty ingenious Man in his way; he knew more Pray∣ers by Heart, than all the blind Men besides in 
Spain;
 and could

 so tone 'em, as made all the Peo∣ple in the Church to cast an Eye towards him. His Mein was de∣vout, grave, and humble; no Gri∣maces, unseemly rolling the Whites, or wry-Mouths, were ob∣servable in him.


He had a Thousand ways to draw Money from People, having Prayers by Rote, for all occasi∣ons; for Women that were bar∣ren, for those in Labour, for such as had severe Husbands, and those that were stale Maids. He could tell the big-belly'd Women, whe∣ther what they went with was a Boy or a Girl.


As for Physical Remedies, 
Galen
 was a mere Ass to him. He had admirable Secrets for the Tooth∣ach, all sorts of Cholicks, and Fits of the Mother. When any one complained to him of any Distem∣per, he had immediately a choice Receipt ready: 
Do this,
 said he to

 one; 
You must use such a thing,
 to another; 
Gather this Herb, take such a Root.
 All the World ran after him, and especially the Wo∣men-kind, who took him for a Man inspired; though he was, in truth, the basest, and most covetous Hound on the Face of the Earth.


He was not content to pinch his own Belly, but would needs starve me too; however, it seldom hap∣pened but I made my part good with him, and became the great∣est shearer in his Gain.


He was wont to keep his Provi∣sion in a little Cloth-bag, whose Mouth was fastened with a Lock; and when he put in, or took out thence any thing, he would be so on his Guard, that the craftiest Fel∣low in the World, must be discou∣raged from attempting to cheat him of the least Crumb; and there∣fore I must be contented with that small Allowance he gave me:

 which would not amount to Two Morsels. But when he closed up his Bag, and imagined my Thoughts diverted on something else, I would steal softly to it, and ripping one of the Sides of it, take thence pie∣ces of Bread and Meat, and then dexterously sow up the Breach; and thus did I preserve my Life from Famine.


When any one gave him a piece of Money, whip it went into my Mouth, if it could be changed in∣to a piece of lesser Value, which I had ready in my Hand for him. He oft complained to me, saying, 
Lazarillo, What the Devil means it, that since thou hast been with me I receive but half the Money for a Prayer which I was wont to have? surely thou hast brought Misfortune with thee.


But to be even with the People, he would cut a Prayer in half; and therefore ordered me as soon as

 the person that imployed him was gone, to twitch him by the Cloak: Then presently changing his Tone, he would cry aloud, 
Who will hear the Life of this Saint,
 or, 
hear this or the other Prayer?








CHAP. III.
 The sad Story of the Pot of Wine.


AT Dinner or Supper time, he was wont to have an 
Earthen Pot of Wine
 standing by him, which was to him instead of a Bottle, which I would now and then whisk up to my Mouth, taking Two or Three go-downs, and then gently set it in its place. This Trade lasted not long with me; for, he not finding his measure, held his Pot thence-forward by the Two Ears. However, this Caution avail'd him little; for getting a Reed, I drew the Wine out with great ease. The old Thief, I believe, heard me suck at last; and therefore claps the Pot between his Knees, and laying one Hand upon it he feeds himself

 with the other. But I was so used to Wine, that, like Monsieur 
Ra∣goo,
 I could live better without a Shirt, or Hose, than without Wine; however, my Reed stood me in no stead.


I bethought my self, after this, of making a little hole at the bottom of the Pot, and stopping it with soft Wax; Then at Supper-time, pre∣tending to be extream cold, I would get between my Master's Legs, and then take our little Lamp, as it were to warm my self, and applying it to the hole of the Pot, melt the Wax; and then would the Wine spurt out like a Spring into my Mouth, which would be sure not to lose a drop. When my blind Master was for ha∣ving th'other bout at it, the Pot was dry; and not being able to di∣vine whence this could happen, he would curse and storm like a mad Man. 
You cannot,
 said I, 
Ʋncle,

 mistrust me to have drunk your Wine, you take sufficient care of that.
 He replyed not a Word, but turned and felt the Pot so on all sides, that he unhappily light on the hole. He seemed at that time to take no notice of it; but the next day planting my self at the accustomed time and place in the same posture, whilst I was bibbing with my Face upwards, in a pleasing man∣ner, with my Eyes half shut, the enraged and cruel blind Man took his opportunity to be revenged of me; for, lifting up with both his Hands this 
sweet
 and 
sowr Pot,
 he discharged it so fiercely on my Face, that I thought the Roof of the House had fallen upon me. Im∣possible 'tis to imagine the Amaze∣ment I was in; the Pot was beat into I know not how many pieces, some of which stuck in my Face, and broke several Teeth out of my Head, which I want to this day.




Since that time, I could never look on this malicious old Rogue without ill Will. He might make much of me, if he pleased; yet I knew well enough, the blow he had given rejoiced his Heart, and therefore I could never forgive him. He wash'd my Wounds with Wine, and grinningly said to me, 
Thou seest,
 Lazarillo, 
how that which has made the Wound, now cures it.
 This Raillery was very well, but it did not please me.


When I was half cured I began to think, that should this blind Wretch give me many such blows, he would soon be rid of me; but I resolved to prevent him by leaving him, tho' I did it not presently.


Had I been the best humour'd Youth in the World, and forgot∣ten the 
Blow with the Pot,
 yet the ill usage he shewed me afterwards, was such, as I could never forgive. He was always beating me, pinch∣ing

 me or pulling me by the Hair. If any tender-hearted body blamed him, then would he recite the ad∣venture of 
the Pot of Wine; and you believe,
 says he, 
that this is some innocent Wretch? I tell you, the Devil himself cannot out-do him, in all manner of Roguery:
 which made those that heard him, lift up their Hands, and cross themselves, saying ever at parting, 
Punish him, punish him, he will thank you for it another day:
 which Counsel the Old Man would not fail to put in practice, nor I be behind hand in my Revenges on him; for I conti∣nually led him through the worst ways. Were there any heap of Stones near us, any puddles and heaps of Dirt, he was sure to pass through 'em. I mattered not the having my part, being willing to put out one of my own Eyes) as they say) to put out both his, that never had any. At every trip he

 made, he would be sure to run his Nails into my Head, or make an Anvil of it with the handle of his Stick. It was to no purpose for me to swear, I was not in fault, and that there was no better Way; this would not pass with him, he was too subtle to believe me.








CHAP. IV.
 The Story of the Bunch of Grapes; and the Sausage, which in roast∣ing, was changed into a Worm-eaten Root.


MY Master leaving 
Salaman∣ca,
 he designed for the Coasts of 
Toledo:
 and tho' Mens Charities were not very great, in those Parts; yet being a wealthy sort of People, he was led thither by the 
Spanish
 Proverb, which says, 
That a Man had better have to do with a rich Niggard, than a Cha∣ritable poor Man.
 We steer'd then this Course, passing always through the best Villages, where, if we found any Encouragement, we made some stay.


At length we arrived at a Town called 
Almorx,
 in the time when they gather their Grapes, where

 my Master had a Bunch of excel∣lent good ones given him; which he would have kept willingly till next morning, but it being very ripe, 'twould have been spoiled. He was forced therefore to eat it; and, to make me amends for the blows and ill usage he had given me that day, he determined to take me in for a Partner.


We sate down then in a shallow gravel Pit, and he said to me, 
La∣zarillo, come, let's eat this Bunch of Grapes, dividing them like Brethren; and therefore do thou take a Grape, and I another; but take no more than one at a time; and I, for my part, do promise thee to do the same.
 The matter was agreed on; but at the second twitch, the Old Knave broke his Promise, and be∣gan to take 'em by two's, suspect∣ing I did the like. When I saw he infring'd the Articles, I did not content my self with doing as he

 did, but pluck'd Three at a time; and being by means of this expedi∣tion, come to an end, he held the stalk wagging in his Hand; and shaking his Head, cried out, 
Ah!
 Lazarillo, 
thou hast deceived me: I can safely swear on my Soul, thou hast taken Three or Four at a time. Pardon me, dear Ʋncle,
 said I, 
my Conscience is as tender as other folks. Prethee,
 replied he, 
did I not ob∣serve, when thou sawest me eat Two at a time, thou saidst nothing? whence I certainly conclude, thou hast went beyond me.


We were lodg'd in an Inn at 
Sca∣lona,
 where he gave me a good fat Sausage to roast for him; and ha∣ving eaten the slices of Bread, which he had put under it that the drip∣ping might not be lost, he drew a small spil of Money out of his Purse, and bad me go and fetch him some Wine.




Occasion, as they say, makes the Thief; for there lying in the Chim∣ney-corner a great Worm-eaten Root, which was thrown aside as not fit for the Pot; and the Blind Man and I being alone, I shut mine Eyes to all that might hap∣pen; and whilst my Master was putting his Hand into his Purse, I whipt the Sausage off the Spit, and dexterously clapt on this Root in its place. I took the Money for the Wine, and gave him the han∣dle of the Spit to turn; he roast∣ing that Root, which was so bad that 'twas not fit to boil.


I soon dispatch'd my Sausage, as I went for the Wine; and at my Return, found my old blind Ma∣ster squeezing the roasted Root, betwixt Two slices of Bread, thinking it to be the Sausage; but biting into it, and finding what it was, he fell into such a fit of raging, that he knew not where he was.

 
What a Devil is the meaning of this,
 says he, Lazarillo? 
What!
 repli∣ed I, 
I hope you have nothing to lay to my Charge, when you know I have been gone for Wine? some body has come in and put this Trick upon you. No, no,
 cried the old Fellow, 
I never let the Spit go out of my Hand; no body has touched it.
 I then be∣gan to swear, I was no ways con∣cerned in the matter; but he rest∣ed not much on my Oaths and Im∣precations.


He then rose up, took me fast by the Crown, and began to smell my Breath: In the rage he was in, he did not the work by halves; but opening my Mouth with both his Hands, he thrust his great sharp Snout down my Throat. The fear which I was in, by this sud∣dain surprize, together with his Elephants Trunk stopping my Breath, made me cast up this undi∣gested Meat: What would I not

 have given to a been at that time Forty Foot under Ground; being in a worse condition, than half dead. My blind Master was now so transported with fury, that had not people entred in at the Out-cry, he had certainly strangled me.


They drew me out of his Hands, which remained full of the little Hair I had left in our past Com∣bats. He told the whole Story, with all its Aggravations, to as many as would hear it; not for∣getting the Adventure of the 
Pot of Wine,
 and the 
Bunch of Grapes.
 The Old Fellow related my prow∣esses so pleasantly, that, in as bad a condition as I was, I must judge my self guilty of the greatest stu∣pidity, should I not laugh for company.


But considering what had past, I was extream mad at my self, that I had not bit off his Nose.

 My stomach, without doubt, would have better retained that than the Sausage. Our Hostess and the rest of the good Folks there present, made peace between us. They wash'd my Neck and Face with the Wine I went for; which made the blind Man joakingly say; 
This Boy costs me more in Wine for him in one Year, than I drink in two:
 Lazarillo, 
Thou must own a greater obligation to Wine, than to thy Father: Thou hast received thy Life from him but once; whereas Wine restores to thee thy Life every day.
 Those that heard him jear me in this manner, broke out into such fits of laughter, as put me be∣yond all patience.








CHAP. V.
 Of the 
Leap
 which the blind Man made.


COnsidering the state of Affairs between us, I was resolved of a long time to leave him; but this last Adventure fully determin∣ed me. We went the next morn∣ing to beg in the Town; and it having rained hard the night be∣fore, we sheltered our selves un∣der a certain Gate, there to expect people as they pass'd by; but Night approaching and the Rain not ceasing, the blind Man said to me, 
Lazarillo, this Rain is like to hold, for the darker it grows, the thicker it falls: Let us then return Home betimes.


Betwixt us, and our Inn, there ran a great Canal, which was much encreased by the Rain: I

 said to him then, 
Ʋncle, this Gut∣ter is very large, but if it please you, we will go a little further, where we may pass without being wet-shod. Now thou art honest,
 said he, 
lead me thither, for 'tis not good to take Water into one's Shooes this Winter Weather.


Things being in this Order, I lead him from under the Gate, and brought him to a great Stone Pillar, and placed him directly be∣fore it: The Rain fell with great Violence, and he was willing to be as soon out of it, as he could. 
Now,
 said I, 
Ʋncle, you must make your Leap. But do you jump first,
 says he, 
Boy;
 which I did, and stood behind the Pillar, watching him as a Man that observes the Motions and Turnings of a wild Bull. I had no sooner said, 
Come Ʋncle;
 but he, like a Ram, went backwards, and then came running, and leap'd with all his force, with

 his Head against the Pillar: I heard his Head sound like a lea∣thern Bottle with the blow. The blind Man fell down backwards half dead; and seeing him fall, 
O, are you come,
 said I; 
You that have such a good Nose to smell out the Sausage, can't, it seems, smell a Pil∣lar! Now, I believe, we are at such an even Reckoning, that we cannot justly laugh at one another.
 I bad him, 
God b'w'y',
 and left him to the care of those that came out to suc∣cour him; and so tripp'd away, without looking behind me, ar∣riving before Night at 
Torrigo;
 knowing not to this Day what was become of my blind Master; and indeed never much enquired after him.








CHAP. VI. Lazarillo
 enters himself into the Service of a Priest. His Master's covetous Humour described.


NOT believing my self in Safety at 
Torrigo,
 I travel∣led to a Village, at greater di∣stance, called 
Maqueda;
 where my Sins made me meet with a Priest, who seemed to me to be the Curate of the Place; and in which I was not mistaken. As I was about to ask him for an Alms, he prevented me, by demanding, 
Whether I knew how to serve at Mass? Very well,
 answered I, 
Sir;
 for tho' the villainous blind Man, had ever used me ill, yet this I must speak in his Praise,

 That he had taught me several use∣ful things, and 
this
 amongst the rest.


In a word, the Priest took me into his Service; whereupon I fell, as they say, out of the frying Pan, into the Fire. Although the blind Man was 
Covetousness it self;
 yet may I safely swear, that in comparison of this Priest, he was a 
real Prodigal.


He had a great ancient Coffer, to which was a strong Lock, whose Key he carried always a∣bout with him, fastned to his Dublet, and when he returned from the Church, he would be sure to lock up therein all the Bread, which belonged to the Poor. In all other Houses a Man shall see something that is to Eat; a piece of Bacon (perhaps) hanging up in the Chimney; or, it may be, a Cheese on the Shelf; or, some pieces of Bread lying up and down;

 or, Crums scattered after Meals; but the House where I light into, would not afford so much as the bare sight of these.


He had only a 
Bunch of Onions
 kept under Lock and Key in a Garret, one of which in four Days was my Allowance. When I ask'd him for the Key for this oc∣casion, if any body was present, my liberal Master would leasurely unty his Key, and very earnestly bid me bring it him again quick∣ly, saying, 
Thou art ever minding of thy Belly.
 A Man would have thought in hearing him speak thus, that he had had all the Varieties in World lock'd up in this Room; the and let me die, if there was any thing more than this wretched 
Bunch of Onions
 I mentioned, hang∣ing on a Nail; the number of which he so well knew, that 'twas impossible for me to deceive him of one of them.




After I had lived some time with him, I was ready to drop down dead with Hunger. What ever Flesh Meat he eat, I was sure not to get the least Crum of it; perhaps he might bestow a lit∣tle of the Broth on me; but as for Bread, half of what was suf∣ficient would have made me think my self happy. On 
Saturday,
 he was wont to send me to buy a Pi∣teous Sheep's-head, which when 'twas boiled, he would eat the Eyes, Tongue, Brains; and clear all the Flesh from the Cheek-bones; and having made this Ana∣tomy, then would he say, 
Here take this away and eat it, and acknow∣ledge thou hast made one good Meal in thy Life. I wish you may never fare better,
 would I say, grumbling softly to my self.


At the end of Three Weeks, I became so weak, that I could scarce stand on my Legs, and I was in a

 fare way to my Grave, had not mine own Industry relieved me. Yet had I been a Thousand times more crafty than I was, what was there to exercise my subtilty on? Moreover this Priest was not blind, as my Old Master, to whom I taught the art of 
Leaping.


He had Eyes to pierce through stone Walls: When we were at the 
Offerring,
 not a Farthing fell into the Bason, of which he did not take account; he had one Eye on his Parishioners, and another on my Hands; so that his Eyes were in perpetual Motion; and the 
Of∣ferring
 being over, he took from me the Bason himself, and placed it on the Altar. By which means 'twas not in my power to deceive him of one poor Farthing, all the time of my Life, or, to speak bet∣ter, all the time of my Death, with him.




He never gave me the trouble of going to the Tavern for him for Wine. He was so exact, that the Wine of the 
Offerring,
 which he lock'd up in his great Coffer every 
Sunday
 morning, serv'd him all the Week. To colour his in∣tolerable Covetousness, he would say to me, 
That Churchmen ought to live in great Sobriety, and that others Example should be no Rule to him.


But the Villain spoke against his own Conscience; for when he dined or supp'd at another's Table, he eat like a Woolf, and drank like a Fish. I never so heartily prayed for the Death of People as I did there; for then, and only then, I was sure to get my Belly∣full of Victuals; and therefore did I earnestly beseech Heaven, to call every Day out of this World one of our Parishioners. When we carried the 
Extream Ʋnction


 to the Sick, the Priest needed not bid me, as is customary, to pray for him; I was always ready e∣nough to do this of my self; and I besought God, 
Not to dispose of him, according to his Will,
 as the Prayer runs; but, 
To bring him immediately into his everlasting Kingdom.
 And if any one after this escaped, Heaven forgive me, for I curst him to the pit of Hell: Whereas I accompanied with a Thousand Benedictions, those who were so charitable as to leave the World. In all the time I served the Priest, which was about a Year, there died not above Five and twenty Persons in all; and I believe I occasioned their Death, by force of wishing it.


All went admirably well on days of Burials; then I might be properly said to live; but these times made the rest but the more uneasie; and therefore all my hope

 was now in mine own death, as it had been heretofore in that of o∣thers.


I thought several times of leav∣ing my Service, but was with-held by Two Reasons: The first, That I could not trust my Legs; whose weakness was so great, that they were not able to carry me far: And the other, That having had Two Masters already, the first made me die with Hun∣ger; and having left him for the second, he had brought me to the brink of the Grave; and should I leave him, and meet with a worse, he would certainly push me into it. This consideration made me unresolv'd; being more∣over, sufficiently enough perswa∣ded of my ill fortune, to believe, it would be worse and worse with me.


Another Reason also I had, not to leave him so soon; for he had

 already taught me to read; and beginning but newly my Writing, I knew not enough of that, to serve me at my need; and I would willingly gain that Improvement by him, before I left him.








CHAP. VII. Lazarillo
 relates the Story of the Tinker's coming to him.


ONE Day my Master being gone out of the Village; there came a Tinker to our Door, or an Angel rather, who ask'd me, 
Whether we had nothing to mend;
 I answered softly to my self, 
More than thou canst do.
 But having no time to lose, I said to him, 
Friend, I have lost the Key of that Coffer you see there, and if you have one amongst that great bun∣dle, which will serve, I will pay you well for it, and you will do me an extraordinary Kindness.
 The Tin∣ker, without further entreaty, began to try his Keys, and I, at∣tentive all the while to what was doing, endeavoured to assist him

 by my Prayers, when on a sud∣dain, I was surprized at the sight of the Coffer's being opened. It seemed to me, that the Heavens were so also, at the sight of the Bread, which lay therein; and addressing my self to the Tinker, transported with joy; 
Friend,
 said I, 
I have no Money, but look ye, here's Bread enough, pay your self with your own Hands.
 He took then one of the best Loaves, and giving me the Key, went away contented, but not so well pleased as I.


For that time, I touched no∣thing; for seeing such a Trea∣sure in my power, I was in a manner half satisfied, as imagining that Hunger now durst not come within an Hundred Leagues of me. My Master returned, and fortunately took no notice of the Loaf, which was wanting. He no sooner went out the next morn∣ing,

 but I opened the blessed Cof∣fer, and taking thence a Loaf, I devoured it in a trice. I forgot not to shut it; and I began to set the Chamber to rights, with so great cheerfulness, that I could scarce feel my self, imagining that now I could not but live happy∣ly. I past all that day, and the next morning, in the bravest hu∣mour in the World; but this last∣ed no longer than the third day; when I saw my cruel Master rum∣maging, and feeling a Thousand times in his Coffer; and begin again as many, the reckoning of his Bread. I made as if I was not at all con∣cerned, during this troublesome search; but yet I recommended my self to God, and all the Saints. 
O blessed Saint
 John, said I, 
blind him, I most humbly beseech thee.
 After a long Calculation, and reckoning the Days and Loaves on his Fingers; he breaks out into

 these words; 
In good faith, did not this Coffer stand in a safe place, I should think some body has robbed me of my Bread: However, I shall henceforward keep such an exact Ac∣count, that I desie all the World to deceive me in my reckoning; here's Nine Loaves and a piece.
 God give thee Nine Curses, said I to my self: Methoughts I saw all my Blood streaming out of my Body, when I heard him talk thus; and the foresight of the Diet to which I was to be reduced, made me starve before hand.


He went out after this; and I opening the Coffer to comfort my self, and kneeling down before the Loaves, I beheld them without daring to touch them: I counted them to see, if by good hap the Curate was not mistaken, but I found him too exact to my Grief. All that I dared do, was to kiss and smell to each Loaf, and to cut

 extream thin slices from one that had been much handled; with which I past that day, but not with that Content, as I did the others.


And having accustomed my self to a greater Quantity of Food, for these Two or Three days, Hunger tormented me so much the more: I felt my self dying; and when I was alone, I did nothing else but open and shut the Coffer, and look on the Bread.








CHAP. VIII.
 How 
Lazarillo
 counterfeited the Mice.


MY good 
Genius
 assisted me again in this urgent Ne∣cessity, by suggesting to me a new Remedy. This Coffer is old, be∣gan I to say within my self, and battered in several places, and the Holes and Clefts be not great in it; yet they are large enough to make it believed, that Mice may have entred it to eat the Bread. To take an whole one will ruine all my after hopes; but what hin∣ders me from counterfeiting the Mouse? I began then to nibble the Loaves over a Napkin, which lay in the Coffer. I thus nibbled Three or Four, and taking the Crums in the hallow of my hand,

 I swallowod them like so many Comfets.


Dinner-time being come, my Curate failed not in opening the Coffer, to perceive what had hap∣pened; and attributed it to the Mice; so well had I plaid my part. He then examines all sides of the Coffer, and seeing the Holes, through which he thought the Mice had past, he called me and said, 
Look here,
 Lazarillo, 
see what Persecution has been raised a∣gainst our Bread.
 I seemed much astonished, asking him, 
How this happened? Whence should this hap∣pen,
 answered he, 
but from these roguish Mice, from which nothing is safe.
 He sate him down to Din∣ner, and gave me the parings of the Bread, and in giving them bad me eat, saying, 
Eat, eat,
 Lazarillo, 
for Mice are cleanly.


We ended our Dinner, if we may call that ending, which was

 never well begun. But I grew sick, when I saw the Curate searching in all Corners for Nails, and little pieces of Wood, to stop up the Holes of the Coffer. O thought I to my self, how short are the pleasures of this World? I thought I had found some miti∣gation of my Misery, when imme∣diately he fell upon such an Inven∣tion as drove me to extream de∣spair. Whilst I was busied in these thoughts, he had perfected his work. 
Now,
 says he, in a great heat, 
damn'd Brood, wretch∣ed Vermin, you must go and pilser elsewhere, live in some other place, for you'll find but short Commons here.


As soon as he was gone out, I ran to the Coffer, and found he had not left the least Crevice un∣stopp'd. I opened, it though to no purpose; and seeing Two or Three Loaves, which my Master

 had been picking, as thinking they had been gnawed by the Mice, I fell also on pinching them in the most careful manner I was able. But these feeble succours being no∣thing to my furious Appetite, my continual study was how to provide some speedy Remedy.


'Tis said of Hunger, that it sharpens mens Wit, whereas much eating does but dull it. One night when these thoughts made me restless, and I was designing a fresh attack on the Coffer, with∣out being discovered; I heard the Curate shoring as he used to do when in a deep sleep. I rose up softly, and making up to the Coffer, I assaulted that side which I knew to be weakest, with a rusty Knife; which did not hold out long, so that I made a conside∣rable breach in it. I afterwards o∣pened the Coffer softly, and scratch∣ing the several Loaves with my

 Nails, I devoured the Crums, and then returned to my Bed, endea∣vouring, if possible, to get a little Rest, which through my fastings, was a difficult matter.


The next morning my Curate seeing the Disorder, the Hole which I had made, and the Bread nibbled, began to curse the Mice in a most extravagant manner; say∣ing, 
What the Devil is the mean∣ing of this, that the Mice should now of late come and torment us in this manner?
 And, indeed, he had reason to wonder at the Mat∣ter; for there was no House in the Kingdom, that could pretend with juster Title, to a Privilege of Ex∣emption from these sort of Ani∣mals; who, for the most part, love not to tarry where there's nothing to eat.


He began again to stop up the Holes, and I to spoil in the Night, what he had done in the Day.

 We each of us wrought so hard, he in stopping the Holes, and I in making them, that in a few Nights and Days, the wretched Coffer was more laden with Nails and bits of Timber, than an Old Whores Face is with Paint.


Seeing he only lost time in these Repairs, he began thus to reason: 
This Coffer is but an ill compacted thing, the stuff of it is so old and Worm-eaten, that the least Mouse can make an hole through it; and if I busie my self in continually mending it, and the Rats and Mice in perpetually making holes in it, the Coffer will be good for nothing in a short time; however, as bad as it is, I am not willing to bestow Three or Four Shillings on another. My best way will be to set up a Trap in it, for these thieving Animals.


He thereupon borrowed one, and baited it with bits of Cheese, which he borrowed of his Neigh∣bours,

 and kept it still set up in the Coffer. These were new 
Ragoo's
 to me, for though I need∣ed not much any thing to sharpen my Stomach, yet this, together with some Crums of Bread, agreed very well with my hungry Appe∣tite.


When the good Man returned home, and found his Bread lessen∣ed, the Trap without Cheese, and no Mouse taken, he gave himself to the Devil, and went a∣bout the Town like a Mad-man; asking his Neighbours, 
How it could happen, that a Rat should eat his Cheese fastened on the Hook, and the Trap fall without his being taken.
 His Neighbours assured him this was impossible, or, at least, a ve∣ry extraordinary Case.








CHAP. IX.
 How the Priest discover'd the Snake, and 
Lazarillo
's being turn'd out of his Service thereupon.


ONE of my Masters Neigh∣bours, an ancient Man, told him, he remembred that his House was wont to be visited by a Snake, and that very probably she had made this Spoil; and though the Trap had fallen, yet her whole body not entring, she might ea∣sily escape. This Neighbour's Saying, satisfied the whole Com∣pany, especially my Master, who, from that time, never slept sound∣ly; for at the least Noise, he imagined the Snake was gnaw∣ing the Coffer. He often leap'd out of his Bed, and with a great

 Cudgel which he held in his Hand, gave several severe stroaks on the poor Coffer, to fright away the 
Snake.
 The Noise he made disturb'd all the Neighbourhood; and I, for my part, was not to think any more of sleeping.


In this Discourse of 
Snakes,
 he was told, that they loved Warmth, and therefore crept often into Childrens Cradles, stung and even kill'd some of them. Ima∣gining therefore the same thing might happen at his House, he would come oft in the Night, pull me out sometimes of the Bed, and other whiles tumble me and it over one another.


I pretended for the most part, to have been asleep; and he would say to me in the Morning, 
Didst thou not hear something in the Night,
 Lazarillo? 
I had a long Course after the
 Snake, 
and I re∣ally believe he hides himself in thy

 Bed; he's a very chilly Animal, and seeks for Warmth. I wish,
 said I, 
he does me not a Mischief some Night or other; for I am great∣ly afraid of it.


His fear made him sleep very little, and he kept such strict Watch, that the 
Snake
 dared not rise to gnaw the Coffer, which ob∣liged me to do my Business in the day time, whilst he was either at Church, or abroad in the Vil∣lage.


This Waste continuing without Remedy, put him on going the Rounds every Night about his Chamber, and to turn all things topsy turvy, to catch the Animal. I was afraid lest in ransacking thus the Chamber and searching about my Bed and Clothes, he should sometime or other meet with my Key; and therefore I thought it the surest way to clap it into my Mouth, when I was to go to sleep.

 It was but very small, although it served for to open a great Coffer. Moreover, I had so accustomed my Mouth to be a Pouch, whilst I lived with the blind Man, that I could hold Ten or a Dozen Far∣things in it, without the least Trouble.


I put my Key then every Night in my Mouth, and so slept secure∣ly, not imaging my Master would come and look for it there: But, 
when a misfortune is to happen, all means to prevent it are vain.


One Night when I was in a profound Sleep, with my Mouth open; the Key, which was hal∣low, lay situated in such a man∣ner in my Mouth, that breathing into the hole of it, I made such a whistling, as roused my Master, who thought it had been most certainly the hissing of the Snake: Holding then his Cudgel in his Hand, he made strait to me very

 softly, least the Beast should hear him. When he was near me, he thought certainly the Snake was in the Straw, and thereupon lifts up his Cudgel to kill her; but discharged such a cruel Blow with all his strength upon my Head, that I thought afterwards, when I came to my Senses, that he had given me my Deaths Wound. Un∣derstanding at length his Error by the Groans I uttered, he felt abundance of Blood issuing out of my Head, which made him hasten for a Candle; which he had no sooner brought, but he saw me groaning, and gasping with my Key in my Mouth; which taking thence and viewing, he perceived it differed not at all from his. But, for better satisfaction, he went to try it, and so found out tne whole Deceit. 'Tis hard to imagine what Joy and Triumph here was on this discovery of the Snake,

 the 
Rat
 and the 
Mice,
 that had given this Trouble, and so de∣stroyed his Bread. What happen∣ed the Three days following I know not, for I was insensible all that while; but when I came to my self, I heard him declare the whole matter to as many as came to see him.


I wondred, being in my Straw, to find my Head so sore and full of Plasters, which made me ask the meaning of it: 
O!
 says the Priest, 
I'll tell thee, my Boy, the meaning of it, I have chased away the
 Rat 
and the
 Snake 
that has done me such Hurt;
 I then im∣mediately began to suspect the Matter. Then came in an Old Woman with some of the Neigh∣bours to dress my Wounds, and being glad to see me out of danger, they began to repeat my Adven∣tures, and make themselves merry with them, which made me weep

 more heartily than they could laugh. In a word, at Fifteen days end I rose up, and could walk a∣bout, being cured of my Wounds, but half dead with Hunger. The next day after I rose, my Master took me by the Hand, and led me into the Street, saying, 
Laza∣rillo, thou art now at Liberty, God be with thee, I have no need of such an ingenious Servant, thou must certainly have served some blind Man.
 And therewith blessing himself from me, as though I had been some Evil Spirit, he hyes him in, and bolts and locks fast the Door.








CHAP. X.
 How 
Lazarillo
 enters himself into the Service of a Squire, and what happened there∣upon.


I Had not many pleas ready to offer my Master, and there∣fore I took my leave of him, with∣out much Ceremony; and craw∣led towards 
Toledo,
 to which City I arrived by the assistance of cha∣ritably disposed Persons. My Wounds were no sooner closed, but every one would say to me, 
Why dost thou not work for thy li∣ving, or get some Service?
 Then I, murmuring within my self, would say, 
Where the Devil shall I get a Master?


At last I met with a 
Squire,
 walking along the Street, in a

 very good Garb, neat and gentile; taking his steps with great State and Gravity. He look'd upon me, and I on him; at last he said to me, 
Boy, dost thou want a Ma∣ster? Yes, Sir,
 replied I, 
a good one. Then follow me,
 says he, 
thou hast met with good Fortune to day, in meeting with me.
 I was over∣joy'd at what he said, and gladly followed him, I met with this Third Master betimes in the morn∣ing, and he led me through the greatest part of the City; and espe∣cially the Markets, where I ex∣pected when he would have load∣ed me home with Provisions, it being a fit time to provide for Dinner; but he very gravely left that place behind him: Then said I to my self, 
Perhaps, he does not see any thing here which pleases him, he will buy elsewhere.
 We walked so long, that the Clock struck Ele∣ven, when he went to the Cathe∣dral

 Church, and I after him, where I saw him most devoutly hear Service; which when ended, he marched leasurely down a Street, and I joyfully followed him, because we had not, as I thought, our Dinner to provide, imagining my Master to have been some great Man, and that we should find our Dinner ready at our coming. 'Twas now about One of the Clock, when we ar∣rived at a House, before which my Master stopp'd; then he throw∣ing his Cloak over his left Shoul∣der, with his right Hand draws a Key out of his Pocket, and there∣with opens the Door. We came into this House through a dark Entry, a bad 
Omen,
 yet there was a little Court before it, and tole∣rable good Chambers in it.


Being within, he throws off his Cloak, and having desired to see whether my Hands were clean,

 we then shook it, and dubbling it handsomly, he blowed away the Dust from a Bench, and laid it there∣on. Which done he sate him down on the same place, and fell into Discourse with me about my Coun∣try, my Age, my Parentage, and what brought me to this City. I gave him the shortest Answers I could, and yet methoughts we were tedi∣ous enough for People that had not Dined; for I had rather have been employ'd in laying the Cloth, than in hearing the most edifying Discourses.








CHAP. XI. 
How
 Lazarillo 
Dined with
 Duke Humphrey.


HAving satisfied the Squire's Curiosity, by lying where I thought it advantageous, and concealing whatever might seem injurious to me, he remained some∣time, as it were, in a study on what I said. I stood before him all the while, with my Hands in my Hat, swallowing my Spittle, and staring on him in such a man∣ner, as he might easily guess I asked him, when we should go to Dinner, though I spake never a word to him of it. 'Twas now Two of the Clock, and I heard no more stir than if I had been in a Charnel-House. Moreover, this closed Gate, this profound Silence

 wherein all the House lay, the bare Walls, and the Chambers, which I could perceive through the Windows, to be naked, with∣out so much as a Chair, or, so much as a Trunk or Coffer in in them; all this, me thought, promiss'd but ill, and brought a sad Damp upon my Spirits.


The Squire came at last out of his study, and said, 
Hast thou Dined, Child? No indeed, Sir,
 answered I, 
how could I, seeing I have attended your Worship ever since Eight in the Morning? For my part,
 adds the Squire, 
I had already Breakfasted when I met thee, and when this happens, as it does sometimes, I have no Stomach to my Dinner, thou must have patience then till Supper.


I had in good earnest like to have drop'd down at the hearing of these words, not altogether so much for Hunger, as at the con∣sideration

 of Fortunes constant per∣secuting me. At this instant, all my past sufferings came into my mind; and I especially remem∣bred the presage I had, and un∣willingness to leave the Curate's Service, out of an Apprehension of meeting with some Master worse than him. However, using violence on my self, I said to him in the best manner I could, 
Sir, 'pray' be not troubled at that; I am, I thank God, of that Temper, that little eating suffices me, and all the Masters I ever served, will give me this Testimony. Temperance is a great Vertue in a Young Man,
 re∣plied the Squire; 
and I love thee the more for this: It belongs only to Swine to glut themselves; and, in my judgment, Temperance, is the chief Note of an honest Man. I understand you,
 said I, within my self; but curst for ever be this Quality, so greatly admired by

 all the Masters I ever yet served.


I at length made off from my Master, and got into a corner of the Court, and began to eat some pieces of Bread, which were the remains of some good Peoples Charity. He coming upon me unawares, ask'd me, 
What I was doing there?
 I came and shewed him the Bread, not being in a con∣dition to give him another An∣swer, because I had my Mouth full of it.


He took one of the best and largest pieces of the Three, which I shewed him, and said to me, 
In good faith, Lad, this is good Bread. It's too hard and dry,
 re∣plied I, 
Sir, to be so admirable. But I vow and protest it is,
 said he, 
prethee who gave it thee? was it made with clean Hands, canst thou tell? I took it,
 said I, 
without any Enquiry, and I eat it as you see, without any Squeamishness. God

 grant it be cleanly made,
 continued he; and putting it to his Mouth, he began to devour it with as great an Appetite as I did mine; say∣ing at every morsel he bit, 
This is admirable Bread, as ever I eat in my days.


Observing the haste he made, I thought good to hasten my pace, least he having done be∣fore me, should be so kind and courteous, as to proffer me his far∣ther Assistance.


We both laboured so well, that we ended together at the same Instant. He then gently brush∣ed off the Crums from his Clothes, and entred into a kind of Pantry, whence he drew out an old bro∣ken Jarr, and having drank out of it, he lovingly invited me to the same. I answered him (feigning great Sobriety) 
Sir, I drink no Wine: But you may drink Water,
 said he, 
for that's the Li∣quor

 I offer thee.
 I took the Pot and drank, or pretended so to do, for it was not Thirst that most tormented me.








CHAP. XII.
 An Account of the Squire's Bed.


WE past the rest of the Day, he in asking me Questi∣ons, and I in answering them the best I could; and Night being come, he made me go into the Room, whence he fetch'd his Pot of Water, and said to me, 
Come let's make my Bed, to the end thou maist learn how to do it in my Ab∣sence.
 I pass'd then on one side, and he on the other, and thus soon made an end of the Business.


This Bed consisted of an Hur∣dle laid over with two wretched Tresses, a silly rotten hard Mat, and on that his Bed-Clothes, which, for want of washing, dif∣fered little from the Mat. We adjusted all, however, as well as we could: When the Mat

 was spread on the Hurdle, every stick appeared like to the Ribs of a lean Calf: We spread over on this a Coverlet, suitable to the rest of the Gear; 'tis hard to say of what stuff it was. It being al∣most Night, 
Lazarillo,
 said he, 
'tis now too late to go to the Market, it being a long way hence, and be∣sides, a Man cannot safely pass the Streets for Ruffins and Thieves, who snatch off Mens Hats, Cloaks, or Swords in the Dark; let's there∣fore pass over this Night, as well as we can, to Morrow, God willing, we shall be better provided. The reason why I am no better stored with Pro∣vision is, because I have hitherto wanted a Servant, and am used to eat in the City; but now we shall keep new and better Orders. Sir,
 said I, 
'pray' take no Care for me; I can pass very well a day or two without Meat. Thou wilt therefore,
 said he, 
live the longer, if the Say∣ings

 of Wise Men be true;
 That a slender Diet maintains Health. 
Well,
 said I, 
then, I believe I shall never die; for I have always kept to this Rule, though against my Will, and am afraid must observe it for ever.


After this he went to Bed, making his Hose and Dublet his Bolster, and causing me to lie at his Feet, where I never slept a wink; the hard Hurdle galling my naked Bones, which through Hunger and Sorrow, had but little Flesh on them. I cursed then my hard Fortune a Thousand times; and the greatest vexation of all, was, I durst not change sides for fear of disturbing him.


When he arose in the Morning, he began to shake and clean his Hose, Dublet and Cloak; I was his Brush, and so he dress'd him∣self with great leasure. Then I gave him Water to wash; and

 having Comb'd himself, he takes his Sword and kisseth it, and put∣ting it on, said to me, 
Laza∣rillo, didst thou know the worth of this Blade, thou wouldst bless thy self: no Gold can purchase it; for as many as
 Antonio 
made, he could never give such Temper to any as to this.
 Then drawing it out of the Scabbard, he tasted the Edge with his Fingers, saying, 
Dost thou observe; I'll undertake to cut through a whole Fleece of Wool with it.
 Whereunto I answered softly, 
And I'll undertake to cut through a Six Penny Loaf with my Teeth, though they be not of such hard Metal.


Then up went the Sword, which he hung at his Girdle, and so march'd forth into the Street, keeping exact time with his Feet, holding his head up like a Turky∣cock, throwing the end of his Cloak sometimes over his Shoulder,

 and otherwhiles under his Arm, with his right Hand always on his side. At his going out, said he, Lazarillo, 
I go to Mass, in the mean time make the Bed, and set the Chamber to rights, and after∣wards go to the River and fill our Jarr with Water: But be sure, whatever thou dost, have a care of the Door, for fear of Thieves, least any of'em rob us; and lay the Key in
 this 
private place, that I may have it, should I chance to return before thee.
 Having said these words, out he marched, with such a stately Air, and Gesture, that a Man would swear, who had not known him, that he was at least some Grandee of 
Spain.


Being then alone, I could not forbear lifting up my hands with Admiration; 
Lord,
 said I, 
who looking on my Master's Countenance and Gesture, would think what a Supper and Lodging he had last Night,

 and but that he had well Breakfast∣ed this Morning? Who would ima∣gine such a noble Gentleman eat no∣thing all yesterday, but one piece of Bread, which his Servant
 Laza∣rillo 
had kept a day and a night in his Bosom? Wherefore to say the Truth, it could not be very clean: Who would suspect he had dried this morning his Face and Hands on the inside of his Coat, for want of a Towel? Good God, how many are there in the World, who for the sake of a little Bravery, do suffer more, than they would for the love of Thee!








CHAP. XIII.
 He turns Mumper again. His Master's Discourse there∣upon.


THus did I stand, as it were in an ecstasie, on the thres∣hold of the Door, with my Arms cross my Stomach, and mine Eyes fix'd on the Squire, till he had turned up the corner of the Street. Having lost sight of him, I went back into the House and ransack'd every corner of it from top to bot∣tom, there being nothing to stay me but the wretched Bed, which I soon made. I took then the Jarr, and went to the River, where I espied my Master in a Garden, entertaining himself with Two Ladies, who were mask'd. They were of that sort, as are

 wont to Breakfast along the Banks of this River, without bringing any thing along with them to eat, in hopes of meeting with those that would furnish them.


My Squire then was walking be∣tween these Two Vertuous Ladies devising a Thousand Gallantries, and charming their Ears with softer and smoother Language than ever 
Ovid
 wrote. These good Ladies finding him sufficient∣ly enamoured with them, I heard 'em make a motion to him of giving them a Treat. But his Purse be∣ing as cold as his Love was hot, he was here struck dead; a cold sweat might be seen on his Face, his Colour was changed, and he became Speechless. They being well vers'd in the World, immedi∣ately found out his Distemper, and shamefully threw him off.


I employed my self, during this Scene, in gnawing some Colwort

 Stalks for my Breakfast; and having fill'd my Jarr with Water, without being perceived by my Master, I returned home, intend∣ing to sweep some part of the House that had most need, but the duce a bit of a Broom could I find to do it withal; so that not knowing whereon to employ my self, I was resolved to expect pa∣tiently till Noon, my Master's Return, hoping he might bring home something with him for our Dinner.


I tarried for him in vain, it striking Two a Clock and he not come; whereupon I lost all pa∣tience, and press'd with Hunger, 
which makes,
 as the Proverb says, 
the Woolf leave the Wood;
 I left my dismal Abode, shut the Door after me, and went to take up mine old Trade again.


I went begging about from Door to Door, with a low and languishing

 Voice; my Hands thrust into my Bosom, and mine Eyes turned up towards Heaven, and the Names of more Saints in my Mouth than ever were in the world; not fail∣ing to stop at those Houses, where there seemed most likelihood of getting any thing.


I had suck'd in this Art, as I may say, with my Milk, learning all the Secrets of it from my blind Master; who was certainly the greatest Artist in the World at it. I had made so good use of his Lessons in this occasion, that before it was Four of the Clock, notwith∣standing our Citizens hard heart∣edness, and the bad Year, I had secured a pound of Bread in my belly, and twice as much in my Bosom and Sleeves. I then re∣turned Home, and passing through the Market, a good Woman gave me a piece of Neats-Foot, and a few bits of boiled Tripe. I found

 at my Return Home, my poor Squire, who had already folded up his Cloak; and having laid it on the Bench, took large strides walking in the Court. As I came in, he made up to me, I thought to quarrel with me for staying so long; but, poor Man, he was of a more peaceable Temper; for he only asked me, 
Where I had been. In good Truth, Sir,
 said I, 
I staid here till past Two a Clock, and see∣ing you not Return, I have been a∣bout the Town, recommending my self to the Charity of good People, who have given me what you see here,
 added I, in shewing him the Bread and Tripe, which I pulled out of my Sleeves and Bosom.


I knew this sight rejoiced him; however, he was pleased to say, 
Staying so long I have dined; I do not blame thee; it's better to beg than to steal: Only be careful of my
 Honour, 
and let it not be known

 thou belongst to me. This is an easie Task,
 said I, 
for I have no great Acquaintance in this Town, and I wish with all my Heart, I had never come here. 'Pray', Sir, be not solli∣citous about this Matter; the World has other Employment, than to come and ask me such kind of Questions. Well eat then,
 poor Lazarillo, said he to me, 
we shall be better accom∣modated one of these days; for, to speak the Truth, I believe this is an unfortunate House to me. Since I first set Foot into it, all convenien∣cies are wanting; it's certainly built in an ill place; it lies under a Curse, I believe: some Houses there are, in which the most lucky Man in the World shall never thrive: wherefore I shall live here no longer than this Month, might I have the House for nothing.








CHAP. XIV.
 He dines his Master, the Squire, as well as himself, with what he had begg'd.


I sat down in the midst of this Discourse, on an end of the Bench, and began to eat, to make him believe I was still Fasting: When I beheld my Hungry Squire, though without seeming to take notice of it, hold his Eyes fix'd on my Bosom and Skirt, which ser∣ved me both for a Table and Nap∣kin.


God pity me, as much as I then pitied this poor Man: I felt his Distemper as much as he did him∣self; my experience rendring me sensible enough in these cases. I knew not whether I should invite him or not; for having told me

 he had dined, I thought he would make it a point of Honour to refuse me: However, I was very will∣ing to deliver him from the pain I saw him in, and to impart to him what I had, as I had done before. Besides, I had better Chear to treat him with, and could better spare it than formerly.


Both our desires were at length accomplished; for, having begun to eat, he made up to me in his Walk, saying, 
I vow and protest,
 Lazarillo, 
thou hast the best Grace
 in Eating, 
of any man in the World; the bare seeing thee Eat, will make a Man's stomach return, though he dined never so well but an hour be∣fore.


A very pretty Introduction, thought I; a body would think thy Hunger might spare Apolo∣gies, and make thee forget these Fooleries. However, to help him forward, I said to him, 
Sir, 'tis

 good Work, that makes a good Work∣man: This is excellent good Bread, and this Neats-Foot — How, Neats-Foot?
 cried he, inter∣rupting me, 
Yes Sir,
 replied I, 
Neats-Foot. If it be so then,
 re∣plied he, 
I have this to say to thee, Thou hast the best Meat in the World; and, in my Fancy, there's no Partridge or Pheasant comes near it. 'Pray' Sir,
 said I, 
do me the honour to taste it
 (putting at the same time the Neats-Foot into his Hands, between Two slices of the best Bread I had) 
and you'll find in effect 'tis a dainty for a Prince, so well is it sod and seasoned.


He sate down by me without further Entreaty, and began to eat, or rather devour, what I had given him, to the very Bones, which hardly escaped the Fury of his Appetite. 
O!
 says he, 
what delicious Meat is this?
 The Sauce, thought I, wherewith thou eatest

 it, will make every thing relish well. 
In good faith,
 added he, at last, 
I have eaten this with as good an Appetite, as if I had eaten no∣thing all the day. I do not at all que∣stion it,
 said I to my self; 
a Man may safely swear as much.


He bad me give him the Pot of Water, which was as full as when I brought it; and seeing he had forgotten to drink, judge ye whe∣ther he had remembred to eat. We past over Eight or Ten days in this manner, in every one of which my Master failed not to go take the Air through the Streets, with the same stately Mo∣tion, and affected Gate, leaving me the Care of providing for the Family.


I often reflected on the Froward∣ness of my Fortune; which ha∣ving taken me out of the Hands of Two covetous Masters, who so scantily fed me, had now made

 me find one, who was so far from maintaining me, that I kept him from starving. Yet I bore him no ill will, but on the contrary hearti∣ly pitied him.


I was fully satisfied of his Mi∣sery. One day when he rose in his Shirt to go to the top of the House to ease himself, I felt in his Breeches, which he had left at his Beds Head, and found only a small Velvet Purse, in which there was not so much as one single Farthing, nor the least sign any had been there for this Ten Years. 
'Tis a poor miserable Wretch,
 said I; 
no body can give what he has not.
 'Twas not the same with the covetous Priest, nor crafty blind Man, who made me starve, although God had given them sufficient; it cost∣ing the one but a 
Pax tecum,
 and the other a 
God restore it you.
 'Twas these Tigers I had reason to hate, for as to my poor Squire, in my

 Conscience, I believe he would have been very liberal, had he had wherewithal. And truly, when I meet with such sort of People in the same Garb, like Port and Gra∣vity, I cannot but pity 'em; ima∣gining they live in the same man∣ner, as the poor Squire, my Master, did. Well, notwithstanding the unlikelihood of growing rich in his Service, I should preferr the ser∣ving of him a Thousand times be∣fore the others. Yet one thing there was in him which I could not approve of, to wit, his intolerable Pride and Vanity. I would have had him known himself better, and considered that 
his condition required other Manners.








CHAP. XV.
 The Extremities to which the Squire and 
Lazarillo
 were reduced.


HOwever, this hindred me not from living quietly with him: But this Year happening to be a Year of great scarcity of Provisions, the Magistrates of the City set forth a Proclamation, en∣joining all poor People, that were Strangers, to depart out of the City; such as were found there after such a time, being to be pu∣nished with Stripes. I saw whole droves of poor People whipp'd out of the Town; and this, for a great while together, was the dai∣ly, sight; which struck such Ter∣rour in me, that I dared not run the hazard of Begging any more.

 Then might you have seen a strange kind of Diet, and silence in our Family. We pass'd over Three days without eating a Bit, or speaking a Word. It happened well for me that I had gotten some small Acquaintanee, with certain poor Women our Neighbours, who lived on Spinning and Knitting of Caps. They, alass, were not able to do much for me; yet that little they gave me, saved my Life, and hindred me from Star∣ving.


I more pitied my poor 
Squire
 than my self; for the Duce a Bit did this miserable Sinner eat, for Eight Days together at least, as I know of. I cannot tell where he went, nor what he did; yet you might see him sometimes come up the Street, strutting like a Big Belly'd Woman, and looking smi∣lingly like a Man that had dined with his Prince. He would stand

 at our Door with his Tooth-pick in his Hand, picking those Teeth which had little need for any thing that had stuck in them with eating; lamenting still the unlucki∣ness of the House we dwelt in; 
It grieveth me,
 said he, 
to see how all our Sorrow comes of this House; thou seest how dark and uncomforta∣ble it is; and as long as we live here, we are like to be thus unhappy; would the Month were out, that we might get far from it.


We lived in this misery, perse∣cuted by Hunger, when one day, I know not by what Chance, a 
Ryal,
 (a piece of Money to the value of Six Pence,) fell into his hands. He came home as great in his own thoughts, as if he had had all the Treasures of the 
Indies
 in his Possessions; he gave it me transported with joy, saying, 
Here,
 Lazarillo, 
God begins to open his Hand; go to the Market, buy

 Bread, and Wine, and Flesh; and feast in spight of the Devils Malice against us; and to compleat thy Joy, know, that I have hired another House; and that we shall tarry here in this unhappy Abode no longer than the end of this Month. Cursed be him
 (continued he without giving me leave to Answer) 
that laid the first Stone for it. As I am a Gen∣tleman,
 adds he, 
not a drop of Wine, nor the least Crum of Flesh has went down my Throat all the time I have lived here; neither have I had a Moment of Rest in it; so that I believe hardly can a Man find a more dark, dismal and sorrow∣ful Place. Go, and return quickly; we shall Dine to day like Princes.


I took my 
Ryal
 and Jarr, and hastily brush'd along the Street to∣wards the Market-place, with that joy, as is scarely to be ima∣gined; and as I ran along, thank∣ing God for the Assistance he had

 sent us, and counting on my Fin∣gers, how I should lay out my Money, I saw a dead Corps ap∣pear, which was carrying to the Grave, attended by a great Con∣voy of Priests. I planted my self against a Wall, and after the Corps was pass'd by, I saw a Wo∣man in deep Mourning, followed by several others, who lamented in a most piteous manner; And, the better to express her Grief, I heard her say: 
Alass my poor Hus∣band! whither are they going to car∣ry thee? To the dark and dismal House: To the uncomfortable and sorrowful House: To the House were they neither eat nor drink.


The place of our Dwelling ap∣peared to me so exactly described in this Woman's Expressions, as made me break through the Crowd, running down the Street, as fast as I could, directly Home, where locking and barricadoing the Door

 in all haste, calling out to my Ma∣ster for help, and embracing him, I emplored his Aid and Assistance; whereat he was not a little startled, thinking it had been some other Matter, demanding of me what might be the occasion of all this. 
O Sir,
 said I, 
keep fast the Door; for they are a going to bring in a dead Coarse here.
 Whereupon I up and told him what I had seen and heard in the Street; and he, notwith∣standing his Misery, fell into an hearty fit of Laughter; which be∣ing over, he sent me on my former Errand.








CHAP. XVI.
 The Reasons which moved the Squire to come to 
Toledo.


I Had a great desire to know, what occasion'd his Arrival at
 Toledo; 
for I perceived at my first coming to him, that he was a per∣fect Stranger in these Parts. My Curiosity was at length satisfied; for, being one day in better Hu∣mour than ordinary, we having made a reasonable good Dinner, he related to me all his Adventures. He told me he was of
 Old Castile, 
and only left his Country, because he would not be oblig'd to put off his Cap to a Person of Quality, his near Neighbour.
 But Sir, 
said I,
 if he were above you by his Birth and Estate, as you seem to acknowledge, you ought certainly to Salute him

 first, without doing your self any injury; seeing that on his part, he was not behind hand with you in Civility. All this is true, 
said he to me;
 but yet he ought to begin once, and force me to let him Sa∣lute me first, in laying hold on my Hand, when he saw I began to put it to my Hat. Truly, Sir, for my part, 
said I,
 I should not have been so rigidly exact in these Matters. Thou art but a Young Man, 
repli∣ed he,
 and dost not understand these Points of Honour, which are the only study and concern of People of Quality. However, let me tell thee this, That though I am but a bare Squire, and should meet a Lord in the Streets, and he Saluted not me in as full and lowly a manner as I him, I say, in as full a manner, the next time I met him, I would turn into some House, feigning Business there, or else pass by and take no notice of him. Dost thou

 observe what I say? 
continued he:
 Excepting God and the King, a Gen∣tleman is to yield to no one, and such a one ought to set a just Value on himself. I remember, one day, I met with a Neighbour of mine, whom I had like to have run through the Guts; for, in meeting me, he gave me this Salutation, 
God save your Worship, Sir. God save your Worship,
 said I, 
Goodman Log∣gerhead; is this your way of sa∣luting a Man of my Quality?
 The poor Man whenever he met me afterwards, would afar off down with his Hat to the Ground, and so word his Complement, that I ne∣ver afterwards had occasion to quar∣rel with him.


I could not forbear saying to him here,
 'Pray', Sir, inform me, where's the wrong, in saying to a Man, 
God save you,
 or 
God give you Happiness?
 Thou art a very silly Fellow, 
answered he,
 in these Mat∣ters:

 This Form of Salutation is not amiss to ordinary People; but, to a Person of my Quality, the least that can be said, is, 
Sir, your Hum∣ble Servant;
 or, if shorter, 
Your Servant Sir,
 provided he that I meet be a Gentleman. Whence thou maist understand, whether I had not reason to complain of this Gentleman in our Country; who, to tell the Truth, would at every Rencounter, out with his 
God save you, Sir.
 Surely, I think I shall not take this Form of Salutation from any ones Hands, but the King; though your Worship was put at the end of it to soften it. 
Where am I now,
 said I to my self? 
What help can I expect from a Man who takes it ill, that any one should desire God to help him?


Neither am I so poor, 
continued the Squire,
 but that I have in my Country certain Houses; which had

 they been built according to my de∣sire, and stood in 
Valladolid,
 they would be worth at least an Hundred or Two hundred Pounds; not to mention a Dove-House, whence I could draw every Year an Hundred or Two of Pigeons, besides other things; all which I forsook on the account of mine Honour. I retired into this City, expecting to meet with some good Fortune, but matters have not fallen out as I expected. I intended to have been Gentleman to some Nobleman; and I do really believe, had I light on such a one, I should have been taken into his Bo∣som; so well could I dissemble with him, and humour him: I would have burst forth into Laughter at the sorriest of his Jests, applaud∣ed his Wit, though he had been the greatest Blockhead in 
Europe;
 ne∣ver have mentioned what might displease him, though his Life and Honour lay at Stake: I would be

 always about his Person, seeming to be delighted with his Company above all Mens, and render my self agreeable to him by all the Courtly M thods now in fashion; often blame such as are about him, that he may think me careful of his Interests; and, if he himself chides any of his Servants, then would I speak some smooth Words, which may seem to be in favour of him that committed the Fault, though indeed it should aggravate it. I would also hold a Correspondence with busie Bodies, and Enquirers into other Peoples Con∣cerns; whereby I should never want matters to entertain his Lordship with; and with these Qualifications, I could domineer over his Servants, and engross his Favour wholly to my self. For if a Man be vertuously inclined, consciencious, and a lover of Truth and Honesty, he will soon be discarded, and look'd upon as a me∣lancholy, whimsical Fellow in these

 great Families, and wholly unfit for Conversation in the World. I be∣lieve, though I say it, there's no Man alive, could better behave himself in these Circumstances; but 'tis not my Fortune to meet with such a Noble Patron.








CHAP. XVII.
 How the Squire was interrupted. An Inventory of his Mova∣bles. He leaves his Servant 
Lazarillo
 in the Lurch.


THus did my Master, the Squire, lament his Ill for∣tune, and so pleased was he with this Discourse, that he would have held it on till night, had he not been interrupted by an Old Woman attended by a Man; the first came for Money for the use of the Bed, the second for the Rent of the House; both their Summs put together came to about Six or Seven Shillings; more Mo∣ney than he touch'd in a whole Year. He gave them very good Words, telling them he was now going out to Change a broad Piece;

 so that if they would be there at Night, they should not fail of their Money.


He went out indeed, but never came in: And his Creditors fail∣ed not to come at the appointed time; but they were forced to put off the Business till the next Morning, it being late, and he not returned. I dared not to lie in the House alone, and there∣fore went to the Neighbours, re∣lated to them what had pass'd, and got a Lodging amongst them.


In the Morning the 
Creditors
 returned to prosecute their Point, enquired for the Squire amongst the Neighbours; but the Bird was flown. The good Women said to 'em, 
Here's his Valet, and the Key of the Door, and this is all we know.
 They asked me, 
What was become of my Master?
 I answered, 
I knew no more than they, he not ha∣ving appeared since he went to change

 his broad Piece, and that I was greatly afraid he was gone away with the change, and left us all in the Lurch.


The 
Creditors
 hereupon fetch'd an Officer and a Scrivener, and taking the Key, they opened the Door in the presence of Witnesses to sieze and appraise the Goods, that they might be paid; but, having, searched all about the House, they found no more Fur∣niture than what I have already mentioned. They then demand∣ed of me, 
Where my Master had conveyed all his Furniture? Where he had sent his Plate, Money and Jewels?
 I answered them, 
I thought they were very merrily dispo∣sed, in putting such a Question. With∣out doubt,
 said the Creditors, 
he has conveyed away all this last Night; 'pray', therefore, Mr. Ser∣jeant, lay hold on this his Servant, he must give us an account where

 they are carried.
 The Officer here∣upon came to me; and taking me by the Collar said, to affright me, 
That if I did not discover what I knew, he was going to lay me up in a Dungeon.


I was never so terrified in all my Life, and therefore I promised to tell them any thing. 
Very well then,
 replied the Officer, grow∣ing now calm, 
give us a Categorical Answer to what we shall ask, and then you need not fear any thing.
 The Scrivener then sate down on the Bench, to write his Invento∣ry, asking me first in general, 
What Estate my Master had? Sir,
 said I, 
my Master told me that he had a great deal of fair Ground to build Houses on; and, besides, a Dove-house, but which is wholly ruined at present. Very well,
 said the Creditors, 
how little soever, these may be worth, yet certainly here's enough to pay us. But where abouts

 in the Town is this Place?
 said the Scrivener to me. 
In his own Country, and not in this Town,
 answered I. 
Then we are all fair∣ly fitted,
 replied they. 
And of what Country is he then?
 continu∣ed the Scrivener. 
He told me he was of
 Old Castile, said I. The Scrivener and Serjeant burst out into a fit of Laughter at this last Answer of mine, saying to those that had employed them, 
Here's enough to pay us all, we need no more. Gentlemen,
 said the Neigh∣bours, who had been all this while present, 
you speak to a poor innocent Lad, who has been with the Squire but a few days, and knows no more of his Affairs than you do. Alas, the poor Creature is always with us, and we have reliev∣ed him as much as we are able, and kept him hitherto from star∣ving.




My Innocency being thus justi∣fied, they asked me no more Que∣stions. But the Man and the Old Woman came not off at so cheap a Rate: For the Question was, who should pay the Charges; whereupon arose a great Noise, the Serjeant and Scrivener de∣manding their Fees. The Cre∣ditors pretended, that seeing there was nothing in the House, and consequently no siezure made, there could be no Fees due. And they alledged, they had left se∣veral Businesses, wherein they should have gotten more, to attend them.


In fine, after much crying and tempesting on both sides, in the conclusion, the Serjeant and Scri∣vener, loaded a Porter with the Coverlet belonging to the Old Woman. Although the Load, as may be gathered from what I said before of it, was not very

 great, yet every one bore a part of it; the Creditors and Officers holding each of 'em a Corner of it, and pulling and striving who should carry it off, the weak∣est being drawn away by the strongest. I know not where they setled to end their difference, neither do I know how 'twas at last deci∣ded; yet this I dare swear, that the Coverlet paid for all, it not being in a condition to hold out long against all their Attacks.


Thus did my Third Master leave me, whereby I perceived that For∣tune went continually against me; for we see Servants every day leave their Masters, but Masters seldom their Servants.








CHAP. XVIII.
 How 
Lazarillo
 enters into the Service of a Friar, and after∣wards into that of a Pardon-monger.


I Was now to seek for a Fourth Master, whom I found by the means of my good Neighbours, he being a Friar, and (as they said) of kin to them. He was a great Enemy to the Choire and Common Table; who loved only to gad abroad, and see the World; whereby, I believe, he wore out more Shooes than all the 
Convent
 besides. The first Shooes I ever wore, I had from him; but, be∣ing obliged to follow him up and down, I was presently ready for another pair. Being not able for want of strength, to endure these

 continual Marches, and accom∣modate my self to certain sottish Humours of his, which I do not think fit to mention, though I thought good to leave him.


I afterwards past over into the Service of a pretended 
Pardon-monger,
 a special Rogue, if ever there was one in the World; having a Thousand Tricks and Devices to put off his false Ware.


As soon as he came into a Vil∣lage, the first Visit he made, was to the Curate, or his Vicars, to make them his Friends, by means of some small Presents. Before he accosted them, he had an ac∣count of their Abilities. If they were Scholars, then he would be sure not to speak to them in 
La∣tin,
 but content himself with Complementing them in 
Spanish;
 but if those he applied himself to were ignorant People, then would he confound them with hard

 Words, and barbarous Terms, which neither he nor they under∣stood, whereby they gaped in an Amazement at his Learning.


When he could not put off his Pardons, by ordinary and com∣mon ways, then would he have recourse to extraordinary ones. He preached up for Two or Three days the great Efficacy of his Par∣dons, in certain places belonging to the Archbishop of 
Toledo
's Dio∣cess; and though he forgot no Artifice to put them off, yet no body came to buy one of them, neither was there any likelihood of a better Market; which brought him into such fits of Rage, as made him curse and foam like a Madman. Yet at last, he fell on this Stratagen. He gave the Peo∣ple then to understand, That he was on the point of Departure, and would therefore take his leave of them the next morning, after

 he had made the last Publication of his Pardons. He was attended (according to Custom) by an Officer of Justice, with whom he struck into Play after Supper.


They pretended a Quarrel about a Cast, and thereupon fell into high Words. My Master said, 
The Officer was a Rogue, and he could prove him one;
 and he, on the other hand, affirmed, 
My Master was a Cheat.
 The first siezed on an half Pike, which he found near at Hand, and the o∣ther clapped his Hand to his Sword.


At the noise which we made, the Host and Hostess, together with several of the Neighbour∣hood, ran in betwixt them, who strove in appearance to make a Rejoinder and kill one another. But the People which came in Crowds, drawn thither by the great noise which sounded all a∣bout,

 taking their Weapons from them, they afresh began to in∣jure one another with words; and the Officer fail'd not to call my Master Cheat, charging him with drawing up the 
Bulls
 himself, and imposing Counterfeit Pardons on the People.


There seeming no likelihood of according them, the Officer, therefore, was carried to another House, and the Pardon-monger remained in the Inn, with all the marks of a Man highly provoked. The Host and Hostess, together with the Neighbours, used all their endeavours to appease him, but to no purpose; wherefore they were forced, it being late, to take their leave of him; and so we went to Bed.


The next Morning, my Master got to the Church, and there as∣sembled the People. Those who had been Witnesses of the former

 days Quarrel, fail'd not to publish what they had heard the Officer say; so that every body now sus∣pected the Fraud. To hear these Villagers murmur, I thought our Affairs were ruined in this place, and I would have willingly told my Master as much, if I dared.


In the mean time came the Officer, assuring the people, there was nothing trurer than what he affirmed last Night; and that, of his Knowledge, the 
Bull
 was Counterfeited. My Master heard him with great Calmness, and let him say what he would. But at length lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, and af∣terwards turning them on the Officer with Indignation, he pro∣nounced a Curse on him as a Slanderer. Which proved so weighty, that the poor Officer was thrown on his Back by it, with that violence, that the Pave∣ment

 resounded again; when he began immediately to foam at the Mouth, and spread out his Legs and Hands, to gnash his Teeth, and to be in such Convulsions, as affrighted all People from coming near him. Yet at length, the boldest and strongest amongst them caught hold, some on his Hands, and others on his Legs. Never any Skittish Mule gave so many kicks with his Feet, as this mali∣cious Officer. There were above Fifteen Men upon him, and yet they could not Master him; and if he could but get an Hand loose, he would be sure to take them over the Face. My Master was all this while in the Pulpit on his Knees, his Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven, in such an Ecstacy, that all the noise in the Church, could not bring him to mind what was doing below. However, some compassionate

 People came up to him, and pull∣ing him by the Sleeve, desired him for the love of God, to try whether he could not by his Pray∣ers, take off the Curse which he had justly laid on this Officer, who had so vilely and maliciously Slan∣dered him.


At length my Master suffered himself to be awakened out of his Trance, and casting his Eyes on them, saith, 
To shew that I for∣give him, I desire we may all go together and pray for him; and that, if for his Wickedness, God has suffered any evil Spirit to en∣ter into him, it might please him to cast him forth again.
 They all then fell on their Knees before the Altar, and having Sung the 
Le∣tany,
 my Master came with the Cross and Holy Water, with his Eyes and Hands so lift up to Hea∣ven, that nothing but a little of the Whites appeared: Then did

 he begin a no less long than devout Prayer, wherein he desired that the poor Offender, who was se∣duced by the Devil, might be delivered from his Power and Ty∣ranny, and restored to his former Senses. Then he sent for one of the Pardons, and laying it on the Patients Head, he began to amend, and by degrees to come to himself. As soon as he got up, he fell down on his Knees to my Master, beg∣ging in a most pathetick manner his Pardon, acknowledging, that whatever he had spoke against the Pardons, was at the meer in∣stigation of the 
Devil,
 who great∣ly laboured to hinder People from receiving the benefit of them. In short, my Master freely for∣gave him, and they were made Friends.


Hereupon followed such a Trade for Pardons, that neither Male nor Female, Young nor Old, in

 all the neighbouring Parts, but would have one. So that my Master put off near Ten or Twelve thousand, without giving himself the trouble of Preaching one Ser∣mon for that purpose. I silly wretch as I was, greatly mar∣velled at this strange accident, believing with the People, that all this whole proceeding had been truly miraculous; till I heard my Master and the Officer laughing and joaking in private, at the Peo∣ples simplicity: Then I plainly understood the Roguery of the whole Contrivance, and reflected within my self, how many such Cheats are used in the world, to deceive the ignorant and credulous People. From that time I con∣ceived such a Detestation at this abominable Cheat, that I could stay no longer with him, and there∣fore I left him, having been in his Service about Six Months.








CHAP. XIX. Lazarillo
 serves a Painter; a Church-man; and after these a Serjeant; and lastly be∣comes a Common 
Cryer.


I Afterwards served a 
Painter,
 who employed me to grind his Colours, but I soon grew wea∣ry of this Master: And being now grown to Man's Estate, I endeavoured to find out some Em∣ploy more proper for me; when entring one day into the Cathe∣dral, one of the Chaplains casting his Eyes on me, and liking my Looks, gave me an Ass in Charge, with Four Tankards and a Whip, to sell Water up and down the Town, and this was the first Step of my Preferment; for we had re∣gulated our Affairs in this manner:

 I was to bring my Chaplain every day Six Pence, excepting 
Satur∣day,
 which day I had to my self; and what I could gain besides o∣ver and above my stinted allow∣ance. I plaid my Cards so well, that at Four Years end, I was a∣ble to buy an old suit of Clothes, together with an old Fashioned Sword and Belt; and being thus gentilely Apparelled, I thought my self too great to follow my usu∣al Employment, and therefore gave up the Ass to my Master again, together with the Tackle, and so took my leave of him.


I after this betook my self to serve, a Serjeant, but I was soon weary of this place, for the dan∣ger that attended it. My Master having Arrested a certain Person, who got out of our Hands into the Church; the people thence drove out my Master with Stones and Staves; and though I was so light

 heel'd that they could not over∣take me, I however quitted my Place upon it; and it studying to find some more profitable and ho∣nourable Employ, through favour of my Friends, I obtained the Of∣fice of a 
Common-Cryer:
 My Busi∣ness was to give notice of such things as are to be sold; whereby I became a noted Man, beloved and respected by all the Town.








CHAP. XX. Lazarillo
 Marries Mr. Arch∣deacons Maid.


I Had the Honour to be employ∣ed by Mr. Archdeacon in the crying his Wines, who having a good Opinion of my Honesty, Married me with his Maid. I considered such a Match could not be any ways disadvantageous to me. The Wife he gave me proves a good Housewife, and Master Archdeacon assists and protects me for her sake. He presents us every Year with a Load of Wheat, and against good times, sends us in several Joints of Meat, and gives us all his cast Clothes. He made us take a little House near him, and, for the most part, on 
Sundays
 we Dine with him.

 Whence it is that ill Tongues spare not to say several things contrary to my Wife's Honour, at which I am not at all moved, for I know she's not a Woman that's fleshly given. These Discourses are so common, that Mr. Archdeacon was pleased to take notice of them himself, saying to me, before my Wife, 
Friend,
 Lazarillo, 
he that minds what every body says may do himself hurt, but no good. I am very sensible what People say at thy Wife's frequenting my House; let 'em talk on, mind thou thine own Interest, this thou may'st be sure of, That I am thy Friend, will do thee all the good I can, but no hurt. Sir,
 said I, 
I am very sensible of the Ob∣gations I have to your Worship; yet I must say, and that the rather, my Wife being present, That she has had several Children, before she was Married, according to my Friends Reports.
 At the hearing of this

 my Wife began to utter such bit∣ter Curses and Oaths, that I was afraid the House would have fal∣len down on our Heads; and af∣ter this fell a weeping, cursing the time she ever Married me, so that I wished I had been several Yards under Ground, when I uttered this Matter. Wherefore I, on the one side, and Master Archdeacon on the other, did all we could to comfort her, and make her leave weeping, vowing and solemnly promising I would never speak a Syllable to her of that Subject, as long as I lived with her; and that I was withal contented she should frequent Mr. Archdeacon's House Night and Day: Wherewith be∣ing pacified, we all grew Friends again. From this time, when∣ever I heard any Man mention a word of this Matter, I would hin∣der him from going forward, say∣ing, 
If you be my Friend, sow not

 discord between me and my dear Wife, whom I love better than mine own Eyes; being willing at any time to swear by the Holy Mass, That an honester Woman is not in the World; and he that saith the contra∣ry, shall know I wear a Sword to vindicate her, and mine own Honour.
 After this Declaration, no body troubled me any more about that Matter, by which means I kept peace at home.








CHAP. XXI. Lazarillo
 gets acquainted with certain 
Germans
 of the Train of 
Charles
 the V. and what happened on this Occa∣sion.


ABout this time the Emperor 
Charles
 V. made his En∣trance into this City with all his Court. I shall not make any men∣tion of the great Feastings, and other Solemnities for his Recep∣tion. Whilst he was here, I got several considerable Acquaintan∣ces, going never without a Bottle of good Wine, and some of the Country Fruits, as a Token of my Trade. I by this means be∣came acquainted with several 
Ger∣mans
 of the Emperor's Atten∣dance: And being not hated by

 the rest of the World, I saw my self so born up, that when I should have committed a Murther, or fallen into some great misfortune, with the Friends and supports that I had, I should come off Scot-free.


Whilst my 
Germans
 were here, I resorted to their Lodgings, and led them to such places where the best Wine was Sold, of which they usually drank so much, that he who went alone into the Ta∣vern, usually came out thence ac∣companied by Four or Five to hold him up. That which I liked best of all, was, They would not let me spend one Farthing, all the while I kept them Company. And whenever I put my hand to my Pocket, for Manners sake on∣ly, they would be ready to quar∣rel with me; neither did we on∣ly drink together, but always had some good relishing Bit; some∣times we had a Joint of Mutton

 Sod in Wine, otherwhiles pieces of Bacon, or some such like Meats, with which they would not only Feast me, but give me enough to carry Home, to serve my Wife and little Family an whole Week.


The good Chear I made, caused me to call to mind the Hunger I had heretofore endured. But, as the Proverb says, 
Fair Weather does not last always.
 For the Court left 
Toledo,
 and my kind Friends, the 
Germans,
 at their departure were very earnest with me to go along with them: But remem∣bring another Proverb, which tells us, 
Better is the
 Ill 
which is known, than the
 Good 
which is yet to know;
 I thank'd them heartily for their Civilities, and took our leaves of one another with a Thousand Embraces, my Love to my Wife and little Daughter hindring me from accepting of their Proffers. I endeavoured to

 comfort my self with them, in the Solitude wherein my 
Ger∣man
 Friends had left me. For, though I be in a great Town, and every where well known and received, yet methinks I am but in a Desert. And, in Truth, I know not what would become of me, were it not for my lit∣tle 
Teresa,
 I say, my little Daughter; for I am cured of the Suspicions I had, occasioned by some Features of Resemblance, which I thought to see on her Face; but my Wife, who would not tell a Lye for all the World, vowed to me in such a manner, That no body gat her but my self; that a Man must be very ob∣stinate not to believe her. In short, my mind is at ease as to that Point. And I only think now of passing the rest of my Days here in Quiet, and laying up something to buy my Daughter an Husband.


















THE SECOND PART OF THE LIFE OF 
Lazarillo de Tormes.










ADVERTISEMENT.


I
 Would not have the Rea∣der's Judgment imposed on, with the pursuit of the Hi∣story of 
Lazarillo de Tormes,
 which is Printed in 
English;
 the Adventures in it are forced, the Characters so ill upheld, and the whole Contrivance so piteously carried on, that it is easily seen, 'tis not 
Lazarillo
 that speaks; but one that would have his dull Conceits pass under a Name so well received by the Publick. What I here offer the Reader, is the faith∣ful

 Translation of some Frag∣ments of the true 
Lazarillo,
 which have fallen into my Hands, and on which this other, without doubt, had wrought, but with very ill suc∣cess.












THE LIFE OF 
Lazarillo de Tormes.
 PART II.




CHAP. I. Lazarillo
 grows an ill Husband. Death of the 
Archdeacon. Lazarillo
's Misery after his Death.


MY 
German
 Friends had so accustomed me to drink∣ing, that I could not leave the Tavern neither Day nor









 Night; and the worst of it was, That I drank at my own cost, so that in Five or Six Months time, I saw an end of what I had got∣ten.


I minded so little my Office of Cryer, that the profit I drew thence, was not sufficient to bear half my Expences; when I want∣ed Money, my Wife was forced to supply me, to make me quiet. However, she made no small noise on her side; and Mr. Archdea∣con had something to do to pacifie us.


When I was in a condition to make use my Reason, I saw I was not altogether blameless. I sometimes therefore offered vio∣lence to my self, and staid at home for Three or Four days together. But then could I tarry no longer, being every where uneasie but at the Tavern; having so habitua∣ted my self to those Places, that


'twas in a manner impossible to leave them. Yet I had so much good Advice, and so seriously re∣flected thereon, that I shewed considerable Amendment, so that I now kept at home for a Week together. But whatever care I took of my self, 'twas plainly seen that I did, as it were, force na∣ture.


My Wife, who I am sure loved me, could not see me long suf∣fer; and moreover we seemed to incommode one another. Sitting one day in the Chimney-corner, she and I alone, she began to say to me, 
She plainly perceived this was not the Course of Life I affect∣ed:
 She therefore counselled me to follow my inclinations, to be merry with my Friends, and to leave the rest to her.


From that time, I found my Pockets well supplied, and Mr. Archdeacon and my Wife so chang∣ed

 their tone, that 'twas they that pressed me to leave the care of the Family to them, especially when they saw I began to keep home. I did not pretend to dive into the reasons of this, and with∣out Enquiries whence our Income flowed, I led the easiest Life in the World.


In the mean time my Wife was brought to Bed of a Son, and Mr. Archdeacon, who was his Godfather, 
loved him as dear∣ly as if he had been his own.
 He daily said to me, 
That if he lived, he would see that he should be as well brought up, as if he had been his own,
 intending to make him his Heir. I admired the Kind∣ness of this Man to a Child 
which was not his own,
 which made me spend my days merrily, referring the whole care and conduct of my Family, to my noble Patron, the 
Archdeacon.




Thus happily did I live, till Mr. Archdeacon's Sickness di∣sturbed our Felicity. He was siezed with such a violent Fever, that in Three days time, he was reduced to the greatest Extremi∣ty.


His Relations, who laid claim to his Estate, had soon notice of it, and therefore came crowding in upon him; and though it might seem, that their Interest should divide them, yet they a∣greed too well for my profit. Their first care was, to forbid my Wife and I an entrance into the House; and though the good Man often asked for us, they gave him so well to understand, that he must not any more think of the Things of this World, that he pass'd quietly into the other; we not having so much as the com∣fort of taking our leave of him, or without bestowing on us the

 least token of his Friendship.


One Misfortune seldom comes alone. The Archdeacon was a Man in Authority, so that he was not to be importuned for such a trifle as the hire of our House. It appeared after his Death, that there was Two Years Rent due. He that owed it was not of accord; that Mr. Arch∣deacon had taken it for us, be∣cause his Heirs would not allow it; and therefore he immediate∣ly turned us out of Doors, and siezed on our few Moveables for the Payment of his Rent.


Of so many Friends wherewith I abounded Eight Days ago, not one appeared to help me in this urgent occasion, or, to give me shelter; and had it not been for a Charitable Lady, who took my Wife to Suckle her Child, and charge of mine, I must immediate∣ly have Mump'd about the Streets,

 as a poor decay'd Gentleman. In Truth, the Archdeacon's Death proved of worse consequence to me, than what could have hap∣pened by either Plague, War or Famine.


Yet I thought I had still a string left to my Bow in my Office of Cryer; but wretch as I was, ha∣ving no Money to spend at Ta∣verns, I could not any longer keep up a Correspondency. Then did I detest my 
Germans,
 as much as I loved them before; and I found when 'twas too late, that having accustomed my self to make good Chear in their Company, I had thereby put my self into a condition of making bad Chear all the days of my Life.








CHAP. II. Lazarillo
 resolves to make a Voyage to the 
Indies.
 He meets with the 
Squire,
 who relates to him his Adven∣tures.


WHat should I do in this ex∣tremity? I knew no bet∣ter course, than to seek my For∣tune in the new World, seeing the Country wherein I was born and bred, would not relieve me. This was a beaten road, it being no new thing in 
Spain,
 when Businesses do not succeed, to go into the 
In∣dies
 to repair what's wanting.


I resolved then upon this Voy∣age. I sold my Cryers Office to set me out, and having taken leave of my desolate Family, and kiss'd an

 hundred times my poor little 
Tere∣sa,
 I parted one fair morning from 
Toledo
 with a stick in my Hand, and a Snapsack on my Shoulder. I could not now endure hardship as heretofore; wherefore I made but small Journies, and Husband∣ed my stock in the best manner I could.


One day that I set out very early, to advance on my way, I saw a Man walk very gently before me, wrapp'd up in his Cloak. He wore a long Sword, whose end peep'd through his Cloak, by a hole which it had made in it.


It was not yet the time for walking; so that I was surpriz'd to find in the High-Way a Man in this Equipage, which made me that I could not tell what to think of him, in the fear I had that he was there to Dismount Passen∣gers. I Saluted him with a soft Air, saying to him, 
God save you,

 Sir. I forgive thee,
 answered he, without pulling his Nose out of his Cloak, 
for as I am accoutred, thou art not obliged to speak other∣wise to me.
 I was surpriz'd at his answer, thinking it to be only a pretence to quarrel; but being will∣ing to take away all occasion; 
It was not, Sir, my design to give you any Offence,
 replied I. 
Be it so,
 answered he very briskly, 
but who learnt thee to salute Gentlemen, in this sottish manner? Let me die, if I do not think this
 God save you 
was brought into the World on purpose to drive me out of it.


These words made me look on him more attentively, and having begun to let down his Cloak, from his Face, I knew him to be the 
Squire,
 whom I had hereto∣fore served. I was glad, for seve∣ral reasons, to meet him, and ap∣proaching him, 
Is it possible, My old Master,
 said I to him, 
that Six

 or Seven Years should so alter
 La∣zarillo de Tormes, 
that you cannot know him?
 He viewed me, and fell on my Neck, 
Truly,
 Lazarillo, said he, 
I may well mistake thee, be∣ing so big and fat as thou ar
, ha∣ving seen thee so lean and slender for∣merly.


After several Embraces, and kind words on both sides; he ask'd me, 
Whither I was going?
 and ha∣ving told him; 
Thou goest,
 said he, 
the same way as I; come, let's go to∣gether, and relate to me what has befallen thee, since the night I was forced to leave thee, for reasons which thou maist guess.
 I gave him an exact account, without concealing any thing; and made my History so long, that we ar∣rived, as I finished it, at the Vil∣lage, where we were to take up that Night.


I went for something to refresh us: We knew one another per∣fectly

 well, so that he did not stand to Complement with me, in putting his Hand into his Pocket.


He informed me afterwards that when he had gone out of the House, where we dwelt at 
Toledo,
 under pretence of 
Changing the broad Piece,
 not doubting but that those who dunn'd him, would be punctual at the time appointed; and considering moreover the small means he had of subsisting at 
To∣ledo,
 he resolved to return into his own Country, to sell the Estate which he had there, and to go from thence to seek his Fortune.


I was surprized,
 added he, com∣ing near, 
to see my Pidgeon-House built up, and some pairs of Oxen grazing in the Fields, which belong∣ed to me: I drew near to a Labourer, that was at Work, and asking him, who he belong'd to? I found by the Answers which he made me, that sometime after I had left my Village,

 for the reasons I have heretofore told thee, the same Gentleman, which had obliged me to leave my Estate, had put himself in Possession of it, without any bodies opposing him, and there settled himself as I saw.


Having taken this information, I went to one of my Old Neighbours, and published my return into the Vil∣lage. He that had possessed himself of my Estate, was surprized at it. He could not but know me; my ab∣sence had not been long enough to make him forget me. We came therefore to an accommodation. He offered to give me my board as long as I lived, or else to make me a suitable Present, and thus I should leave him in quiet Possession.


I accepted of the first condition, yet without tying my self to any thing; however, I required, that I should at least have the second place at his Table; that he should salute me on occasions, saying,
 Your Ser∣vant,

 Sir, 
and not
 God save you, Sir, 
I would rather have quitted all, than abated any thing in this Point.


In these terms did I live Two Years, dragging my Sword after me, and adored as much as I could wish, by the Country People; but at length this Idle Life displeased me, and perceiving moreover that the People of the House began to grow fami∣liar with me, I would no longer stand to the first Bargain I made with the Gentleman; and therefore made him to understand I would go into the Army. He was very glad for his part to be rid of me, and there∣fore gave me very generously one of his best Horses, and Money sufficient, to furnish me for the Campaign, I Articling with him to make over all my Claims and Pretensions to him; thus did I bid adieu for ever to the place of my Birth.








CHAP. III. The Squire continues the re∣cital of his Adventures. 
La∣zarillo
 and he associate to∣gether in the Voyage to the 
Indies.


IT was not my real design to go into the Army, and therefore a quar∣ter of a League distant from my Village, I left the Road of 
Catalonia,
 for that of 
Madrid;
 where I hoped to make my Fortune with less dan∣ger. For to tell the Truth, though I have worn a Sword all my Life time, yet I had never no great in∣clination for Arms; and having ever had an aspiring mind, and great thoughts of my self, I there∣fore easily fell into the humour of the Grandees of our Nation, who think all Employs in War are be∣neath

 them; and that 'tis mean to serve in the Army. To make short, I arrived at 
Madrid,
 where I sold my Horse, and hired a neat Cham∣ber, and began to view the Town. Coming home one Evening, when 'twas almost dark, passing along a narrow Street a Coach met me, which stopp'd, wherein I saw a Lady well dress'd, whom I Saluted, as I thought I was obliged; because I could not pass by without thrusting my Nose into the Coach.


I had not taken two strides, when a Lacquey came and pull'd me by the Cloak, telling me the Lady in the Coach desired to speak with me. You will be surprized, 
said she to me, when I came near her,
 at the liber∣ty I take: I know you are a Stran∣ger, and I read in your Countenance, you are not a man to refuse a credita∣ble Employ should one offer it you. I thank'd her for her freedom, tell∣ing her, This was what I sought for

 at 
Madrid:
 That I was a Younger Brother, who had no great Fortune in the World, and that — You have said enough, Sir, 
said she.
 I have long wish'd to meet with such a Person as you. Madam the Coun∣tess 
de Los Garfios,
 to whom I be∣long, gives me no rest, till I find her a Squire. She is a Lady of the First Quality. You'll have all things at your desire, a good Salary, a Foot∣man to attend you, a Coach at your service, and the prospect of farther Advancements.


I would have thank'd her; but she would not hear me; you shall thank me, 
said she,
 when you have experienced the truth of what I tell you. Come up into the Coach, and we will talk further. What part of the Town do you lodge in? I told her, and she made Answer, Very well, 'tis thereabouts my occasions call me; I will therefore set you down there. I bless'd a Thousand times, in my mind,

 this fortunate Adventure, which happened when I least expected it. She asked me an hundred questions in the Coach, and you may guess whether I could conceal any thing from my 
Benefactress.


We arrived in the Street where my quarters were, and she would needs go up into my Chamber, to see how I was lodged; and as I was about seeking for a Candle, she would not suffer me. We can see clear enough, 
said she, smiling;
 and I should be unwilling every body should know the freedom I use with you. Being in my Cham∣ber, she would have the Door stand open; and bidding her Lacquey keep there, least any body should enter she led me for a last Favour to my Beds side, and made me sit down b
 here, where we discoursed to the full, how I should be with Madam the Countess 
de Los Garfios.


She gave me Instructions how I was to behave my self, and made me

 an exact Description of each of the Domesticks Humours; and having promised to send the same Coach for me the next Morning, to present me; and after reiterated protesta∣tions of an everlasting Friendship, we parted.


I waited on her to the Coach, with that joy which you may easily imagine. But no sooner had I gotten up into my Chamber, with a light; but I found that whilst this kind Lady had amused me with these pleasing expectations, her Lacquey had Ran∣sack'd all my Chamber, and left no∣thing behind him, but what could not go into the Coach. He was so careful as not to forget my Portmanteau, where I had put my Linen, and Wool∣len-Clothes, and almost all my Money. I ran down into the Street like a Mad-man, following the tracts of the Coach till I came into some cross Streets, where I soon lost my Scent, Three or Four Coaches having past

 that way, so that I was forced to re∣turn home cursing my ill Destiny, the Countess 
de Los Garfios,
 and my own Folly.


This was, as you see, Friend 
Lazarillo,
 an ill beginning of making ones Fortune, 
continues the Squire.
 I remained only with Ten Pieces in my Pocket, and half of this Summ must be laid out in repairing the dis∣order, the roguish Lacquey had made in my Wardrobe. I must live be∣sides, which I could not do long with∣out some supply.


Thus did my noble Master fi∣nish the Relation of his Adven∣tures, and I comforted him in the best manner I could; telling him,
 Seeing we were both forced to go seek in the 
Indies,
 what Fortune had de∣nied us at home, we ought to thank Heaven for bringing us thus happi∣ly together again: That we might be a mutual help to one another, it being a great consolation to have a Friend,

 in whom one may confide, in so long a Voyage, as we were undertaking.


From that time we lived like Friends and Comrades. We a∣greed he should retain his Name of
 Don Alonzo Fanegada, 
and I was to take on me that of my Fa∣ther, and call my self
 Don Lazaro Gonsales. 
That I should term my self a Gentleman as well as he; for 'tis very easie to ennoble ones self in a Country where one is not known. We Travelled together making small Journeys in our way to
 Cales, 
where we happily arriv'd, some weeks before the departure of the Fleet. We easily agreed for our Transportation with the Cap∣tain of a Vessel; and Fifteen days after our arrival, the Fleet put to Sea with a favourable Wind.








CHAP. IV. Lazarillo
 makes Shipwrack at his return from the 
Indies.
 Certain Fishermen carry him throughout all 
Spain
 as a Monstrous Fish. How they were discover'd and punish'd.


A Fresh gale filled all our Sails, and we were on the point of discovering the 
Spanish
 Coasts. I had gotten on the Fore-deck to be the first discoverer of that hap∣py Land, which was then the only aim of my Desires; and I with unspeakable delight ruminated in my mind on the pleasure I should have in embracing my Wife and Children, after so long a time as Three Years of Dangers and Fatigues; and that I might also

 impart to them some share of the little Fortune I brought from the place whence I came. I had to the value of Four or Five hundred Crowns in Money and Goods, with which I thought to set up Shop, and with my Industry get an honest Subsistence for my Fa∣mily, which I intended to settle at 
Cales,
 as being the most proper place I imagined for business. But alas! Fortune was not weary of persecuting me.


There immediately arose an horrible Tempest, which divided our Fleet. The Pilot and the rest of the Seamen having yielded our Vessel to the humour of the Winds. We lay Two days between Death and Life, and the second Night we fell on a Rock. Although I could not swim, yet I stripp'd my self, that I might have less in∣tanglements, if I could get hold of some Plank, which by good

 hap I light of, and was carried along the Shore, where I was taken up by Fishermen half dead, amongst the Moss and Sedges which grow in the Water.


The Shore, whereto the Waves had driven me, was distant from the Rock, against which we ran; the Plank whereon I held being all that came so far of the whole Wrack of our Vessel. The Fishermen took me at first for some Sea Monster, my Skin being so wrinkled, my Face so disfigured, and my whole Body so disguised by the Weeds, which were wrapp'd about it. Having well considered me, they perceived their Error; but the Fi∣gure I then made, put a Project into their Heads, which they soon after executed.


They made me disgorge the Water I drank, which done I be∣gan to breath. They then carried me into their Hut, where some

 hours after I reassumed my Spirits, and perceived my self naked, ly∣ing on a wretched Mat, and scarce knowable to my self.


In the mean time the Fishermen had held a Council among them∣selves; and just as I was about to give Thanks to Heaven, for ha∣ving drawn me out of the Danger, which I remembred to have been in; and was musing on my bad Fortune, in having lost in an in∣stant, what I had been gaining for Three Years together, with such Labour and Care; one of the Fishermen, who was the greatest Rogue amongst them, came to me, and thus saluted me: 
How now, Mr.
 Triton, 
do you know that you are welcome? What news from the rest of your Brethren, the Sea Monsters? Who, I a Monster,
 replied I? 
Do you not see I am a Man as you are? A Man,
 answered the Fisherman, 
thou art a
 Triton, 
or Sea Monster, I am sure of it.




Whereupon the rest came up, and seconded what he said, swear∣ing 'twas true. I swore again as fast as they, That I was a Man, and Son to a Citizen of the best Rank in 
Madrid;
 and further, That I was Married, and had a Wife and Children, 
'Pray' leave of arguing,
 said the first Rogue, 
you are, and shall be a
 Triton, 
and the most hideous Monster as ever was seen; and therefore hold thy Peace, and be quiet unless you're minded to be pick'ed up for Cod-fish.
 I was about to reply, but the Fisherman began to take up his Knife, as it were to execute in earnest what he had threatned; whereupon, seeing no remedy, I resolved to be what they would have me, 
Triton,
 Monster or Red-Herring, if they pleas'd.


Yet I could not divine all this while whereunto this tended; but I was soon satisfied, when I saw

 my Masters come to me with a Tub full of Water. They swad∣led me up in Moss and other Herbs, tying me down with a Cord, ha∣ving nothing but my Head at li∣berty, so that a stranger Figure could not appear. They covered my Head with mossy Leaves, and made me a long Beard with Horse hair; and thus dressed up, they laid me on my Belly in the Tub, which was flat and of an Oval form, making appear at the end of my Legs a 
Triton
's Tail which they had adjusted. They had also fastned a Rope on my Feet, one end of which came out through a leaden pipe, so that if I offered to speak or grumble never so little, they needed only pull the Rope, and I was forced to plunge like a Duck.


Having put all their machins in order, They gave out, they had taken a 
Triton;
 and so many Peo∣ple

 round about came that day to see me, that though the Fishermen took but Pence a piece, this amounted to a considerable Summ. I would have spoken when my Spectators began to throng about me, but he that was speaker to the Show, and sate on the side of the Tub, draw∣ing the Cord, every time I at∣tempted to open my Mouth, duck'd my Head in the Water, so that I was forced to be silent, for fear of drowning.


My Masters ravish'd to see their Project take so well, and encou∣raged by the Gain they found; carried me through all the Towns and Villages of 
Spain,
 in a Cart. One of these Fishermen was the Carter, and the other sate in it to take care to pull the Rope, if I offered to speak, when we met any body. They only permitted me to use my Tongue, when we were alone.




I ask'd them one Day, what the Devil they meant in thus Tyranni∣zing over me. 
You know in your own Conscience,
 said I to them, 
that I am a Man, endued with sense as well as your selves; if you keep me long in this stinking Water I shall certainly perish. Hold thy Tongue,
 said he that was my guard, 
unless thou hast something better to say than this, we know best what's fitting for thee. Being a Fish, as thou art, thou canst not live an Hour out of the Water without ex∣tream peril of Death; thou oughtest therefore to be thankful for having fallen into such Hands as ours, who know what belongs to Sea Monsters.
 I had nothing to reply; and so much the less, because I felt al∣ready, he began to twitch the Cord, to convince me of the ne∣cessity of my silence; so that I was forced to be contented, to be a Fish, till such time as Heaven

 should free me from the hands of these Villains.


They had the impudence to carry me to 
Madrid,
 but they re∣mained not there long. The first who came to see me were Scholars. Having examined me a little more curiously than the Country peo∣ple, there was one who said, 
In good Faith, he is as much a
 Triton, 
as I am one; were I an Officer of
 Justice, 
I should send both the Fish∣ermen and Fish too to the Galleys, having first made 'em fetch a walk about the Town, in the manner as they deserve.
 Alas, said I to my self, I would willingly be quit for a Thousand Lashes, and Ten Years service in the Galleys; for I should suffer less than I do now. In the mean time this Discourse alarm'd my Conductors; they apprehended lest some others should reason as clearly as the Scho∣lars had done; wherefore they left

 the Town the same Day, to carry me into the Villages, where the People would be more easily impo∣sed on.


They at length carried me to 
Toledo.
 They hired a Ground∣room in the very House, wherein I had heretofore lived. All the Town came hither, and I was (you may well think) in a strange taking, to see my Wife, with lit∣tle 
Teresa,
 amongst the rest who was then about Five or Six Years Old, and who appeared to me pret∣ty, like an Angel. This fight made such impressions on my Heart, that I fell into a Swoon with my Head into the Water; the Fisher∣men perceived it, and having cleared the Room of Folks, they emptied the Tub, and took all possible care for my preservation, they being so greatly interess'd in it. But all seemed in vain, and they thought me dead.




The fear they had, least my Death should discover their Ro∣guery, made them resolve to throw me by Night into the River, and so to march off. They laid me then athwart one of the Mules, which served to draw their Cart. The jogging of the Mule made me dis∣gorge the Water I had swallowed, and come to my Senses; I under∣stood they talk'd about throwing me into the River; seeing the danger I was in, I began to call out for help with all my force, and to cry Murther. The Watch, by good hap, was passing through the next Street. They surrounded us in an instant, and carried us all to Prison.


We were questioned the next Morning, and I was known for what I was. The Fishermen were punished, and the Money they had gotten confiscated, one third to the King, the other to the

 Hospital, and the rest to me. I had for my share above Fifty Crowns: I might have had more, but the Officers took as much for their share. My Wife caused me to be carried into a little House she had hired, where she lived with my Daughter working for her living. My Son died a while after my de∣parture from 
Toledo.
 I was a great while before I could recover my self, from what I had suffered by these roguish Fishermen.








CHAP. V.
 How 
Lazarillo
 became an Her∣mit, and wrote these Me∣moirs.


SCarce was I well when it plea∣sed Heaven to deprive me of the Company of my Daughter, and dear Wife, who soon follow∣ed one another; and truly I my self had like to have followed them, with Grief. I made serious re∣flections on the misery of humane Life, and resolv'd to bid adieu to the World.


I caus'd a little Chapel to be built on a Hill, about a League off from 
Toledo,
 with a little Lodge; and in this laid out all the Money I had, both by selling my Clothes, and the Houshold Stuff which my Wife had left me.




Here do I spend my days with that delicious quiet which I never before tasted; and I have drawn up these Memoirs, to the end, that after my Death, they may be joined to what I wrote heretofore to my Friend 
Pedro de Corredas,
 Citizen of 
Madrid;
 which I know are abroad in the World.






To satisfie, as much as lies in my power, the Readers curiosity, he must know that 
Lazarillo
 died in his Hermitage, a while after he had written these Memoirs; that he was enterred in his little Chapel, and, That his Tomb is still to be seen with this Epitaph:


Here lies


Brother
 Lazarillo Gonsales,


Surnam'd
 de Tormes,


Who having acted on the Thea∣ter of this World, 
The blind Man's

 Boy, Squire's Gentleman,
 and served with great ingenuity several other Masters, and run through se∣veral other Employments, died an Hermit the 
12th.
 of 
Sept. 1540.
 in the 
39th.
 Year of his Age.


R. I. P.




FINIS.




















THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Young 
LAZARILLO,
 SON and HEIR TO Old 
Lazarillo de Tormes. Never before in
 English.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
J. Leake
 1688.














THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Young 
LAZARILLO.


HAVING thus given you a perfect Relation of the Life and Death of the Fa∣ther and the Mother, it would be an Injustice to their Memory, to say nothing of that same Sprigg of Iniquity which they left behind. For, that they had a Son between

 them (I mean, 
Lazarillo,
 and his beloved Spouse or Doxie, no mat∣ter whether) all the 
Gusmanick, Busconick, Scarronick
 Writers a∣gree; more especially, 
The Chief Remembrancer to the Knights of the Order of Industry,
 in his Lives of the Sons and Daughters of Joy, expresly affirms it. Moreover, he gives several Reasons to assure us, that he was the Father's and Mother's nown Child; and, that for once, his Mother did conceive without the help of Interlopers. For he says, that the Child did so partake of the natural Disposition and 
Genius
 of his Father and Mo∣ther, that he might well be call'd a Chipp of the Old Block. The Infant was so far from being only naturally enclined to Thievery after he was born, that he began to study it in his Mother's Womb, and so stole himself into the World. 'Tis true, he did not couzen the

 World as 
Garagantua
 did; that is to say, he did not slip through his Mother's 
Cotyledons,
 into the Hollow Vein, and by that means crossing the 
Diaphragma,
 ascend as far as the Shoulders, where that Vein parts in two; and so turn∣ing to the left Hand, creep out at his Mother's left Ear. No; but he came so slily into the World, that he was half out before his Mother perceived him; who was delivered of a sudden, to her great satisfaction, without the help of Midwife or Nurse, or any other Woman to assist her. And indeed, he would have been a True Son of 
Mercury,
 had not an untimely Accident cut him off in the Bloom of his Years, at which you will either Laugh or Weep, when we shall come to relate it.


He was not so forward as 
Her∣cules,
 to Kill Snakes in his Cradle. Good reason for that; for, 
Jupiter


 was Eight and forty Hours a get∣ting him; and the Poet says, his Deityship was forced to drudge hard too; and therefore we shall not tell you, what our Youngster did, before he had bred the full number of his Teeth. But no sooner could he speak, but his Father beholding the vigour and sprightliness of his Son, thought there should be nothing wanting on his part; and therefore know∣ing the Importance of early In∣structions, he began to tutour him between his Knees, telling him, That the Profession of a Thief was one of the Liberal Sci∣ences, and did not at all relish of 
Mechanick,
 though indeed there were somewhat in that, required the nimbleness and slight of Hand; that they who went by the Names oft honestest Men, made it now adays the greatest part of their Calling; so that whoever did not

 know how to steal, knew not how to live in the World. And therefore (quoth his Father pro∣ceeding) why do the Serjeants and Bayliffs so prosecute us? Only be∣cause one Trade envies another, Why do they Whipp, why Banish and Hang us up, but because they will not suffer any Thieves but themselves to live among them? However, good Instructions and Craft do many times deliver us out of their Clutches. In my Youth (quoth the Old Man) I usually haunted the Churches and other Places of Publick Meeting, and then sometimes I happened to be snapp'd; yet still I got off by my Wits, which were always good at a dead lift. And therefore, my Son (quoth he) keep Wit in thy Brains, and that will keep Money in thy Pocket.


You cannot think how deep these Instructions sank into the little

 Noddle of Young 
Lazarillo,
 and throve like 
Jerusalem Artichoaks
 in a fat Garden; so that he could no sooner make a Casting Topp Spin, but he began to shew his Gifts. For, at Eight Years of Age, he was able to have cheated at Cards or Dice, all the Footmen that belong to the 
House of Com∣mons;
 and was fit to have been Captain of the 
Black Guard,
 that rogue about the Guards near 
White∣hall.
 More particularly, he was the Inventor of that stratagemi∣cal Way of Cheating, or rather, robbing the Custard Women in the open street at noon Day; Which was thus performed; So soon as he heard the Voice of the Custard-woman setting up her Throat, and bawlling out, 
Custards, large Custards, Groats a piece,
 up he comes with her, and bids her shew him a couple of Custards; both these he takes, and while he

 is poising them upon the Palm of his Hands to try which is the best, presently comes another Boy of the Confederacy, well instru∣cted before-hand, and seeing him weighing the Custards so busily, 
What are you doing here?
 quoth he, 
Doing!
 cries the other, 
Why I am going to buy one of these Custards; which shall I take?—Oh ye Rogue,
 quoth the Boy, 
buying Custards, and your Grandfather dead! My Grandfather dead!
 crys t'other; and, as it were in a strange A∣mazement, clapping both the Cu∣stards together, runs away with them both as hard as he can drive; while the poor Woman surpriz'd, has neither time to follow, nor time to cry out, till the Young Rogues are got with their Plunder quite out of sight.


At the same time there was a Costermonger, that took up his

 stand in an Evening after Candle∣light, before the entrance into a Church, at a good distance from the Houses on each side; only for his own use the Costermonger had a Candle in a paper Lanthorn stuck at one side of his Basket. This Young 
Lazarillo
 observing, when he had a mind to fill his own and his Companions Bellies with Fruit, order'd his Gang to follow him. And being furnish∣ed with three or four good stones, when he came within reach of the Costermonger's Paper-Lanthorn, at it he lets drive with his unlucky Hand, but if he mist the first hit, at the second he was sure to fetch down the Candle and extinguish the Light; and then it was that the Costermonger being in the dark, that 
Lazarillo
 and his fol∣lowers had their Opportunity to fill their Pockets, and vanish be∣fore the Costermonger could light

 his Candle, to see who had hurt him, or what Losses had befallen him.


A Barber observing this Toward∣liness in 
Young Lazarillo;
 says he to himself, 
This Boy may do me great service.
 Now this Barber, as he was a great Friend and Neigh∣bour of 
Old Lazarillo
's, so was he a very arrant 
Felon.
 Therefore, to fit 
Young Lazarillo
 for his pur∣pose, he sent him to the Pick∣pocket School, where the Young Rogue profited so well in a short time, that he was able to out-do many of his Seniors in that Trade; so that had there been degrees in the Art of 
Pocket-picking,
 as there are in the Sciences of 
Law
 and 
Phy∣sick,
 he might have Commenc'd 
Master of Arts
 in half a Years time. Nor did the Barber repent him of his Charity, in putting 
Young Lazarillo
 out. For, the Barber having got a Trick, when

 he trimmed his Customers, to fill their Eyes full of Camphire Sudds, against which their only Remedy was to keep their Eyes close shut, 
Young Lazarillo
 was still at hand to open their Pockets, and take much out of more, and 
 out of little, to the great Be∣nefit of the Barber, who by that means doubly, sometimes trebly paid for his Trimming.


At about ten Years of Age, 
Young Lazarillo
 was put to an ordinary Grammar School in the Country, one of those that teach Latin in∣deed, but no higher than 
Ovid
's 
Metamorphosis,
 or 
Virgil's Eneads.
 While he remained there, his usu∣al Practice was, to secure all the Books that came in his Way; and, that his little Thefts might pass undiscover'd, before he exposed his Thieveries to sale, he would so strangely alter their Complexi∣ons, that they could never be

 known. If they were new, he would rub their Covers in the Ashes; if the Leaves were red, he would alter their Colour into blew or green, or whatever other Colour he could get, for which he had his Utensils and Materials al∣ways by him; or, if old, he would renew their old Faces with fresh Painting. As for his Mo∣ney, he had various ways to spend it, in treating and caressing those Boys that were able to make his Exercises, which render'd him ve∣ry acceptable to his Master. How∣ever, he would often play the Tru∣ant, and those Truantings were always attended with some noto∣rious piece of Roguery, as Rob∣bing of Orchards, Milking the Cows in his Hat, Robbing of Hen-Roosts, and diminishing the number of the Farmers Geese. To which purpose, he had a short stick with a string ty'd to the end

 of it, and a Bullet at the end of that, which would fetch in his Game by the Neck; about which, the Weight of the Bullet twisted the String so many times, that it was impossible for the Geese to disingage themselves from De∣struction. Now, whatever he got, he carry'd to a House, which encouraged him in his Roguery, gave him two Pence for what was worth a Shilling, and feasted him to boot.


In his rovings, while a mere griftly Bratt, he was very severe; so that if a stronger Boy than him∣self had injur'd him, he would conceal his Resentment, and ex∣ercise his Revenge upon him privately; and one Trick he had among the rest for the same pur∣pose, which was, to stick a Pin in the Seat where the Boy was to sit.


Another time, one of the Maids having cross'd him; to be reveng'd

 of her, knowing her to be a drou∣sy Wench, as she slept by the fire, 
Young Lazarillo
 took his Oppor∣tunity, and having melted a little Glew, gently touch'd the closure of both her Eye-lids with a Pencil, and when he thought it cold, he suddenly wak'd the Wench, pre∣tending that her Mistress call'd her, having first set all the Chairs and Stools about the Kitchin in her Way. Presently up starts the Wench, and rubbing her Eyes, away she hurries, but, being blindfold, in her haste, here she tumbles over the Chairs, there o∣ver the Stools; up went her Heels, and up flew her Petty-Coats before and behind, to the great satisfacti∣on of 
Young Lazarillo,
 who was extreamly delighted with this piece of Roguery. On the other side, the Wench would hardly be perswaded, but that it was a Judg∣ment upon her for some Sin she

 had privately committed; and had certainly run Mad, had she not been speedily restored to her Sight by washing off the Glew, which was not so easily done neither.


This stuck in the Maids Sto∣mach, so that one day being desi∣rous to taste of some Plum-Broth that was upon the Fire, 
Young La∣zarillo
 desired the Maid to give him a Taste; whereupon the Maid taking up a Ladle-full, and hold∣ing the Ladle in her own Hand, she bid him sup: At what time 
Young Lazarillo
 opening his Mouth somewhat wider than he needed, the unlucky Baggage pour'd the scalding Porridge down his Throat; so that poor 
Lazarillo
 thought he had swallowed the 
Gunpowder Plot.
 This put 
Lazarillo
 upon another Design: For, he obser∣ving that the Maid in a short time after carry'd the Plum-Porridge Pot into the Yard, and set it just

 under the defending of the Jack-weight; 
Young Lazarillo,
 so soon as the Weight was down, took it off, and fastening the Porridge-Pot to the Pully, went into the Kitchin, and wound up the Ket∣tle, Pottage and all, to the top of the Penthouse, and then stopp'd the Jack, the Meat being taken from the Fire. By and by the Por∣ridge was call'd for, but neither Porridge nor Pot were to be found, which put the whole House into an Uproar. And though the Maid swore she saw it but just before, and really thought that none but the Devil could have removed it, yet the Miracle could not be disco∣vered till the next Roasting; at what time the Porridge Pot de∣scended like an Angel in a Play-House, fastened to the Pully of the Jack-line.


Now, though the School-Master was an Old Man, yet he would

 not give over teaching for all that; so that when he was indisposed, he would send for his Scholars in∣to his Chamber, and teach them as he lay a-bed. One time among the rest, a Gentleman had sent the Master his Son's Quarteridge, for Diet and Teaching, 
&c.
 all in Gold. Which the Master recei∣ving, call'd for a small Cabinet that stood in the Room, which 
Young Lazarillo
 more officious than the rest, presently ran and fetch'd him; into which, when the Ma∣ster had lock'd up his choice Com∣modity, he order'd 
Lazarillo
 to set it where he found it. Present∣ly the Devil became his Tutour, and now nothing would serve his Turn but that he must have that Gold. After many and various Stratagems and Contrivances, he bethought himself at length of ta∣king the Impression of the Key in Wax, which with much difficulty

 he obtain'd, and carried to a Smith Four Miles off. But the Smith suspecting him, and questioning him what he intended to do with the Key, poor 
Lazarillo
 was forc'd to betake himself to his Heels, and run for it, not having any Excuse or specious Pretence wherewith to couzen Old 
Vulcan,
 too well acquainted with such kind of De∣vices. This Stratagem failing, he try'd a Pick-lock of his own In∣vention; but that not taking Effect neither, he resolv'd at length to take away Cabinet and all. To which purpose he watch'd his Opportu∣nity, which he obtained in a short time. For, the Master had a Cu∣stom to keep within all the Day, and take his Recreations abroad in the Night. Thereupon 
Young Lazarillo
 watching his time, con∣veighed himself into his Master's Chamber, and hid himself under the Bed; and when he found the

 Coast clear, getting the Cabinet into his Custody, stole out of the House and march'd all Night. In the Morning he found himself near a small Town about Sixteen Miles off from the School, where believing himself secure, he thought it requisite to rest his ten∣der weary Limbs, and solace him∣self with the sight of his Purchase. To which purpose he enter'd the first Inn he came to, and there call'd for some 
Moscatella
 Wine, which he had heard much talk of, but never had tasted in his Life. At which the People of the House admiring that such a young Ur∣chin as he, should call for such a sort of dainty Liquor, viewed him very circumspectly, but more e∣specially the Cabinet under his Arm, which bred in them no small Jealousies of the Bearer; so that they acquainted their Master with it; who being a kind of 
Corrigi∣dor


 or Constable, without craving Pardon for intruding, desired to be admitted into 
Young Lazarillo
's Society. Upon his admission, he began to Catechize 
Young Laza∣rillo,
 asking him, Whence he came, Whither he was going, and, What he had in his Casket? But, before he could study an an∣swer to the Questions which were put to him, he was overtaken by those that closely pursued him; so that poor 
Young Lazarillo
 was laid hold on, and his Treasure taken from him.


Thus, ready to die, he was car∣ried back to the place from whence he came; where, by the Master, he was confined close Prisoner within a Chamber, though not altogether without Company; for, he was daily visited by the Master, who with a Cat-of-Nine-Tails flead his Buttocks twice a-Day; who, after he had Skinn'd

 his Posteriors, would often wash them with Water and Salt. With∣in a Week, his Mother being sent for, arriv'd; who, hearing of the Rogueries of her hopeful Son, grew so impatient, that she would needs take him to Task her self; but, when she had untruss'd him, and saw in what a woeful Plight he was (his Shirt being stiffen'd like a piece of Buckram with Mat∣ter and Blood, and his tender But∣tocks all Plough'd and Harrow'd with the Cat-with-Nine-Tails) she began to scold at the Master; who, to pacifie her, told her, that great Offences required severe Pu∣nishments, and used so many Ar∣guments, that his Mother at length was in part pacified; but, what to do with the Young Stripling she knew not; and therefore she con∣sulted with the Master, who told her, He durst not keep the young Vermin any longer; for that the

 Country People brought in daily most grievous Complaints against him; and, to aggravate his Mo∣ther the more, he gave her a Ca∣talogue of his Crimes; As, how that once going to correct him for some unlucky Prank or other, having given himself a Laxative on purpose, he Squirted full in his Face upon the first Lash; That, when he was upon the Boys Backs ready to be Whipp'd, he bit Holes in their Ears; That another time, having surreverenc'd in a Paper, and running to the Window with it that look'd into the Yard, as his Old Mistress was gaping up to see who opened the Casement, he let the Contents drop into her Mouth; That, in the Summer∣time he watch'd the Lusty Young Girls, that were wont to Bath themselves in a Brook not far from the School; and hiding himself under a Bush till they were strip∣ed,

 he would then go and take a∣way their Cloths, and make them dance after him stark naked, till he had satisfied his waggish Humour; That he his Master ha∣ving some choice Apricocks in his Garden, which were kept as chary as the forbidden Fruit for his pe∣culiar Tooth, and looking out at his Window while 
Young Lazaril∣lo
 was filling his Pockets, though not able to discern who it was, and therefore sending for all the Boys together to make a privy search, her Son understanding the Business, cleverly conveigh'd the Fruit into the next Boy's Pocket; by which means, the poor Inno∣cent Boy was severely lash'd, for the Crime which he himself had committed.


Lazarillo
 hearing all this, and the serious Consultation of his Mo∣ther, how to dispose of him for the future (wherein she proposed

 several Methods, no way pleasing to 
Young Lazarillo
) thereupon he resolved to give her the slip, and try his own Fortune in the World.


With this Resolution away he trips, determining to steer his Course as Fortune should guide him. The first Dinner he made, was upon the Fruits of the Field, and the Bushes, and when Night approached, he was forced to be∣take himself to a Hay-Cock; but, considering with himself that he had no School-Exercise to make, nor was in any danger of over∣sleeping himself the next Morn∣ing, he endur'd his Hardship with the more Patience.


The next Day he rambled along (all tatter'd and torn with the Bushes and Briars, and with scrambling over the Hedges to get at the Green Pease as he went a∣long) and, by that time 'twas Night, he got to an Inn that

 stood alone upon the Road, where he begg'd Victuals and desired to lie in the Barn. The Master and Mistress of the House call'd him in, and seeing him a comely young Boy, ask'd him, Whence he came, and, Who were his Friends, and, Whither he was going? to all which the young arch Rogue an∣swer'd, That he was a poor Fa∣therless and Motherless Child; That he had been put to School while they lived, and could both Read and Write; but, that his Pa∣rents) to whom he gave wrong Names) being lately dead, he was put to his Shifts, and would be willing to serve any Body, and do any thing for a living. The modest Look of the Boy, and the neatness of his Delivery, bred Compassion in the Master and Mistress of the House, so that they resolv'd to entertain him; especially the Master of the House,

 who, because he could neither Write nor Read himself, was glad of such an Assistant: For, to say Truth, 
Young Lazarillo
 was a very pretty Schollard of his Age.


In short, this Inn became his Habitation, where he was em∣ployed to go of Errands, and up∣on several other Occasions. But, he had not been long there, be∣fore such a Contrivance came in∣to this Young Boy's Noddle, that none but the Devil could have in∣vented.


In this Inn there was a Cham∣ber call'd the best Chamber, wherein were Lodg'd none but Persons of Quality that Travell'd that way. Into this Chamber was this Varlet of a Crack-rope wont to convey himself in the winter Nights, when any Guests of Quality were to be Lodg'd there, and to keep himself close conceal∣ed till they were fast asleep. Or,

 if he found them to be wakeful, betook himself to his Diabolical Stratagems, of sighing and groan∣ing like a 
troubled Ghost;
 and sometimes by the glimmering of the Coals in the Chimney, would open the Curtains, and shew him∣self in a white Shroud at the Beds side, till the poor affrighted Gen∣tleman, in a dreadful Consterna∣tion, was forc'd to wrap himself in a cold Sweat over Head and Ears; and then was his time to pick their Pockets. Nor did the Gentlemen dare to complain of their Losses, but were glad they were got out of the House; so that at length the Report was spread about the Country, that the Chamber was haunted. This Practice this young Devil of a 
La∣zarillo
 continued for almost two whole Winters; till at last, a Gentleman that had been far∣ther up in the Country, and be∣ing

 belated in his return home (which was not above Ten Miles from the Inchanted Castle) com∣ing to the Inn, desired a Lodging. The Mistress of the House made him answer, That all the Rooms in the House were taken up, but only one Chamber that was haunted. 
Let it be haunted with a Legion
 (quoth the Gentle∣man, who was a Person of Reso∣lution) 
if there be but a Mat, let me lie there, rather than in the Street.
 Only he desired a good Fire, two Great Candles, and a Book or two, to waste that time of the Night, wherein Goblings and Ghosts are most active. To be short, the Gentleman took Possession of the haunted Cham∣ber, had a good Supper and drank freely. All the forepart of the Night he sat and read; but seeing no Devil appear, between two and three a-Clock in the Morn∣ing

 he betook himself to his Rest. But no sooner had he composed himself to sleep, than he felt some∣thing creeping softly up at the Bed's Feet, and by and by some∣what weighty upon his Shins. At which gathering up his Legs, he gave a spring with both his Legs, which gave the young Devil such a squelch, that he fell plump upon the Floor. Ay, thought he, the Devil's Airy Body can never make such a Noise. And with that, starting out of his Bed, he ran to the Chamber Door, and holding it fast lock'd in his Hand, knock'd and call'd as loud as he could to raise the House. In a short time, the Master and Mistress came, who, with two or three Servants and Lights, being let in, they fell to searching the Cham∣ber, not leaving the least Hole or Cranny which they did not accurately peep into, yet could

 find nothing, which put the Gen∣tleman into some kind of Amaze. But at last, remembring they had not look'd under the Table that stood in the middle of the Room, cover'd with a large Carpet that trailed on every side upon the Ground, they turned up the Car∣pet, and there they found the cun∣ning Devil, 
Young Lazarillo;
 who being brought forth and ex∣amined by the Gentleman, who was himself an 
Alguezite,
 or Ju∣stice of the Peace; upon his Exa∣mination, confessed the whole 
se∣ries
 of his Roguery, and was thereupon sent to the next Grand Gaol, there to be punished upon the sitting of the next 
Hermandad.


The News of this Young De∣vil being thus spread all over the Country, 
Lazarillo
's Mother knew now where to find her lost Son. And, such was her motherly Af∣fection, that with much ado, and

 the Expence of some Money, af∣ter the Hangman had visited his Shoulders with the Publick Lash, she got him Home again.


Young Lazarillo
 was by this time arrived at some years of Dis∣cretion; and, his Mother belie∣ving that his last Afflictions might have wrought in him some kind of Reformation, by the Advice of Friends sent him to another School of a higher Order, where, to say Truth, he strangely impro∣v'd, to the great Content of his Parents and his Master.


But now Lament and Weep with me; for here comes the dis∣mal Catastrophe, that nipp'd this Blossom in the Bud; and, for ought we know, deprived us of one of the pleasantest Lives that ever was Writ.


For, it happen'd, that the time for choosing of 
Kings
 being near, and the Master intending to give

 some Recreation to his Scholars, resolv'd to make a 
Royalty.
 When the Time came, the Cake was divided; and, the Kingdom of the Bean, fell to 
Young Lazarillo
's share. With which he presently acquaint∣ed his Mother, that she might pro∣vide him Clothes and necessary Ornaments. The Day of Tri∣umph being come, he was moun∣ted upon a 
Rozinant,
 like that of D. 
Quixot
's, a perfect Enchant∣ed Horse, the leanest that ever was seen; for, his Chine was at least a Mile long; and, he was withal so humble, that he went all the way making of Congies. He had but one Eye, a Neck like a Camel, and a Tail like an Ape, that is to say, no Tail at all. 
Young Lazarillo
 being mounted upon this sprightly Barb, and attended by all the rest of his School-fellows, drest up in all the Finery their Mothers could procure for them,

 they all made their Procession through the Market-Place; but, coming near the Herb-woman's Stalls, 
Lazarillo
's Hunger starv'd Horse fell upon a Basket of Cole∣worts, and devour'd them in a Trice, as being not a little over∣joy'd at so pleasant a Bait. Upon which, the Herb-woman, whose Coleworts they were, being a sort of unruly Jade, and as Impu∣dent as an Oister Wench, began to set up her Throat; at which, the whole Tribe came flocking a∣bout her, with a great number of Rakehells and Porters, who snatch∣ing up their great handfuls of Turneps and Onions, fell to pelt∣ing of the poor King, who knew not what shift to make; and, at the same time, one of these Cuck∣oldly Rogues gave his Horse so full a Charge upon the Nose, that being none of the strongest, he fell backward with the King's

 Worship, not upon dry Land, but (with Reverence be it spoken) into a Bottomless Jakes, where, before timely Assistance could come to their Relief, the Horse and the Rider were stifl'd; where we must be forc'd to leave them, without saying any thing of their Funerals; being instructed by the Proverb, which tells us, 
The more you stir, the more 'twill stink.
 Be∣sides, that it is all that we can find of the Acts and Deeds of 
Young Lazarillo,
 whose Unfortunate End was bemoaned by all that knew him.


FINIS.













