Poor Robins Character of France, or, France painted to the life in a brief dialogue of the description of that nation, their manners, customs, complements, language, discourse &c. : as also, an exact character of the city of Paris, of their gentry, peasants, women &c. / by Poor Robin ...
Poor Robin.
Approx. 69 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 16 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2006-06 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A55410




Wing P2878



ESTC R8615





ocm 13736675




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Poor Robins Character of France, or, France painted to the life in a brief dialogue of the description of that nation, their manners, customs, complements, language, discourse &c. : as also, an exact character of the city of Paris, of their gentry, peasants, women &c. / by Poor Robin ...
Poor Robin.
Winstanley, William, 1628?-1698.
31 p.   


London :


[s.n.],


1666.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
France --  Description and travel.
France --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
Paris (France) --  Description and travel.
2005-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2005-08
Aptara
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2006-01
Emma (Leeson) Huber
Sampled and proofread
2006-01
Emma (Leeson) Huber
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2006-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






P2878


13736675


101631














POOR ROBIN'S

CHARACTER
OF
FRANCE:
OR,

FRANCE
 Painted to the Life. IN
A BRIEF DIALOGUE
OF THE
Description of that Nation, their Man∣ners,
Customs, Complements, Lan∣guage,
Discourse, 
&c.
 AS ALSO,
An exact 
Character
 of the City of 
Paris,

of their Gentry, Peasants, Women, 
&c.
 By 
POOR ROBIN,
 Knight of the
Burnt-Island, a Well willer to the
French Taylors.


London,
 Printed in the Year 1666.








To the Judicious READERS.


Gentlemen,


I
 Here present you with a Dish of Dainties, I assure you
you no 
Kickshaws,
 though drest after the French mode.
To describe that people aright, a man must have in him
extraordinary of the Mimmick, and therefore I would desire
the Reader in the perusal of these Lines, to adde to them
something of action; for it is impossible to personate a
French-man aright, unless he with it play the Antick:
My request therefore is to all those who shall read this 
ook
in Taverns, Ale-houses, or Coffee-houses, to have a special
care therein, that I may not be murthered in my own Lines,
but to adde to it a graceful shaking of the head, drawing back
the legs, and thrusting out the shoulders, and then it will
be 
ala mode France.
 If all the humors I have writ of them
do not suit patt to the Nation the same time you read this,
you must impute it to the fickleness of those people, whose
inconstancy is such, that let me now write never so real a
truth of their Garb or Clothes, though the Author and
Printer make all the haste imaginable, they will be in another
fashion before the Book can be published, that a Taylor may
as well take measure of a Garment for the Moon, as an Au∣thor
to describe the Habits and Fashions of that People. So
now Reader, having told you at the door how you are to be∣have
your self, if you please walk in and see the Show.












POOR ROBIN'S
CHARACTER
OF
FRANCE.




English-man.


GOod morrow, 
Monsieur.






French-man.


Tres humble Serviteur, Monsieur.






English-man.


What makes you stirring so early this morning?






French-man.


No ting, but me owe de leetle mony to de Hoastess, and de pocky-hora
vill no stay, but send vor de Shargeant, dat scare me worss den de Tif∣fell;
begar me sooner see de Tiffel den de Shargeant, me be de sush
Bird vas vill no sing in de Cage: fish vay sall me take to be safe? me
mus come no near de Hoastess, me goe in de 
France,
 den 
futra
 vor de
Shargeant.






English-man.


And what Calling do you intend when you come into 
France?






French-man.


Ah, me have de brava Calling in de Varle, me play ode 
Fidle,
 me
teash a to Dance, O so rare, so rare! begar 
London
 vill de undone
when me be in de 
France:
 Begar you no ave de autre man in all de Shitty
so brave fellow as me selfe; yet begar me no shuse but run, de pocky
Shargeant doe scare a me so.






English-man.


Indeed a Fidler in 
France
 is a man of a very high repute, for I
remember about five years ago being in your Countrey at a town


not far distant from 
Orleans,
 whilest I and the rest of my compa∣ny
(amongst which was a 
Fille de Joy
 of 
Paris
) were at Dinner,
there entred into our Room three of these uncouth fellows, with
Flats on their heads like cover'd Dishes, and in such a garb as our
Countrey-men use to clothe Poles wherewith to affrighten Crows
from eating their Corn, being for the most part pinn'd together,
and the rest fastened with here and there a stitch, so that they
were 
a la mode de Tatterdemallion.
 At the first sight of them I
cast one eye on my Cloak, and the other on my Sword, as not
knowing what occasion I might have of the one, to desend the
other; for by their insol
nt int
nsion and sa
cy boldness, I could
not imagine them to be other than Thieves: but when I took a
more strict survey of their Apparrel, I soon alter'd that opinion,
and rather guess'd them to be the Excrement of a Prison, though
it soon appeared that I was alike deceived in my thoughts, they
being neither better nor worse than errant Fidlers. These fel∣lows,
though such as we in 
England
 should not hold worthy of the
Whipping-post, without leave, and without reverence on their
parts performed, fell to their work, abusing our ears with such an
harsh Lesson, that one of our School-boys playing on the 
Jews-Trump

compared to this, might have been taken for the Musick
of the Spheres: but as if this had not been punishment enough un∣to
us, they must needs adde to it one of their Songs, but then
how did I bless my self in the remembrance of our Ballad-singers
when they Chant the Tunes of 
In Summer time,
 and 
Ch
vy-Chase!

Now though I understood not French perfectly yet by that little
I had, and the simpering of the 
Fille de Joy,
 I perceived it was
Bawdy, yea, such as could not patiently be endured by any but a
French-man.






French-man.


Begar you be de Rouge to speak sush ting of de French-man, no pee∣ple
in de varle dat do sing like unto dem; begar me should by de prate
tink dat dis drunk, but dat me no see stagger.






English man.


But 
Monsieur,
 give me leave to proceed in my Story: what to
do to be rid of these fellows I knew not, for I knew not how to
call them Rogues handsomly in French, and for other Languages


they understood none, and to beat them, they were Villains of
such an inferior quality, as indeed was not worthy of mine or any
honest mans anger; a knot of Rascals so infinitely below the se∣verity
of a Statute, that they would have discredited the Stocks;
and to have hang'd them, as it would have hazarded the reputa∣tion
of the Gallowes, so it would have been unprofitable to the
Executioner, their Clothes being onely fit for the Rag-woman;
it would have puzzled a man in a whole years time to have studi∣ed
a Vengeance for them which they would not have injured, in
the suffering the greatest torment one could inflict on them, be∣ing
not to hearken to their Ribaldry. But to proceed, after their
Song was ended, one of them pulled a Dish out of his pocket,
and set it before us, into which we were to cast our Benevolence,
which by custom (you know 
Monsieur
) is but but onely a Soll from
every man; such a rare Calling it is to be a Fidler in 
France!






French-man.


Begar me be no sush Fidler, me be de Mushishaner, dat play to de
Lords, to de Ladies; me goe brave in de Parrell, me kish de Shamber∣maid,
me lye wid de Kitchen-Wensh, but if me get her wid Shilde, O
Diabolo, vat sall become of me den?






English-man.


It is but shifting into another Countrey, you know Fidlers and
Beggars are never out of their Sphere. I suppose it is impossible
for you to be lowsie you shift so often.






French-man.


Begar me go to 
Parry
 de brav
 Shitty in de varle, dis Shitty is no
compare wid 
Parry,
 no more den de Bushers knife is wid a long Tord.






English-man.


Indeed 
Monsieur
 your Comparison is very suitable, if by your
last word you mean 
Paris,
 as I suppose you do; the onely stink of
which place being a greater strength unto it, and more powerful
to keep out an Enemy, than the Ditches or Bullwarks round a∣bout
it; well therefore may it be said to be the strongest Town
in Christendom, if we take the word (strong) in that sense, as
when we say, such a man hath a 
strong breath;
 for otherways it is
so weak, that if the stink of the streets keep him not out, there
is no assurance to be looked for of the Walls: But that which is


most admirable, is, that in such a perpetuated constancy of stinks,
there is also such an admirable and distinct variety, that a Chy∣mical
Nose after two or three perambulations, would hunt out
b
inde-fold, each several street by the smells, as perfectly as an∣other
by his eye in a serene Skie at noon day.






French man.


Par ma foy de tell loud lye, begar 
Parry
 is so brava dat no express
it, begar be Son of Debastalder to say 
Parry
 tinks, when it is sweet as
de Rose, and de brava Houses in de varle.






English-man.


I confess your Houses in 
Paris
 are very handsom to the street∣ward,
but for the Furniture within, they come very much behind
ours; the French men most commonly carrying all their wealth
on their back, so that when they are in their best Clothes, they
may be said to be in the middle of their Estates, when the poorest
Trades man in 
London
 hath his Plate to drink in, and is served up
with his Pewter-dishes of several sorts, your Artisans of 
Paris

coming so far behinde them, that they would be glad of meat
(could they but reach to the price of it) although it were in a
Wooden Dish.






French-man.


Begar de Artisan of 
Parry
 be de brava fellow, de Engliss Taylor be
noting, de make Breech vit vor de Plough-man, 'tis not 
ala mode France:

De France Taylor trick de Clown up so rara, make him zhow like de
Gentil-man. De Engliss Barber Trim make man like de Goate.






English-man.


The French Barber trims so as makes a man look like a Mon∣key,
come 
Monsieur
 I must help you out with it: You French men
are indeed excellent fellows for Toys, very perfect at Tooth∣picks,
Beard-brushes, and Gentle womens Fans; but in other more
substantial Trades how infinitely short do you come of the Eng∣lish?
Your Cutlers make such abominable and fearful Knives, as
would grieve a mans heart to see them, enough almost to make
one loathe the Victuals that should be cut by such mis-shapen In∣struments.
And your Glovers are worse than your Cutlers, for
you would imagine by their Gloves, that the hand for which they
were made, were cut off by the wrist. And what excellent work∣men


your Painters are, may be seen by the Signes hanging over
each door in 
Paris
 for a distinguishment, as with us at 
London:
 but
so hideously are these made, and so little resembling the thing sig∣nified,
that if a Hen did not scrape better Pourtraitures on a
Dunghil, I would be bound to eat no other meat but of a French
paisant womans dressing during life, which would be a torment
next to starving; very convenient therefore is it that they have
it printed in Capital Letters under every Sign what it is, for fear
the Spectators should take a Cock for a Bull, or a Pigg for a
Goss-hawk.






French-man.


Me can no longra endure to heare 
Parry
 de brave Shitty in de varle to
be so degraste.






English-man.


A brave City indeed, and of a strange composition, wherein a
man cannot live in the Summer for fear of being poisoned with
the stink, nor in the Winter for the like danger of being mired
with the dirt.






French-man.


Begar if de speak so false of 
Parry
 de brava Shitty, vat will de den
doe of de Countrey!






English-man.


For your Countrey, I must confess indeed the soyl thereof is
enough plentiful, stored with Corn, Beasts, and Fowls; but alas,
what is that to the poor peasant, who onely beholdeth it with his
eyes, seldom or never so much as tasting it with his mouth; a
Capon or Rabbit being almost as unlawful for these miserable
Creatures to eat, as it was in the Old Law for any but the Priests
to eat Shew-bread. I believe one of your Countrey Taylors has
but an ordinary Trade with them, they thinking themselves hap∣py
if in their apparel they can but mount to Canvass, for wool∣len
Cloth is beyond the reach of their purse, and he that aspires
to Fustain, will not stick to justle for the best place in the Parish,
even to that of the Church-warden: For Hats they will be sure
to have them, though their Bellies pinch for it, and that it may
appear they have them, they alwayes keep them on their heads.
I suppose they are great Enemies to Hosiers and Shooe-makers,


because they seldom wear any Shooes or Stocking;, but such as
Nature furnishes them withal, unless it be on some principal Ho∣ly-day,
when they will be sure to go to Church.






French-man.


Vat dis de speak of de p
isant, begar de paisant be de Clown in all
Country, but de France Gentilman is de brave Gentilman in de varle.






English-man.


What is spoken of your Nation in general, that they are won
with a Feather, and lost with a straw, may more particularly be
applyed to these your 
de brave Gentil men,
 who at fi
st sight will
be as familiar with you as your sleep, and follow you as doth your
shadow; but upon the least distaste, for a word speaking they
will draw their sword: They are brave fellows at a first On-set,
begin an action like thunder, and end it in a smoke, at the first
encounter more than men, in the close thereof less than women.
They are very Complemental, and full of their Court Cringes,
without which none is accounted a Gentil-man. At my first co∣ming
to 
Paris,
 one of these Monsieurs add essed himself to me,
carrying his head as if he had been ridden with a Martingal, then
did he draw back his legs, and thrust out his shoulders in such a
ridiculous posture, that made my Worship to laugh heartily to see
the Ape out-done by the French-man.






French-man.


Begar me can forbeare no longra, de Rouge, de Rascal, de Jack-napes,
compare de France-man ala moda, to de Ape, begar fleesh, blood, spee∣rit,
na de Saule can no suffer dis; par ma foy de thrush Tord in de heart
bleed if de speak dis.






English-man.


Monsieur,
 not so angry, we know the temper of your Country∣men
well enough, though you will draw the Sword on the least
distaste, a minutes pause sheathes it again, then if a man beats
you into better manners you will take it kindly, kiss your hand,
and cry 
Serviteur.
 I must confess at first when I came to 
Paris,
 I
did much admire the gallantry of your Nation, thinking no place
in the world comparable to it for Nobility and Gentry, until at
last one foul mistake rectified my judgement, which was this:
There came to visit a Scotch Lord of my acquaintance a French


Gallant, who had on him a Sute of Turky Grogram doubled
with Taffata, 
asht after the French fashion, and belayed with
Bugle-lace, a Shirt of pure Holland appearing through the open∣ings
of his Doublet, which was likewise wrought with curious
Needle-work; the Points at his Waste and Knees (for so the fa∣shion
there then was) alledged with a Silver-edging; his Garters,
Roses, and Hat-band sutable to his Points; a Beaver Hat, and a
pair of Silk-stockings; his Cloak also of Turky Grogram cut up∣on
black Taffaty. This man by his Habit I guessed to be no less
than a Lord, (for who would have imagined 
Aesops
 Fable to have
been a real truth, that the Ass was drest up in the Lyons skin)
and according to the man that I imagined him to be, I gave him
the Stile of 
My Lord
 at every word. After some discourse, he see∣ing
me to clap a Handkerchief to my cheek, and to make a kinde
of a sowre face, asked me what I ailed? I told him I was very
much troubled with the Tooth-ache. Alas, said he, that is a grie∣vous
pain, but ca
l on me at my Lodging the next morning, and I
shall presently give you ease: I humbly thanked his Lordship for
such an immense favor, with the greatest obeysance I could de∣vise;
and the next morning somewhat before the time appoint∣ed,
sent my servant for a Barber to trim me and make me neat,
because I could not tell what occasion I might have of seeing his
Lady, or his Daughters. This Messenger chanced to happen on
his Lordship, who was no other than a Barber; but when I saw
him come in with his Apron before him, and pulling a Case of In∣struments
out of his pocket, bless me! I thought I should have
split my self with laughing, had not the consideration of my own
folly, of being so obeysant to him the night before, something re∣strained
me. His Lordship, though he guessed the cause of my
extraordinary mirth, yet fell to work about me, to the earning
of a 
Quardesou,
 and indeed he was very dexterous in his Art, and
soon made my Chin 
ala mode;
 then would he have proceeded to
to the pulling out of my Tooth, but the pain being now some∣thing
abated, I told his Lordship I would retain it in my head a
little longer: wherefore pocketing up his 
Quardesou,
 with a low
cringing, and less courtesie on my part than before, his Lordship
departed.








French-man.


Begar dat vas brave, de France Barber couzen de Engliss-man,
begar me no shuse but laugh till de burss: O de France Barbers be de
brave fellows in de varle, but where den did thee goe ven de went
from 
Parry?






English-man.


A Friend and I having a great desire to see the Countrey, we
took Post-horse, intending for 
Amiens,
 but might as good have
been mounted on a Post, as on such Jades; as lean they were as

Envy
 is by the Poets feigned to be, having neither flesh on their
bones, nor skin on their flesh, nor hair on their skin; neither was
it so alone, that their bones might be numbred through their skin,
but the Spur-galls had made such Casements in their flesh, that an
ordinary Farrier might have known what Diseases they were trou∣bled
with, by surveying their Entrails. They were very easie to
be mounted, and there was no great fear of melting them by over∣riding,
surely 
Don Quixot
's 
Rozinante
 was a horse of State to
either of these. Being thus mounted, and galloping a foot pace,
in twelve hours we had ridden fourteen miles; night coming on,
and a pretty big Town just before us, we resolved to lodge there,
whert enquiring for one of the chief Inns, we were directed to
the skelliton of a House, which in 
England
 would scarcely have
passed for an Ale-house, and yet there it was an Inn, ay, and an
honorable one too: Alighting at the door, the Hoast of the house
came out unto us, at first sight I took him to be one of the three
Fidlers I told you of before, a pitiful ragged, shabby fellow.






French-man.


Dat is no honest to de grase French Inns, de base Guest dat raile on
de Hoast; begar de French Inns be more good den de Engliss Inns, ver
in de French Inns is de brave vine, but in de Engliss Inns is no ting
but de Beere






English-man.


But 
Monsieur,
 notwithstanding your Wine, I suppose our ordi∣nary
Ale-houses are a story higher praise worthy than your Inns,
as may appear by the description of this, and by which you may
give a guess at the rest. No sooner were we alighted, but our
Hoast (the ragged fellow I told you of before) conducted us to a


room, somewhat resembling a Charnel-house, being full as dark
and as dampish; on one side whereof was a pretty big hole, which
formerly had been a Glass-window, but the Glass being gone it
was for the most part stopped up with Pease straw: In this room
was the resemblance of three Beds, for by their description you
will say it was improper to call them Beds; the foundation of
them was of straw, which not having been shifted in many a year,
it was so infinitely thronged together, that the Wooll-packs which
our Judge sit on in the Parliament, were melted Butter to them.
Upon this lay a large Bag containing a Medley of Flocks and Fea∣thers,
but so ill ordered, that they stuck out of the sides like to the
knobs of a Crab-tree Cudgel; the Sheets on those Beds were

party per pale,
 a mean betwixt white and black, and so course, that
a Mariner would have disdained to have used them for a Sayl; the
Coverlets were alike answerable to the rest of the Bedding, here
a hole, and there a patch, and for Curtains and Valances, my
Landlady had disrobed the Beds of them two years before, to make
she and the kinde natured Gentleman her Husband, Clothes of
them.






French-man.


Begar if de make Cloase of de Curtans a
d de Vaylance, den de
look like de Jack Pudding.






English man.


Having taken a view of the Furniture of this Room, seeing eve∣ry
thing so nasty, I supposed it was impossible to finde any Vi∣ctuals
there; and that if our horses were the Pictures of 
Envy,

this place was the Receptacle of 
Famine:
 But see how I was mi∣staken
in my thoughts! for my Hoastess (whose head was wrap∣ped
about with a dirty Dish-clout) had for our Suppers cut the
throat of a Pullet, and tearing it in pieces with her hands, she af∣ter
that took away Feathers and Skin together, stripping it as we
strip Rabbets in 
England,
 then clapping it into a Pan, it was soon
fryed and set upon the Table; the Napery belonging to which was
suitable to the Bedding, as foul and as dirty, my Landlady being
so provident a Creature, she would not have it worn out with of∣ten
washing. The Napkins were fit companions for the Clothes,


which would rather foul ones fingers with whiping on them, than
make them clean.






French-man.


Begar she were de Slu
t dat no w
sh Linnen till de tink, par ma foy
de Shade va
d bin hanged; bega
 me could raile on her out of all
de cry.






English-man


Nay 
Monsieur,
 you may as well rail on the rest as on this, for
though some few of your Inns be not altogether so wretched, yet
is the alteration almost insensible.






French-man.


Begar de lye dere be brave Inns in 
France,
 in 
Paris,
 in 
Roven,

&c. one, twa, tre stories high, where de Hoast goe like de Gentil∣man,
and de Hoastess like de Madam.






English man.


I speak not of your Inns in 
Paris,
 nor some other great Cities,
but of those in the Countrey, which are generally such as this, and
therefore 
Monsieur,
 give me leave to go on in my Story. The
Meat being on the Board, we fell unto it, hunger making us the
better able to digest the Nastiness of the Cookery: After Sup∣per,
desirous to go to Bed to refresh our Bodies, weary with ri∣ding
on those tyred Jades, we called for a 
Chamberlain,
 but you
might a good have spoken Greek to them, none of them under∣standing
what a Chamberlain was: at last came a fellow with some
patches hanging on him, but for the most part open to the skin,
who having pulled off our Boats, presently had recourse to the
Coverlet to wipe them, and having rubb'd one side a little, left the
other part to be finished by us if we would have it; it was enough
for him that he had written the Copy. Thus forced to make a
Law of Necessity, we lay till morning, not making extraordinary
haste out, lest perchance we might have lost the sight of my Hoa∣stess
and her daughters; they were not very hard to be known, for
at the first blush a stranger might swear that they were of a blood,
and indeed it had bin great pity had it bin otherwise. Not to ho∣nor
them with a further Character, let it suffice to know, that their
persons kept so excellent a decorum with the house and furniture,
that it was great pity they should be parted.








French-man


Begar me no vill stay if de speak so; Oh Mordien, we sall shitt
me selfe to heare do parte, and den vill they say dere is de shitten
French-man.






English-man.


Well then, 
Monsieur,
 to take my leave of this Inn; being about
to depart, we had such a throng about us of those ill-favoured fa∣ces,
and every one chiming out this Ditty, 
Pour les Servant,
 that
one might with greater ease have distributed a Dole at a rich mans
Funeral, than to give them a penny, their importunity, be you
never so hasty, will forestal your Bounty; yet their ambition is
not so high: after all this impudent begging, they expect but a
Soll, and he that gives them more out-bids their expectation, and
shall be counted a Spend-thrift.






French-man.


Begar me vill stay no longra, de be sush time taking leave of de
Inn, dat de might in dat time have rid fife, sex, sefen mile.






English-man.


Well then, to proceed: Being mounted, and riding very softly
according to the Genius of our horses, at the end of the Town
we came to a great Green, and it being then a petty Holy-day,
there was assembled on the Green a Miscelany or Gallimaufry of
all ages and conditions on purpose to dance.—






French-man.


Begar me mush speak now: O de dance, de skip, de fidele, par ma
foy de brava ting in all de varle.






English-man.


It seems your Nation does naturally affect it, not onely the
poor Peasants, but also the Gallant Monsieurs and Damoseils;
for here were assembled both Youth and Gentry, Age and Po∣verty,
the Rags interwoven with the Silks, and wrinkled Brows
interchangeably mingled with fresh Beauties. Those whom age
had forced to walk with a staff in the street, here taught their feet
to measure out the paces of a Dance, and others that had been
long troubled with the Sciatica, though they could not trip it so
nimbly, yet would enfo
 their feet to hobble. Some of them
were so ragged, you would have thought that a swift Galliard


would almost have shaked them into nakedness, and yet would
they venture the loosing of their Clothes for the gaining of a
Dance. Nay, those whom either Age or other Infirmity had not
permitted to go, yet would be carryed thither in their Chairs, to
behold the Pastimes, and tread the measures with their Eyes; to
perswade them to stay at home when they heard the Fidle, was to
seek to empty the Sea with a spoon, or to perswade a 
Lutners

Love-Lady to become a Nun.




—A work so great,


Would make 
Olympus
 bearing 
Atlas
 sweat.








French man.


O de brave exercise in de varle, begar no ting is wid it de com∣pare.
O de brave shite to heare de Fidele, to see dem dance, to leap,
to skip.—O dat me were amongst dem.—






English-man.


That which to you is so pleasing, soon wearied us, wherefore
we took our leaves of them, and proceeded on in our Journey, and
about Noon came to another Town somewhat bigger than a Vil∣lage,
and comparable to the worser sort of Market-Towns in

England,
 distant from the place where we lay before, about five
miles, (for we rid very hard, and spared not for Horse-flesh) here
we resolved to bait both our selves and our horses, and to that
purpose singled out an Inn where we expected to finde best ac∣commodations,
and indeed we thought we had found a great pur∣chase,
for there it was our fortune to meet with a Rabbet, larded
it was, as all meat is in that Countrey, otherwise it is so lean it
would be burnt up ere it could be roasted, it was served up with
the feet on, and the reason of the custom thereof in that Country
is (I conceive) that being a frugal Nation, they would make them
go the further. The sight of this Dish gave us great content, but
when we came to eat thereof, it proved so tough, that I verily
think it was no more than two removes from that Rabbet which
was in the Ark; but though it proved so bad in the eating, the
price thereof was good enough, no less than Half a Crown Eng∣lish.
My Companion thought it to be very dear, but I adjudged
otherwise, for certainly the Grass which fed it was worth more
than eight times the money.








French-man.


Begar some men do tink meat is no good if dat it be no deare, par
may foy vould me had it present, me could eat it, vor me is very
angry.






English-man.


Nay 
Monsieur,
 if you be so angry that you grow quarrelsom,
I shall beat you into better manners.






French-man.


Begar me no say quarrelsom, me be angry, dat is, me could veede
on de Rappit.






English-man.


O cry you mercy Sir, now I understand ye, I suppose you are
better to feed than to fight; but alas, Rabbets are too dainty meat
for French Peasants, for in that rank I must place ye, though now
you have got on a borrowed Garb of English Feathers, but when
you come amongst your fellows, you must then be glad to do as
they do, your Bread of the coursest flour, and so black that it can∣not
admit of the name of brown, and for drink have recourse to
the next Fountain, content onely with so much as is sufficient to
keep you from the extremities of Cold and Famine.






French-man.


Begar be de R
gue to call me Paisant, me be de Gentilman Mu∣shishaner,
me be de Compaigne vor de Lord, vor de Madam, me fi∣dele
vor de Gentilman, and at de Weddin.






English-man.


Now you put me in minde of a Wedding, I must tell y
 of one
that I saw once at 
Orleans,
 where at my going into the Town, I
met with Mistriss Bride coming from the Church: The day before
she had been somewhat of the condition of such as scowre Drip∣ping-pans
in Great Mens houses, and went accoutred as those wo∣men
that in 
London
 cry 
Kitching-stuff
 about the streets of the Ci∣ty:
but now there was a strange metamorphosis in her, you
would not believe she was the same woman, she was so tricked up
with Scarffs, Rings, Cross-garters, Knots of Ribbonds, 
&c.
 that
she was 
a la mode France.
 Now could the fellow have marryed
onely her Clothes, I should have very much applauded his for∣tune,
but it could not be so (God be merciful to him) he was al∣so


chained to the Wench, much good may it do him with her, and
much joy may they have together most peerless Couple.




Sing,
 Hymen, Hym
n, O Hymenae
,


O Hymen, Hymen, Hymenaee.




I would have a French man marry none but a French woman, for
a fitter Match cannot be.






French-man.


Vat is dat de say? begar France weemen be de brave weemen in de
varle.






English-man.


Now 
Monsieur,
 I shall speak something of what I observed of the
women in your Country, and to begin with the Peasants, as being
most in number: They are a sort of people which cannot say the
least claim to any share of beauty, so that she which with us is rec∣koned
amongst the vulgar, would be amongst them esteemed for a
Princess, quite contrary to the women in 
England,
 where you have
many thatched Cottages that harbour such Beauties, as would
tempt 
Jupiter
 from his Throne to court them in a golden Showre.
Answerable to their Beauty is their Attire, their head being wrap∣ped
about with an old Dish clout turned out of service, or the cor∣ner
of a Table-cloath reserved from washing; the goodness of
their faces tells us that that is sufficient, for why should the back∣part
of their head be handsomer than the fore-part? They have no
need of Masks, and the Bacon-rined colour of their faces tells us
that they were strangers to Bon graces when they were children.
As concerning Petticoats, they have all of them such a kinde of
Garment, but most of them so short, you would think them cut off
at the Placket; Now when the Parents have worn them till such
time as the rottenness of them will save a labor of undressing, they
are a nevv cut out and fitted for the children, by vvhich time they
have done vvith them, they speed to the dunghil, being scorned to
be taken up by the Rag-vvoman. For shooes and stockings they
take no great care for, few of them ever had above one pair in all
their lives, and vvhich they vvear every day, being very durable.
In this degree hath Nature placed them, and the greatest happi∣ness
that they do enjoy, is that they are contented vvith the same.








French-man.


But vat is dis of de Paisant to de France Gentil woman.






English-man.


Well, next I will speak somthing of the middle sort of wo∣men,
or such as live in Cities and great Towns, (for I shall for∣bear
to mention the Court, as being above my sphere) of these
sort of women there is much difference from the Peasants; but
in what? surely nothing but in attire, otherwise Nature hath
not been over prodigal to them for beauty, so that 
Don Quixot

did not so deservedly assume to himself the title of 
The Knight
of the ill favoured face,
 as they may that of the 
Damosels
 of it;
The most comly and best proportioned part about them is their
hands, long, white, and slender; but scarce shall you see one
of a hundred, whose wrists, and betwixt their fingers is no

all over-run with a scab like to a leprosie. Their dispositions
hold good correspondency with their faces, and suit as well as
a Toast and Nutmeg doth with a pot of Ale in the depth of Win∣ter,
all which you will swear to be truth, when you once come
but to hear them speak; no better Character being to be ga∣thered
of them, then from their prating, which is so tedious
and infinite, that you shall sooner want ears than they Tongues;
set but their Tongues once a going, and they are like to a
Watch, you need not winde them up above once in twelve hours,
for so long will the Thread of their discourse be in spinning,
such everlasting Talkers are they all, that they will sooner
want breath then words, there being no wayes to silent them,
but only to go out of their Companies. But were this only to
some of their Familiars, it were the more tolerable, but stran∣ger
or acquaintance, all is one, though indeed no man is to
them a stranger, for in two houres time you shall have them as
familiar, and as merry with you, as if you had been of their ac∣quaintance
seven yeares, or bred up in a house together ever
since you were born; Now though I cannot condemn any of
them of dishonesty, as having had no such experience of them,
yet to an Englishman such sudden affability argues somwhat of
a confident boldness, to say no worse. I remember, the first
time I came to 
London,
 being but a young Novice, scarcely wri∣ting



Man,
 passing through 
Luteners-lane,
 a Gentlewoman stand∣ing
at the door accosted me with these words, 
How do you Sir,
I am heartily glad to see you well, how have you done a long time?

Seeing so beautiful a Lady, with black patches on her face, and
drest 
Alamode de France,
 thus to salute me, I could not chuse
but admire; 
Madam,
 said I, 
do you know me? alack
 (Sir said she)

pray come in and let us discourse together:
 but notwithstanding
her bold invitation away I went, and coming to my Lodging,
relating the story, Sir, said one to me, you must have a care of
such Creatures, for notwithstanding their brave Garbe, they
are no other then common Strumpets. This sudden fami∣liarity
of the French-women made me to remember this
story. for—






French-man.


Begar be de Rogue, de shallenge de feeld, compare de
French Madam to de 
Lutener-lane
 pocky-hora; begar me no
shuse but feight up to de nose in plood; begar me can no dure
dis.






English-man.


You fight, you sh—think you with high words to daunt
me? do not I know the Nature of your Country men better
then so? how in one thing they very much resemble the De—
meekness or submission maketh them insolent, but a little
resistance putteth them to their heels, or makes him your
Spaniel.






French-man.


Begar me tink no hurt, though de speak so. Tres humble Serviture
Mounsieur.






English-man.


Then to proceed in my story concerning the French women.
They are abundantly full of laughter and toying, and have al∣ways
in store some lascivious songs, which they refuse not to
sing in any company, so that a stranger would think modesty
were quite banished the Kingdom, or rather that it had never
been there; and whereas women in other Countrys are most
ashamed to discourse of those parts which makes them women.
These French Dames will talk of them, even before men, as


broadly as a Midwife, or a Barber-Surgeon. So that if that saying
be true, that 
Modesty is the best apparel of a woman,
 I doubt many
of the Female sex in 
France,
 must go thinly clad, and a great many
of them quite naked.






French-man.


Begar dere be but some dut be so bad as de peak of.






English-man.


Truly I saw but little difference amongst them, it is an
Epidemical disease, both Maids and Wives, Madams and
Damosels, Rich and Poor, alike sick of it, if there were any
difference, it was onely in this, that those who were highest in
their places and callings, were likewise highest in this lightsom
vein of ribaldry.






French-man.


De speak of de Common hora, but de Fransh Gentilwoman be no
sush.






English-man.


God forbid I should condemne every one of them, though
they generally be so, but for them you call 
Common whores, I

must rank them in a degree by themselves; It was my fortune
once to be in the company of two of these 
Fille de joyes,
 but
never since I first knew mankinde and the world, did I observe so
much impudence in the general, as I did in these two; so au∣daciously
bawdie in their discourse, that even any immodest
ear would have abhorred their language, and of such a shame∣less
deportment, that their very behaviour would have fright∣ed
lust out of the most incontinent man living, but a 
French∣man.

In a word, they were Wenches able to have shamed all
the Friers with whom they had trafficked, for they would not be

cast-a,
 and could not be 
caut-a,
 and so I leave them, for me∣thinks
my discourse of them is unsavoury, but he that rakes in
filthy puddles, must be sure to meet with nasty stinks.






French-man.


Begar de hora be over all de varle, dere be de creat many in de Lon∣don,
me go in de Turnbull street, me go in de Neetingale lane me go
in de Rosemary lane, me go in de Ra-ra-ratcleefe high way, me go to
Damaris Page, me sure doe find pocky-hora, me veele it in my bones.








English-man.


Ha 
Mounsieur,
 have you got a Clap with a 
French
-Fiddle.






French-man.


Begar me no deny it, me pay Shurgeon one, twa, tree pound var de cure.






English-man


I commend you 
Mounsieur,
 for your ingenuous acknowledg∣ment;
but I having spoken so much of the 
French
-woman, I
think it convenient to say somthing of the men, for pity it is
they should be parted.






French-man.


Begar me will listen to dat, me love to heare of de France Gen∣til-man.






English-man.


As I said of the women, you might character them out by
their discourse, so may I say of the men, you may look into their
breasts by their talk, which most commonly runneth upon two
wheels, 
treason and ribaldry.
 Never in my life did I hear
people talk less reverently of their Prince, and as our Nation
have been always addicted too much to your Apish fashions, so
in our late times, when Rebellion was rampant, had they got
too much of your unworthy custom of speaking irreverently of
their King; but I hope that custom is out of use with us now.
I wish it were so in 
France;
 where scarce a day passeth without
some seditious Pamphlet printed and published, in disgrace of
the King, or some of his Courtiers; the Contents of which
Libels they will not spare to speak of in each place where they
come; take them from this, (which you can hardly do till
they have told all) and then they fall upon their ribaldry, re∣lating
stories of their own uncleanness, with a face as confi∣dent,
as if they had no accidents to please their Hearers more
commendable. Never did valiant Captain more glory in the
number of the Cities he had taken, then they will do of the
several women which they have prostituted.






French-man.


Par ma foy me no dislike dat, me love to hear talk Bawdy de leetle,
me be no shamed of dat, begar it does teekle my ling
 to hear dit.








English-man.


Nay, I know that you are not only good to talk bawdy,
but to act bawdily, and to boast of it too, as many of your
Countrey-men have done, who having been at 
London,
 upon
their return, report strange 
Chimera
's of the 
English
 modesty;
as what Merchants wives they enjoyed here, and in what fa∣miliarity
such and such a Lady entertained them at 
Westminster,

when the poor fooles have been cozened with common Prosti∣tutes;
and to this purpose I shall relate you a pretty story.
A 
French Mounsieur
 coming over full pursed to 
London,
 be∣ing
hot in the Codpiece as many of them are, desired a
Cooler, but his ambition soared so high, that common beau∣ties,
(such as those of 
France
) would not serve his turn; but
he must have a rare one, no lesse then a 
Phoenix;
 and falling in
acquaintance with a 
French Pandar,
 for a sum of money he
promised him the enjoyment of a Lady, who was much fa∣moused
for her beauty; the 
Mounsieur
 gladly hearkens there∣to,
pays his money, and thinks every houre ten, till the pre∣fixed
houre come. In the mean space the 
Pandar
 goes to a com∣mon
Prostitute, instructs her in the business, they share the mo∣ney,
and she takes upon her to imitate the Lady; a Coach is
hired, (for a Cart m
ght have been in danger of shaking her in
pieces) the 
Pandar
 and she goes together, who conducts her
to the 
Mounsieur,
 the 
French
 Gentilman courts her 
alamede,

swears he is her servant, and she with a seeming unwillingness
at last condescends to his request, but whilest he is busie in
his employment, she picks his pocket of his Watch, and three∣score
pieces of gold, which as soon as she rises from the Bed, is
strait conveyed to the 
Pandar,
 who all this while guarded the
door. Upon the receit of the prize he is gone; but before the
pretty Mob could make an escape, 
Mounsieur
 misses his Watch
and his money, he stormes and chafes like a mad-man, mistrusts
his Mob, but wonders a Lady of her quality, as he took her to
be, would do such a thing. Necessity has no Law, she endea∣vours
an escape, gets into the street, but 
Mounsieur
 overtakes
her there, and layes flat felony to her Ladiship, presently an
huburb is made, the Constable comes and carries them both be∣fore


a Justice, the Frenchman challenges her Ladiship with his
money, and she challenges him with a Rape; the Mob is searcht,
but no money found; 
Mounsieur
 is askt again, if he would
swear positively she pickt his pocket; he considers of it, and
then says, 
he was mistake;
 but she being known to be a prime
Trader in 
Fleet-yard,
 was sent to 
Bri
ewell,
 and 
Mounsieur
 dis∣mist
to go to borrow money to go to the Surgeon, of whom now
he had great need.






French-man.


Begar me was serve sush a trick one, me go into 
de Lutener-lane,

de-brave Gentilwoman at de door call me in; me kiss her, and me do
someting else, but when me was gone, me vent to de Ordinary to eat
Veetle, ven me come to pay, all me mony vas gone.






English-man.


And how come you off with the Cook?






French-man.


Begar de Cook call me French Rogue, tell me de beat-me, me vas
pray him to bè quiet, and me vild leave de tord for his reckoning.






English-man.


That was a right French trick, to eat up the Cooks meat, and
leave him a a tord for his reckoning.






French-man.


Me do no mean de tord in de belly, me mean de tord dat hang by
de side.






English-man.


Nay 
Mounsieur,
 it is pitty you should ever speak any thing but
French, your Language being very agreeable to your Natures,
which to be spoken with a grace, the head, body, shoulders must
all concern in the pronouncing of it, and the many Proverbs
wherewith it is furnished, makes it very significant to your Na∣tions
humor of scoffing. Indeed it is very full of Courtship,
which makes all your people so Complemental: The poorest
Cobler in the Village having his Court-cringes, and his 
Eau
beneste de Cour,
 his Court holy-water, as perfectly as the best Lord
of them all.






French-man.


And vy shoole henot, begar 
Franceman
 be de all Gentilman.








English-man.


And that makes you in your ordinary discourse to bestow
the highghest of titles upon those of the lowest condition, and by
this reason the Beggar begetteth 
Mounsieurs
 and 
Madams
 to his
sons and daughters, as familiarly as the King.






French-man.


Begar di
 true or me be de hang.






English-man.


But on what Gibbit 
Mounsieur
 would you desire to be
hanged on, for I observed in your Country there were seve∣ral
sorts of them, every 
Haute Justice
 having his peculiar
Gibbit, which were made wonderful methodically, by the
criticisme of which you may judge of the quality of him that
owneth it; for the Gibbit of one of the Nobles hath but
two pillars, that of the Chastellan three, the Barons
four, the Earls six, and the Dukes eight, so exact is
your Nation that they observe a Mode even in their Gal∣lowses.






French-man.


But begar me no love hanging, me shuse to die in de straw,
den be hang on de vine Gallowes in all de 
France.
 Begar
den me mus eat no more quood Mutt, quood Beef, quood
Lamb, 
&c.






English-man.


Now you speak of Beef, Mutton, and Lamb, give me
leave to tell ye some observations I made of your Cookery,
and how your Gentlemens tables furnished, which though
they come not nigh ours, yet are they beyond comparison
above the Paisants. Their Beef they cut out into little chops,
so smal, that what goes there for a laudable dish, would be
thought here to be a University Commons, now served
from the hatch. A loyne of Mutton serve amongst them for
three roastings, besides the hazard of making pottage with
the Rump. They have likewise store of Fowl, but such
as the King found in 
Scotland,
 viz. foule napkins, foule
table cloaths, &c. but to speak truth, that which they have is
sufficient for Nature and a friend, were it not for the


strange misteries of the Kitching-wench. Their Cooks are
much famed for rare fellows, but their skill consists not in
the handling of Beef, Mutton, and such like solid meats,
but in the making of puff-pastes, kickshaws, and such fine
devices, onely to fill the pallat, but not the belly, and so
by consequence would make rare fellows in a Garrison, to cozen
the belly, and feed the eye. Now if you can digest the sluttishness
of the Cookery of (which is most abominable at the first fight)
sit down and welcome, where you must say your own Grace,
private Graces being there as ordinary as private Masses, and
from whence (perhaps) they learned them. Grace ended,
fall to where you like best, for they observe no order nor
method in their eating, and if you expect a to have Carver, you
may rise a hungry; thus are their Tables furnished, and
think themselves served in as great state as King 
Nebuchad∣nezars.






French-man.


Vat is dat you say,
 No be gott no sir.






English man.


I said 
Nebuchadnezar,
 the name is something hard.






French-man.


Begar so it is; No, no, no, no be gott no sir.
Eng. ne. Fr. ne. Eng. bu. Fr. bu. Eng. chad. Fr. chad Eng. ne.
Fr. ne. Eng. zar. Fr. zar. now me have it, 
Ne-bu-chad-ne-zar,

begar me vil carry dis name into me Country var to cure de Tooth∣ake.






English-man.


And why may not that name cure the tooth-ach, as
well as many cures which are ascribed to be done by Re∣liques,
of which Reliques I saw divers of them at 
St
Denis,
 a small town with a great wall, showing like all
the world like a 
Spaniards
 little face in his great 
uffe,
or like a small chop of Mutton in a large dish of Pot∣tage
at the th
ee Penny Ordinary, at this Town in the
Church of 
 D
nis, is sa
d to be kept one of the naile



Town in the Church of St. 
Dennis,
 is said to be kept one of the
Nails which fastened our Saviour to the Cross, as also a piece of
the Cross it self, though so many parts thereof are shown at several
places, that were they all put together, would have broken the
back of 
Symon
 of 
Cyrene
 to have carryed it. Here is also some of
the Virgin 
Maries
 milk, the Arm of St. 
Simeon
 set in a Case of
Gold, the Reliques of St. 
Lewis,
 and the Head of St. 
Dennis,
 with
a part of his Body; of this St. 
Dennis
 (being the Patron of 
France
)
I shall tell you a Story, more than ever you read in the History
of the 
Seven Champions of Christendom,
 and perhaps as true, which
is this: He being to suffer death under the Reign of 
Domitian
 the
Emperor, for not bowing before the Altar of 
Mercury,
 when the
Executioner had smitten off his head, he caught it in his arms, and
ran with it down the Hill as fast as his legs would carry him; ha∣ving
run thus half a mile he sat down and rested, and so he did nine
times in all, (you must conceive he was very heavy loaden to car∣ry
his head in his arms) but having ran three miles, he ran himself
quite out of breath, for then he fell down and died, over which
place was built this Church consecrated to his Memory wherein
the aforesaid Reliques are kept.






French-man.


Begar Sen 
Dennis
 was de brave fellow when he live, he cut, he slase,
he slay, he feight like de spright; he vas love Wench named 
Ros∣salen,

she make him Cuckoll, he weare de horns on his head sefen year;
den came 
Zhorge
 on de Hoars-back, and wid his Tord cut dem off
at one blow.






English-man.


Was not St. 
George
 of 
England
 than a brave man to do so wor∣thy
an Act?






French-man.


Begar he was de brave Shampion in all de varle, but de France
man; he kill de burn Dragon, but de Seignior 
Amadis de Gaule
 be
kill de Shyant, one, twa, tre, four story high; begar den he was brave
fellow; let me see den, dere was Monsieur le 
Charlemaigne,
 de Roy

Pepin,
 Monsieur 
Oliver,
 Monsieur 
Rowland,
 begar de France man
be de creat killer of de Shyants in all de varle.








English-man.


Indeed no Nation in the wo
ld is greater killers of Gyants and
multitudes of people than the French; but how? why in Roman¦ces,
wherein there is little danger in fighting; but for real feats
of Arms, alas how far short do they fall in the performance! How
often have they been beaten by the English, with the greatest dis∣advantage
almost that might be? witness 
Poicters, Crescy,
 and

Agen-Court
 Battels, wherein their Armies exceeded ours almost
ten to one; nay, have we not taken their Kingdom from them?
the English King Crowned King of 
France
 in 
France?
 where was
their Valour then? Why they were forced to have recourse to a
Witch, one 
Joan
 of 
Arc,
 when 
France
 lay as it were expiring out
her latest breath. How were they forced to pretend a Message to
her from God, to breathe new courage into the hearts of their fan∣ting
Soldiers? and yet when they had wrought all these Forgeries,
it was not so much their Courage as our own Divisions, that cau∣sed
the English expulsion out of 
France.






French-man.


Begar though me ha skill to Fidele, me ha no skill in de History, me
can no tell if de speak true; but me mush tink dis, me mush 
give loo∣ser
leave to speak.






English-man.


Nay 
Monsieur,
 if you are up with your Proverbs, I must also give
you one, which though but a homely one, yet sets out the three
Nations, French, English, and the Spaniards to the life. The
French man is compared to a Flea, quickly skipping into a Coun∣trey,
and as quickly skipping out; their Valor being like a blaze
of fire, makes of a sudden a great show, but is quickly extinguish∣ed.
The English are like a Lowse, slowly mastering a place, and
as slowly driven out again. The Spaniard like to a Crab fish

hardly gaining any thing, but where he enters seldom or neve

again removed.






French-man.


Begar me leeke dis Proverb well enough of de men, vat is de Pr
verb
of de weemen?






English-man.


They say that to the making up of an absolute Woman, the



is required the parts of a Dutch woman from the Girdle down∣wards,
the parts of a French woman from the Girdle up to the
Neck, over which must be placed an English Face, for the great∣er
perfection of all the rest; for if you come to compare the
French Beauries with the English, alas they are not to be named
the same day with them, their Faces being as bad a punishment
to the Eyes, as their Discourse is a torment to the Eares: And
herein may the English glory, that they have the fairest Women,
the goodliest Horses, and the best breed of Dogs in all the whole
world; To which we may adde, that as 
England
 is said to be 
A
Paradise for women,
 by reason of their Priviledges, so it may be
said to be 
A Paradise of women,
 by reason o
 their un-marchable
Perfections.






French-man.


Begar de France woman be de hansom woman vor all dat.






English-man.


For your French women, as their shoulders and backs are so
broad that they hold no proportion with their middles, so are they
of a very black hair, and swarthy complexion; and though the
Poets do commend 
Leda
 for he
 black hair, as in that Verse of

Ovids,


Leda fuit nigris conspicienda comis.

yet that blackness reached onely to a kinde of dark brown, not
so fearful as this of the French women, who are generally blacker
th
n a gracious loveliness can admit: And though black hair do
give a lustre to a beautiful Face, as a shadow doth to a Picture,
or a 
Sable bearing
 to a 
Field a
gent;
 yet what are the French wo∣mens
Faces concerned in that, which are so far from that thing
called 
Beauty,
 that when they are adorned with black Patches,
they look like rusty Gammons of Bacon stuck with Cloves.






French man.


Me can no shuse but confess me had rader eat of de Gammon of
Baoon, dan kiss de hansom woman in all de v
rle.






English-man.


Now you talk of kissing, I cannot but much admire that humor
of the French women, who though (as I said before) they are so
light and wanton in their discourse and gestures, yet are so coy of


their Lips that they will not admit of a kiss, accounting that wo∣man
that is kissed, more than half whored, be her deportment o∣ther
wayes never so civil▪ Now, though I must confess I like this
their custom very well, it sparing me many an unsavory piece of
mannerliness when I was amongst them, yet it was to me a kinde
of a strange Riddle, that they should confine all immodesty and
lasciviousness to a harmless kiss. But as it is said of the Italian,

That he will rather murther a man in private, than speak ill of him
openly,
 so it may be thought of these Damosels, that they will not
refuse a mans bed in private, although they deny to kiss him
openly.






French-man.


Begar de tell lye, de France Madam be de Civil Madam dat lives
in de whole varle.






English-man.


Yes 
Monsieur,
 I shall tell you of a piece of Civility of one of
your Madams, as I was informed by an Acquaintance of mine
who was an Eye-witness to it. That being at a Tilting, a Roguish
Boy was peeking under a Ladies Coats, a Courtier seeing it, went
about to remove him from that sawcy action: but when her La∣dyship
perceived his intention, she hindred him with this Com∣plement,

Laisse Monsieur, laisse les yeux ne sont pas larrons:
 The
boys eyes would steal nothing away. Certainly those who are
so w
nton in their discourse and actions abroad, will not stick out
of play, when Night and the Curtains may conceal it.






French-man.


Par ma foy vis is no sush ting, de Frensh be a no soe bad, dey make
more conscience den so.






English-man.


I will not deny but there may be some of them very conscien∣tious,
but generally they are most irreverent and irreligious;
great Scoffers, yea in matters of Religion, and at those times
when they should be most solid, witness that Gallant who lying
on his Death-bed, when he had the 
Hoast
 (so they call the Sacra∣ment
of the Lords Supper) brought to him by a Lubberly Priest,
he said, 
That Christ came to him, as he went into
 Jerusalem, 
riding▪
upon an Ass.
 Another of them being to receive the Sacrament,


when the Priest had with many words perswaded him that the
Bread and Wine was the real Body and Blood of Christ, he refu∣sed
to taste of it, because it was then Fryday. And I was infor∣med
by a Gentleman, that at a Mass in the 
Cordeliers
 Church in

Paris,
 he saw two French Papists, when the most sacred Mystery
of their Faith was celebrating, break out into such a blasphemous
and atheistical laughter, that even an 
Ethnick
 would have blushed
to have heard it. Can we then think these men to be religious,
who make a scoff at the Divine Mysteries of our Salvation? Cer∣tainly
had a 
Lutheran
 done this, some French hot-head or other,
would have sent them laughing to 
Pluto.






French-man.


Dat is none good to do soe; me had rather goe to dine den to die,
to feede den to feight, dere is no sush haste to goe to de Teiffel, he vill
have dem soone enough me varrant ye. Me vill be glad to live so long
as de old woman of 
Parry.






English-man.


I remember dat old woman very well, who was of such an age,
that it is questionable whether she were ever young or no: for,
but that I have read the Scriptures, otherwise I should have been
apt to have believed that she was one of the first Pieces of the
Creation, and that by some mischance or other she had scaped
the Flood: Our Countrey-man 
Tom. Parr
 the 
Salopian Wonder,

was but an Infant to her; at the least you could not but have ima∣gined
her one of the Reliques of the first Age after the building of

Babel,
 several Ages before the birth of the 
Wandring Jew;
 her
face was for all the world like unto that of 
Sibylla Erythrea
 in an
old Print, or like that of 
Solomons
 two Harlets in the Painted
Cloth, or like those Statuas on the out-side of 
Westminster Abbey,

which for these six hundred years have been exposed to winde and
weather. It is doubtful whether our Arch Poet 
Ed. Spenser,
 when
he writ his Poem of 
The Ruines of Time,
 did not purposely in∣tend
it of her; sure I am it is very appliable in the Title. Now
by reason that all her Teeth were out, her Tongue was boundless,
and without ceasing would move for six and twenty hours toge∣thet,
the fastidious pratler which 
Horace
 mentioneth in his 
Ninth
Satyr,
 was but a Poisne to her. Now whether she be living still,


or no, I know not, but if she once come to be speechless, I sup∣pose
she is then past all recovery.






French-man.


Begar she was creat pratler indeed, and so me tink we be, derefore
me now make haste, vor my belly de chime Noon, and me mush make
haste vor fe
r of de pocky Shargeant.






English-man.


Well 
Monsieur,
 onely one word before you go, and then fare∣well.
There is an old Proverb, that the Emperor of 
Germany
 is

Rex Regom,
 the King of 
Spain
 is 
Rex Hominem,
 the King of

France Rex Asinorum,
 and the King of 
England Rex Diabalo∣rum.

The Emperor of 
Germany
 is called 
Rex Regem,
 in respect
of having so many free Princes under him, who have power of
themselves to Coyn Money, raise Soldiers, and other Immuni∣ties
consenant to Regal Authority. The King of 
Spain Rex Ho∣minem,

for that his Subjects are so constant and faithful in their
Allegiance, not questioning what the Prince does, but obeying
because he so commands it. The King of 
France
 is called 
Rex
Asinorum,
 because of the Subjects patient bearing of those insup∣portable
Taxes which he sucks out of their sweat and blood. Pride
in matters of Sumptuousness, and the Civil Wars which lasted a
long time in that Countrey, having occasioned most of the Crown
Lands to have been sold or mortgaged, so that the Subject is
now onely the Revenue of the Crown. The Kings hand lying so
heavy upon them, that it hath almost thrust them into an 
Egyp∣tian

bondage: To recite all those Impositions which this miser∣able
people are afflicted withal, were almost as wretched as the
payment of them, I shall briefly instance in some few, and first

Gabelle de Sel,
 or Gabel on Salt, which is an Imposition that no
man in the Kingdom (some few Countries excepted) can eat any
Salt, but he must buy it of the King, and at his price; but this
is not all, for though through poverty many of them could be con∣tented
to eat meat (when they can get it) without Salt, yet are
they forced to take such a quantity of it, or howsoever they will
have of them so much money. This Imposition is exacted with
such unconscionable rigour, that it is thought to be worth unto
the King 3000000 of Crowns yearly. Next is the 
Taillon,
 a


heavy burthen which lies almost altogether upon the poor Pea∣sant,
who are a people of any other the most unfortunate, paying
such infinite Rents to their Lords, and such innumerable Taxes
to the King, that all their care and extream labour is onely suffi∣cient
to pay their Duties, and keep them from the extremities of
cold and famine. This Imposition was at first levyed by way of
Extraordinary Subsidy, and lay alike heavy upon all, but now it is
confined onely to the Peasant; the greater Towns, the Of∣ficers
of the Kings House, the Officers of War, the President,
Councellors, and Officers of the Courts of Parliament, the No∣bility,
the Clergy, and the Scholars of the University, being freed
from it. Divers Imposts have they besides, as the Soll upon the
Liure, which is the twentieth penny of all things bought or sold,
onely 
Corn
 and 
Sallets
 excepted. Imposts upon Wine double and
treble, and after all this, the poor Vintner forced to pay the 8th
penny of that Wine which he selleth, to the King. Then is there
besides Imposts on all sorts of Fruits, Provisions, Wares, and Mer∣chandize,
to which we may adde the base and corrupt money in it,
being for the most part made of Tin and Brass. Hardly shall you
see a Piece of Gold of the French stamp, scarce any but what
comes out of 
Spain,
 which are very ill proportioned, and which
one resembles to a French Cheese, being neither long, nor square,
nor round, nor thick, nor thin, nor great, nor little, nor any one
of these, but yet all, and yet none of them.


These Circumstances considered, we may the clearer see our
own felicities, which to express in a word, is to say onely this,

That the English Subject is in no circumstance a French man,
 though
we are so blinde as herein not to see our own happiness, but by
our often Rebellions have given occasion to that Apellation, that
the King of 
England
 is 
Rex Diabalorum.




FINIS.









