The present state of Jamaica with the life of the great Columbus the first discoverer : to which is added an exact account of Sir Hen. Morgan's voyage to, and famous siege and taking of Panama from the Spaniards.
Approx. 116 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 64 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A55720




Wing P3268



ESTC R1042





ocm 12013014




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The present state of Jamaica with the life of the great Columbus the first discoverer : to which is added an exact account of Sir Hen. Morgan's voyage to, and famous siege and taking of Panama from the Spaniards.
[10], 117 p.   


London :


Printed by Fr. Clark for Tho. Malthus ...,


1683.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Columbus, Christopher.
Morgan, Henry, --  Sir, 1635?-1688.
Jamaica --  Description and travel.
Panama --  History.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-12
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-01
Anne Simpson
Sampled and proofread
2014-01
Anne Simpson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






P3268


R1042


12013014


52464














THE PRESENT STATE OF Jamaica. WITH THE LIFE Of the Great 
Columbus
 The first Discoverer:


To which is Added An Exact Account of Sir 
Hen. Morgan
's Voyage to, and famous Siege and ta∣king of 
Panama
 from the 
Spaniards.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
Fr. Clark
 for 
Tho. Malthus
 at the 
Sun
 in the 
Poultry,
 1683.










TO THE READER.


I Present thee here with a short view of 
Jamaica,
 an Island the most flourishing of any this day in the 
West Indies;
 and tho it has been but

 a short time in the Hands of the 
English,
 yet it hath Augmented it self to that vast strength, by reason of its great 
Trade
 and number of 
Inhabitants,
 that it is not only capable to Defend it self against any 
Invasion
 that may be made upon it: but if oc∣casion be, to Offend the most Potent of its Neigh∣bours; a proof of which you will find in Sir 
Henry Morgans
 famous Voyage

 to 
Panama,
 many years ago, the Island being then in its Infancy, yet was able to give the 
(Club) Law
 to the proud 
Spani∣ards,
 the apprehensions of which strikes Terrour into the Inhabitants of those Parts to this day. You will find here an ex∣act State of the Govern∣ment of the Church, the Laws, the Militia, and its Revenue, carefully Collected from the Re∣cords

 of the Country, with an Account of its Soyl, Climate, Woods, Mountains, Winds, and the Diseases that the Peo∣ple are most Incident to; the Commodities of the Country, Cattel, Fowls, Fish and other 
Provisi∣ons;
 with an Historical Account of its being ta∣ken from the 
Spaniards.


Vale.








Books lately printed for and sold by 
Tho. Malthus,
 at the 
Sun
 in the 
Poultry.


BEntivolio
 and 
Ʋrania
 in six Books, by 
Nathaniel Ingelo
 D. D. the fourth Edi∣
ion, with large Amendments, wherein all 
he obscure Words throughout the Book 
re interpreted in the Margin, which makes 
his much more Delightful to read than the 
ormer Editions.


Mr. 
James Janewayes Legacy
 to his 
riends, containing twenty seven Famous 
nstances of Gods Providences, in and about 
ea-dangers and Deliverances, with the Names of several that were Eye Witnesses 
o many of them.


Catastrophe Mundi,
 or 
Merlin Revived,
 in Discourse of Prophesies, and Predictions, 
nd their Remarkable Accomplishments with Mr. 
Lillies
 Hieroglyphicks Exactly Out, 
nd Notes, and Observations thereon, as also Collection of all the antient reputed Pro∣
hecies that are extant, touching the Grand evolutions like to happen in these latter ages.


Historical Memoirs
 of the Life and Death 
f that wise and valiant Prince, 
Rupert,
 Prince 
Palatine
 of the 
Rhine,
 Duke of 
Cum∣
erland,
 &c. containing a brief but impartial

 Account of his Great and Martial Achieve∣ments, during the time of the Civil Wars, together with his several Engagements in the Wars between his Majesty and the States General of the United Provinces.


An Historical Account of the Heroick Life and Magnanimous Actions of the most Illustrious Protestant Prince, 
James
 Duke of 
Monmouth;
 containing an Account o
 his Birth, Education, Places and Titles with his Great and Martial Achievement
 in 
Flanders
 and 
Scotland,
 his Disgrace and Departure both from Court and Kingdom
 with the most material Circumstances tha
 have occurred since his Return.


Psalmorum Davidis, Paraphrasis Poetica
 Georgii Buchanani, Scots Argumentis ac Me¦lodiis explicata, atque Illustrata.


The Romish Mass-Book
 faithfully tran¦slated into 
English;
 with Notes and Ob¦servations thereupon, plainly demonstra¦ting the Idolatry and Blasphemy thereof▪ containing, 1. The 
Cautelae,
 or 
Caveats
 o
 the 
Mass,
 2. The 
Canon
 of the 
Mass.
 3 The 
History
 of the 
Mass:
 Shewing when how, and by whom it was patched to¦gether; with a curious Copper Cut pre∣fixed, representing the 
Priest
 a saying 
Mass
 With unanswerable Arguments proving

 it no Service of God. Published at this 
uncture to prevent the Designes of those that are endeavouring to introduce 
Popery
 amongst us. Dedicated to the Right Re∣verend Father in God, 
Henry
 Lord Bishop of 
London.
 Price bound One Shilling.


The Famous Voyages of the ever Re∣nowned and Valiant Sir 
Francis Drake
 into the 
West-Indies:
 viz. His great Adven∣tures for Gold and Siver, and the gaining thereof; with a particular Account of the 
amous Battel of 
Nombre de Dios.
 A large Account of that Voyage wherein he encom∣passed the World: His Voyage with Cap∣tain 
Knollis,
 and others; their taking the Towns of St. 
Jago, Sancto Domingo, Car∣thagena,
 &c. His last Voyage in which he died, being accompanied with several va∣liant Commanders, and the manner of his Burial. To which is added, an Account of his valourous Exploits in 1588. in the 
Spa∣
ish Invasion.
 Price bound One Shilling.


A most Learned Treatise, entituled, 
Fun∣damental Law the true Security of Soveraign Dignity, and the Peoples Liberty.
 By a Person of Honour. 
Octav.
 Price one Shil∣ing Six pence.


Vates Astrologicus:
 or, 
England
's 
Astro∣logical Prophet.
 Foretelling what is likely

 to befal 
Great Britain
 and 
Ireland,
 particu¦larly the great and famous City of 
London
 as also 
France, Holland, Spain, Germany Poland, Italy, Sicily, Apulia, Bohemia Turkie,
 and indeed all 
Europe,
 but mor
 especially the See of 
Rome,
 for twenty year
 together, beginning 
March
 10. 1683. end¦ing 
March
 10. 1702. Likewise 
Astrologic
 Judgments
 of the effects of that famous Tr
¦ple Conjunction of 
Saturn
 and 
Jupiter,
 bein
 thrice repeated in that Regal Sign 
Leo,
 th
 great Dignities of the 
Sun
 and 
Jupiter.
 Als
 some Remarks upon the Eclipses, and mo
 especially upon that great and famous vi
¦ble Eclipse of the Sun, 
July
 2. 1684. Wit
 twenty years Predictions from some of th
 most eminent mutual Aspects of the Planet
 and Eclipse of the Luminaries, and annu
 Revolutions of Sun. With man 
Hierogl
¦phicks,
 representing the future State an
 Changes of the World. By 
Richard Ki
¦by
 Student in Astrology. Price one Shillin


The 
Womens Advocate,
 or Fifteen 
Re
 Comforts
 or 
Matrimony:
 being in requital 
 the late Fifteen 
Sham-Comforts;
 with Satyr
¦cal Reflections on Whoring, and the D
¦baucheries of this Age, Written by a Pe
 of Quality of the Female Sex. The Secon
 
dition. Price One Shilling.
















THE PRESENT STATE OF Jamaica.


THE Island of 
Jamaica
 in 
America
 is Situated in about 182 North Latitude, in the Sea called 
Mare Del Nort;
 it lies about 140 Leagues North of the Main Continent of 
America,
 South from the great Island of 
Cuba
 about 15 Leagues, and from 
Hispaniola
 West about 20 Leagues.


The Island is of an Oval Form, and lies due East and West, having a continued Ridge of lofty Moun∣tains

 running from one end to the other. By the Map and Survey which Sir 
Thomas Lynch
 took, it's above 150 Miles long, and from 25 to 50 Miles broad, 
de plano,
 and contains four Millions and a half of Acres; it's imagined, if this Island were divided into eight parts, one is Excellent Pasturage, called by the 
Indians Savannas,
 4/8 good Plantable Land, ⅜ Barren or unplantable.


In the Year 1675, when Sir 
Tho∣mas Lynch
 left the Government, there was above 900000 Acres pass'd and Planted, and to Manure and Culti∣vate it about 30000 of all sorts of People.


This Island is not generally so Fer∣tile and proper for Sugar as 
Barba∣does
 has been, the Soyl being ex∣treamly differing; for in some parts 'tis a black fat Earth, and in others stiff and Clayie, in others Sandy, and in some Reddish, but by pareels; it's therefore the Settlements are di∣stinct,

 Mountainous, and Unplant∣able Land interposing betwixt them make them appear like so many se∣veral Colonies, and has occasioned this Division of the Parishes, St. 
Thomas
 at the East, St. 
Elizabeth
 at the West, St. 
Johns
 and St. 
Thomas in the Vale.
 In the Island, St. 
Georges,
 St. 
Maries,
 and St. 
Anns,
 the North side: St. 
Davids,
 St. 
Andrews, Port Royal,
 St. 
Catharines,
 St. 
Dorothies, Clarendon
 and 
Vere
 on the South side. The greatest Plains, and almost all the 
Savannas
 or Pasturage is on the South side; they are all taken up and Stock'd with Cattel; on the South side likewise is 
Port Royal
 and all the best Ports and Roads, and most considerable Plantations, this side being dry, plain, more agreeable, and much quicker and safer Coast than the North, for that in the Spring is apt to violent Gusts of Winds, and much more subject to Rains than the South, as the East,

 and all Parts is that is Woody and Mountainous; nor has the North side any safe Port, but 
Port Antonio,
 to the Wind-ward, which is subject to violent and constant Rains, and the Land about it Morsey and Moun∣tainous, so no Settlements are near it. The other Lee-ward Parishes have 
Port St. Maries,
 that is Reaso∣nably good and safe, but they have (especially in St. 
Maries
 Parish) abundance of Excellent Plantations of 
Coccoa,
 many Sugar-works, and Provision Plantations that are sup∣ported and carried on by Hunting and gathering 
Pimento,
 with which this Quarter abounds. Thus Plan∣tations were begun, and the Govern∣ment settled in Sir 
Thomas Lynch
 his time, and now the Inhabitants find the goodness of that Soyl Liberally Recompence the want of Harbours and Pasturage, and distance from the Chief Port and Seat of Govern¦ment, for its very Fertile Land

 covered with Excellent Timber; it's a little Hilly, but full of fine Rivers, and all Conveniencies for Plantations.


The Climate is as agreeable as any can be betwixt the Tropicks, the Air being very serene and clear, even to a Proverb among the 
Spaniards:
 It's subject to Thunder and Light∣ning, as all Countries in that Lati∣tude are; the Rains come uncer∣tainly, but most expected about 
November
 and 
May,
 they are gene∣rally violent, continue an uncertain time, are unhealthy, and breed 
Mus∣ketoes,
 that are the greatest Plague in the Island, but are troublesom only the Rainy Seasons, and in most places where they have not good Houses, a free Air, clean Yards, 
&c.


This Climate subjects no body inevitably to Diseases, here being no such thing as Seasoning, which is common in 
Ireland
 and 
Virginia, &c.
 Sir 
Tho. Lynch
 at St. 
Jago
 and

 thereabouts lost not one Person o
 his Family that consisted of abou
 Thirty all the time of his Govern∣ment. But to many Persons the Heat is unsupportable, because it's so constant, and its Reflections so violent, otherwise it is not greate
 than our Summers in 
England.
 I
 is Excess in Eating, Drinking, Exer¦cising Debauchery, 
&c.
 that to new comers and full Bodies often bring Fevers, Calentures, and such Dis¦eases, that are infinitely more Acut
 than those here, and Cured by othe
 Methods. To Servants, poor La¦bouring People, 
&c.
 the Dropsie i
 the most common of all other Dis¦eases; they and Debauch'd Person are the most subject to Belly-aches caused usually by their Disorders want of convenient Lodging, Cloath¦ing, Exercise, Diet, but sometime by ill chosen Seats when they Plan
 in low Valleys, and have no Air, o
 by Rivers, and have too much moi¦sture,

 or by Mountains or Morossos, and have too much Rain, or by the Sea-side and on Bays, where they are Sandy, want good Water, and have the Reflection of the Sun too vio∣lent; for this Island differs one part from another as much in the temper of the Climate, as nature of the Soyl: For the East Parts are Moun∣tainous, Rainy, and generally Fer∣tile and unhealthful. The South Part dry, plain, very pleasant, abound∣ing with Ports and Pasturage. The West is between both, only that and the South want Rivers, which the North side abounds with, and Rich Land, as likewise good Hunt∣ing and gathering 
Pimento
 in the Mountains, and Fishing on the Sea-Coasts; and by what the 
Spaniards
 have told us, and some little Disco∣very we have made, we think di∣vers of the Mountains have Mine∣rals.




The Winter Months here have only the Nights, Mornings and Eve∣nings cooler, the Days as hot as Summer, and about fifteen Hours long Winter and Summer.


The Winds blow not an hours variation commonly here as they do every where betwixt the Tro∣picks, that is Easterly, which they call Breeses, near the Island they rise not till about Nine in the Morning, and usually cease at about six or seven at Night; they come in gently, and grow as the Sun rises, and in the Evening comes in a kind of Westernly Wind, which we call Land-breese, because it blows off the Land, and with it the Vessels go out of Port: And to the West, that is, the Wind-ward, as the East is called Lee-ward. This Island has never been troubled with those dreadful Hurricanes that so often Ruine and Afflict the 
Charibe Islands, Portorico, Hispaniola, Cuba,
 and

 many parts of the Main. Here is no great Ebb or Flood of the Sea, we have not Observed above a foot difference, nor can any Pilot give any certain Account of the Currents of these Seas, they are so various and uncertain, nor can any guess why the Hurricanes and Earthquakes should never touch 
Jamaica,
 since they so often Afflict all the Islands and Continent.


None of the Rivers of this Island are fair or Navigable, because the Countrey is very Mountainous, and these Hills running through the Centre of it East and West, the Ri∣vers rise in them, and disembogue North and South; so falling out of these high Mountains are very Rap∣pie, and because of the great Rains in them, are subject to Inundations that carry great stone Rocks and Timber along with the Torrent, so make their usual Course foul and unpassable for Boats, and make and

 change the Bars. There are divers dry Rivers which hinder the Boats from entring into the Countrey, as particularly 
Minoa,
 that runs through 
Clarendon,
 which at some time has not a drop of Water, and at other times as much as the 
Thames
 at High Water.


The Mountains, whether Stony or Plantable, are generally covered with Excellent Timber for all Uses, both for Curiosity, Building, and Dying abundance of Fruit and Spice Trees: These Mountains are full of Hoggs, and there is probability of Minerals, but no Trees or Fruit that resemble ours in 
England.


There's no Towns in this Island but on the South side, at the East by 
Port St. Thomas, Port Morant,
 se∣veral Houses called 
Rapp-Houses,
 which serve for Store-Houses and Ale-Houses for the Neighbourhood, and such Vessels as use that Port, which are but few, because the

 Governour has not yet permitted Vessels to Discharge there.


At St. 
Davids
 is 
Yhallows Bay,
 about seven Leagues from 
Port St. Thomas,
 as far from 
Port Royal,
 there is several Ale-Houses and Store-Houses.


At 
Liguania,
 the in-side of the Harbour, opposite to 
Port Royal
 about two Leagues, is several Houses, some of them very handsom, and well Built, which place in time is like to become a pretty Town.


Port Royal
 is Situate on the ex∣tream Point of Land that makes the Harbour: It runs about Twelve Miles from the Main off the Land Westernly. It has to the South the Sea, to the North the Harbour, which is the largest, safest, and most convenient in 
America.
 This Neck of Land is exceeding narrow, and nothing but a loose Sand that has neither Grass, Stone, Water, nor Trees. But being so Commodious

 for Ships, that they are Secure all Weathers, and can unload a Float at the Merchants Key: It is the most Populous place for Trading in the Island, and there only Ships enters and are dispatch'd. In the 
Spaniards
 time there was no Houses, the Sea-men of 
Cromwel
's Fleet begun the Town, by Building Store-Houses, and called it 
Cogway,
 as we judge corruptly, from the 
Spanish
 word 
La aguia.
 Col. 
Doyly
 caused it to be laid out as a Town, but not very Regularly. In Sir 
Char. Littleton
's time it was called 
Port Royal,
 from the Excellency of the Harbour. It now contains above 1500 Houses, there is a House, though none of the best, belonging to the King: And in the Earl of 
Carlile
's time a fine New Church, Built partly by Liberal Subscription of divers Gentlemen Inhabiting the Island, and partly by an Assessment laid upon the Inhabitants of the Port.




Going from 
Port Royal
 to St. 
Jago de la Vega,
 People Land at Passage, where a Fort was in Col. 
Doyly
's time, and there is about Thirty Houses that are Store-Houses, Ale-Houses, and Horse-keepers, and Hackney Coaches; this being the greatest Passage in the Island, it is two Leagues from 
Port Royal
 by Sea, and six Miles from St. 
Jago
 by Land.


St. 
Jago de la Vega
 is Situated in a large Plain by a River that is called 
pro de Cabre,
 as having a taste of that Metal, or coming out of those Moun∣tains in 
Liguania,
 where the 
Spaniards
 told us they found of it. This Town was almost quite Deserted when Sir 
Tho. Lynch
 came to the Government, but in his time about Forty Houses were Built, and Re∣paired about one Hundred more. The Grand Court is holden Quar∣t
rly in this Town, and a Fair was Erected in Sir 
Tho. Lynch
 his time;

 it has one 
Spanish
 Church, and Gen∣tlemens Houses that made it look well during the time the Governour Lived there, but since that time it is much increased in Number of Beautiful Buildings and Inhabitants.


At 
Old Harbour,
 about seven Miles West from St. 
Jago,
 are about Thirty Houses for the Uses and Ac∣commodation of Vessels, and Store-Houses for Planters Goods, this be∣ing esteemed the best Harbour, ex∣cepting 
Port Royal,
 in the South side. By the 
Spaniards
 it was more Frequented.


At 
Withy Wood,
 Twenty Miles to the West, is about forty or fifty Houses for the Accommodation of Vessels, that Road being more fre∣quented than any other on the South side, there being good Land, many Settlements, and a Pleasant Coun∣trey all about it.


At the Extensive Point of 
Port Royal
 was Built a Round Tower by

 
Cromwel
's Sea-men in 1656, in 1657 and 1658 Col. 
Doyly
 laid the Foun∣dation of a more Regular one, which Sir 
Charles Littleton
 near Fi∣nished in 1664, and Sir 
Tho. Mody∣ford
 in his time, which was to the Year 1671, quite finished, and Mounted in it about 36 Guns, Em∣ploying the Round Tower only as a Store-House for Ammunition. Be∣sides this he Built a Breast-work of stone, that run from the Harbour to the Sea about 200 Yards, this was to Defend the Town from any sur∣prize by Land, as the Castle was to Defend the Mouth of the Harbour. It was Named by Sir 
Charles Little∣ton, Charles Fort,
 in Honour of His Majesty. In Sir 
Tho. Lynch
 his time was Built a Fort, called 
James Fort,
 Built by Sir 
Thomas,
 and the Volun∣tary Contribution of some Gentle∣men: On the Island Point of the Town, to flank the Ships at turning into the Harbour, and Batter them

 when at Anchor in it, which the Castle cannot: He likewise made a slight Work for that purpose at 
Pri∣son Point,
 where six Guns were Mounted, and at 
Port Morant
 four Guns, and a Breast-work raised to Defend the Port.


Another likewise at 
Old Harbour,
 which was done in Sir 
Tho. Lynch
 his time, but many more were added in the time of the Earl of 
Carlisle.


The Commodities the Countrey produces are Excellent Sugars, 
Cocoa,
 Cotton, Hides, Ginger, Tobacco, Tortoise shell, Indico, Primento, Fustick, Brazilletto, 
Lignum Vitae,
 Granadilla, Ebony; besides some Gums, 
Achot
 Drugs, 
&c.


This Island abounds with Cattle, and the Islands of 
Spaniola, Portico,
 and 
Cuba
 do the like; so does many Parts of the Main, the first Breed being brought out of 
Europe;
 for before the Discovery, there was none of our Cattel, great or small

 in the 
West Indies:
 In 
Jamaica
 they Multiplyed so exceedingly, that when the 
English
 took the Island, a Cow was not worth above a Piece of Eight, and a Horse half as much. But the Army destroy'd them so, that in the Year 1671, when Sir 
Tho. Lynch
 came to the Government, a Cow was worth Twelve or Four∣teen pounds, but by the goodness of the Pasture, and the Cattle Sir 
Thomas
 Imported from the 
Spaniards,
 they increased so, that in the Year 1675 they were worth but four pounds 
per
 Head, one with another. Besides, here is plenty of good sprightly Horses, some Mules and Asnegroes, abundance of Hogs, Goats, and Sheep, whose Wool is hairy, the Flesh not generally so good as in 
England;
 they breed often, but live not well, unless about 
Al∣ligater Ponds.
 Rabbets live well enough, but there's no Hare nor Deer in the Island.




In this Countrey is Hens, Turkeys, and Ducks, bred better, and are better flesh than in 
England.
 Geese are but rare, there's abundance of Excellent Wild Fowl, as 
Guiny
 Hens, Flemingoes, Teale, Ducks, Curlews, with great variety of Pidgeons, Tur∣tles, Parrots, Maces, and other Birds, whose Flesh is good, and Feathers finely coloured.


There is store of Fish, both in the Sea and divers Rivers, not much common to 
England,
 but a King of Lobster, Craw-fish, Eels, Mullers, and 
Spanish
 Mackrael, with abun∣dance of all sorts of Admirable Fish proper to those Seas. Tortoise are taken much on this Coast, but chiefly at the Island 
Cay Manos,
 30 Leagues to the West of this Island, whither the Vessels go 
May, June,
 and 
July
 to Load of their Flesh that they Pickle in Bulk, and take them in that Season, when they come on shore to lay their Eggs, which they

 do, and cover them with Sand that hatches them, and then by instinct they crawl to the Sea, where they Live, and feed on Weeds that grows in the bottom, or floats. In many Rivers and Ponds of 
Jamaica
 there's vast Numbers of Crocodiles, or Al∣legators, that is an Amphibious Creature, and breeds of an Egg, hatch'd by the Sun in the sand. A Tortoise Egg is just like the Yolk of a Hen-Egg, of which she lays near a Peck at a time; but the Allegator but a few, and are like a Turkeys; their Flesh is not good, they are voracious, and live on Fowls and Beasts that they catch by surprize, but seldom or never hurt any Man.


Here's an 
Indian
 Coney, called 
Raccoones,
 that is good Meat, but of a distastful shape, being some∣thing like an over-grown Rat: The Snakes in this Island are not at all hurtful, but were eaten by the 
In∣dians
 as 
Regaloes,
 as the 
Guanaes
 are

 by the 
Spaniards;
 it is but small, and of the shape of an Allegator, the Flesh is sweet and tender: The most Offensive thing in this Island are divers sorts of Flies, called 
Mery∣wings,
 from their Noise; 
Mutquet∣toes,
 from their Littleness; 
Galli∣nippors,
 from their Biting; for all sting and trouble People exceeding∣ly: And in some parts of the North there's little ugly Creatures, called by the 
English Gallivaches,
 whose bite is Mortal to Dogs, Goats, 
&c.


There is in this Island none of the Fruit common to 
Europe
 but Oranges, Lemons, and Limes (a Bastard Lemon) Citrons, Pomgra∣nats, Grapes grow well enough; here is a Wild sort the 
Spaniards
 made Red Wine of: The 
English
 have but few Vines, and they require much time to Cultivate them, and are so difficultly defended from the Parrots, and other Birds, and not Ripening altogether. We think it

 impossible to make Wine without great quantities and great Labour; for in the Countrey after every Sea∣son there's a Spring, so that the Grapes and all Fruits shoot out after, it have therefore Blossoms, Young Fruit, and Ripe all at the same time. Besides these Fruit in 
Jamaica,
 there is abundance of 
Plantains, Bonanoes, Tamarinds, Cathus, Guavaes, Mum∣mees,
 and small 
Oysters
 that grow in Clusters on Mangroves by the Sea-side, 
Sapolaes, Supotilla, Adue∣cades, Star-Apples, Custard-Apples,
 and 
Prickle-Apples, Pears, Pine-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Plumbs
 of divers sorts.


The Common Bread that Ordi∣nary Planters and Servants use, is 
Cassader,
 in its stead 
Potatoes.
 But the Gentlemen make Bread of Flour that comes from 
England
 and 
New York.


English
 Flowers would grow in this Island without Care and Charge,

 but they have large and extraordi∣nary Jessemine-Trees, and other Odoriferous Trees and Plants.


Likewise there grows exceeding well all our Summer Herbs, so does Pease, Beans, Cabbage; and Tur∣neps, though not very well. But Carrots, Raddish, Onions pretty well. By Art, Care, and Pains Gar∣dinage would do better here than in the South parts of 
Spain;
 for though our Rains are more violent, our Droughts are not so frequent and long.


In this Island are abundance of Medicinal Herbs, Roots, and Plants. We have 
Venillaes;
 here's 
China, Sar∣saparilla, Gum Guaicum, Benjamin,
 &c.


The Common Drink of the Gen∣tlemen is 
Madera
 Wine and Water; at the Sugar-works they make Drink of 
Malasses,
 in other places of 
Cas∣sader,
 which they call 
Perinoe,
 and of 
Potatoes,
 called 
Mobbie;
 and like∣wise

 of 
Bonanoes.
 A Drink is made of a Spirit, called 
Rum,
 Distilled from the Canes, they make great quantities, which does Mischief, be∣ing very strong and unpleasant, yet drunk by the Ordinary People ex∣cessivly, that causes Drunkenness, Disorder, Poverty, Diseases.


The 11th. of 
October,
 1492, 
Col∣lumbus
 Discovered the 
Lucca's Islands, Spaniola,
 and 
Cuba,
 and shortly after return'd for 
Spain.
 In his second Voyage, endeavouring to round 
Cuba,
 to know whether it was an Island or no, he Discovered 
Jamaica
 the 14th. of 
May,
 1494. and called it St. 
Jago,
 which Name did not take, he staid but little on it at its Disco∣very; but in his Third Voyage, in the Year 1503, the 23d. of 
June,
 he arrived there again, Ship-wrackt, and in great Distress, his Vessels quite disabled, Provisions spent, and Men sick and dis-heartened with their Misfortunes. At 
Veragua
 on

 the Coast of the Main, the first Road he fell in with he did not like, but went further West to a Port he called 
Sancta Gloria,
 and there run his ships on ground and lash'd them toge∣ther, and Lodg'd on their Decks, the 
Indians
 being Numerous, for at this time it was supposed there was above 60000 Families of them on this Island. 
Collumbus
 lay about two Months in a most Miserable Condi∣tion, the ingrateful 
Spaniards
 and Malicious Governour of St. 
Domingo
 sending him no Relief, on purpose to make him Perish; and in this Fa∣tal time the 
Porra's,
 three Brothers of 
Sevil,
 Rebelled, which 
Collum∣bus
's Brother suppress'd; so that in this Island was the first Civil War and Blood-shed betwixt the 
Spani∣ards
 in 
America.
 In the time this great Unfortunate Man staid thus Miserably, and ship-wrackt on the North side of 
Jamaica,
 it's suppose
 they began to settle a Design to Plant

 finding this Island very fertile, and the Natives more civil and ingeni∣ous than any of the other Islanders. And at this time began that Town, the old Maps call 
Metilla,
 that we think were about Fig-tree on the North side, which was but by lit∣tle advanced, then they deserted it. Eight or ten Leagues further West, finding a better Bay they call'd St. 
Anns,
 which Names is continued by us. And here they began to settle, and in some years built a handsom 
arge Town named 
Sevil,
 that had some Sugar Works, and good Plan¦tations about it, and a very conside∣rable Abbey in it; the Abbots were alwaies the Bishops Suffragan, and chief in all Ecclesiastical affairs; there's some Pillars of this left, and a Portal of the Church, with the Emperour 
Charles
 the Fifths Arms over it, and an Inscription that says; 
Petrus Martir Anuleria Abbas Ʋnius Insule, eadem hanc Bisigne consump∣tam

 Letantio & quadrata Lapido a fundamentis extruxit.
 This being a most learned Millener, that had served King 
Ferdinand
 as Confessor and Embassador to 
Grand Cape,
 and being of the Emperours Council for the 
Indies,
 of which he wrote the 
Decades.
 It may be suppos'd 
Ja∣maica
 was then in great esteem. This Town flourish'd till about the year 1590. then the 
Spaniards
 deserted, as they say, because their Children could not live there. But we rather believe, because the North side was Mountainous and unpleasant; and on the South were huge plain 
Sa∣vannaes,
 which we suppose were Fields of 
Indian
 Corn and 
Cassader
 that were proper for Cattle, of which the 
Spaniards
 now have grea
 plenty. Besides, the South had better Ports, was nearer, and had greater Commerce with the rich Country o
 the 
Maine,
 then the North could have, which might reasonably e∣nough

 induce them to change Situa∣tions, and fix on that of the 
Jago de la Vega,
 or St. 
James
 upon the Plain, where they were settled 70 years. Before the 
English
 under General 
Ve∣nables,
 the 10th of 
May,
 1655. took it, it had about 17 years before been surpriz'd by one 
Jackson,
 with a Fleet of 
English
 Privateers, who, for a thousand Beeves quitted the Town, having no design but to Cruise. But 
Crumwell
 sent his Army to seize 
Spa∣niola,
 or some place that was conve∣nient for a Collony and seat of War, he having mist St. 
Domingo
 they re∣solved to fix here; nor were they like to be beaten out, for there was not many Native 
Indians
 left, they being long before destroy'd by the 
Spaniards;
 and of the 
Spaniards
 there was not above 550 Men, 600 Women, and 1500 Slaves; there was no Militia or Fortification. The Town had in it two Churches, four Chappels, about 1200 Houses of all

 sorts; the Streets Regular, but Houses low and like Barns: all the 
Spaniards
 and their Wives and Chil∣dren dwell in them, and had their Servants and Slaves in the Country, to manage their Cattel, Sugar works, and Cocoa Walks, and furnish them with Provisions, which they lazily and luxuriously spent in the Town; the Trade they had was with 
Carta∣gena
 and 
Portobella,
 and sometimes with Interlopers. There Merchan∣dize was Hides, Cocoa, Tallow, Su∣gar, Pimento, with which they bought what they needed. The dis∣covery of 
Nova Hispana
 and 
Perue
 unpeopled this Island, as it did 
Por∣terico, Spaniola
 and 
Cuba,
 people be∣ing less safe and rich in them after the 
English
 and 
Dutch
 Privateers be∣gan to infest these 
Indias;
 besides the Inhabitants of 
Jamaica
 were dis∣couraged by being Tennant or Vas∣sals to a Proprietor; for about the year 1560. as we guess, this Island

 was given to the Heirs of 
Collumbus,
 in compensation for the perpetual Vice-Roy-ship and Admiralty of these 
Indies:
 so they were called Dukes 
De la Vaga,
 now 
De Veragua,
 their eldest Son a Marquis, one Dr. 
Fulano Ramizer
 was Governour for the Duke 
De Veragua,
 when the 
English
 came in 1655. he was an old decrepid man: so retreated with the Priests, Women and Children into the Island and Mountains, and left the Serjeant Major 
D' Christovall de Alvares Sali,
 that was afterwards Go∣vernour, to treat with the General of the 
English
 Army, which was Col. 
Venables. Penn
 Commanded the Fleet, but both and the whole Design was to be Governed by Commanders, which were the two Generals Col. 
Searle
 Governour of 
Berbados,
 Col. 
Everard
 Governour of St. 
Christo∣phers,
 Col. 
Butler
 and Major 
Winslow
 that went with the Army, which con∣sisted of six Regiments Commanded

 by General 
Venables.
 Col. 
Fortescue
 that after 
Haynes
 his Death was made Ma∣jor General, Col. 
Anthony Butler,
 Col. 
Holdup,
 and Col. 
Doyly,
 with two Troops one brought from 
Eng∣land,
 and Commanded by Captain 
Jones;
 the otheer rais'd at 
Barbados,
 Commanded by Capt. 
Carter;
 these Landed with the Army and Regi∣ment of Seamen, Commanded by Vice-Admiral 
Goodson.


The Fleet consisted of about 30 Sail of Men of War, and as many other Vessels and 
Dutch
 Ships, which were seized at 
Barbados.
 At our Ar∣rival the 
Spaniards
 pretended to de∣liver the Island by Treaty, but the General soon found they only by this Artifice endeavoured to get time to secure the Women, Chil∣dren and Wealth in the Mountains: so about 20 daies after the Armies Landing, the General sent out Par∣ties to pursue them; sometimes we took of these miserable People;

 sometimes they surpriz'd and kill'd of ours, strangling and starving Sol∣diers: But the Stores of the Army being Landed, which were exceed∣ing great and convenient, the gross of the Fleet and two Generals, re∣turn for 
England;
 in their way of the 
Havanna
 they met the 
Spanish
 Fleet, which they had easily taken if they had known them. The Ships that staid was commanded by Ad∣miral 
Goodson,
 the Army by Major General 
Fortescue;
 the last in 1656. died, leaving the Souldiers in a most miserable and perishing condition; many were dead, most sick, their Stores spent, the 
Spanish
 Plantations, and their vast numbers of Cattel all destroy'd, or run wild, and the Fleet in no better condition. On 
Fortes∣cues
 Death, Col. 
Carter
 should have Commanded, but being sick he re∣sign'd to Col. 
Doyly,
 and died quick∣ly after. This lamentable Command Col. 
Doyly
 held about a year. Then

 Major General 
Sedgwick
 came to Command, and brought some Stores and Recruits of Men out of 
Ireland.
 But before he was well in this Office he died; so did Sir 
William Aylesbu∣ry
 about 8 Months after he came over with 
Sedgwick;
 and after his Death, was by the Commissioners made one of them; for in the Inter∣vals, the Armys was Commanded by the Commissioners, and the chief power lodg'd in them, who succeed∣ed, and appointed one another when any Died or went away. On Ge∣neral 
Sedgwicks
 death, the Com∣mands Reverts again on Col. 
Doyly.
 In this time the condition of the Ar∣my, if it was possible, grew yet more lamentable; those that were not sick were discontented and Mu∣tinous, ready to have run to the 
Spaniards,
 if they had known where to have found them, which occasi∣oned the Dispute between Major 
Throgmorton
 and the General: for

 the Major was employ'd by the Of∣ficers of the Army to Petition the Commissioners for our Pay; if an Army, for subsistance; to return, if no Army. Col. 
Doyly
 was privy to this, but before the Commissioners denied it, which made 
Throgmorton
 Impeach him; to make which good, he was secured, and Col. 
Doyly
 af∣terwards; when 
Goodson
 the chief Commissioner forms a trifling Charge against him; and in defending him∣self, 
Throgmorton
 (a passionate young Gentleman; alledg'd the Court Marshall had no power to Try him; whereupon he was thrust rude∣ly out of the Court, and the hold∣ing up his Hand to save his Head, when the Marshal offer'd to strike him with the Hilt of his Sword, was on the Marshal Generals Oath Judg'd a resisting of him: so the most un∣happy, most ingenious and hansom man that ever was on 
Jamaica,
 was shot to death, in which his Col. 
Bar∣rington


 had as great a hand as the General.


In 1657. 
Cromwell
 sent over Col. 
Richard Bryan
 to Command, with two Regiments out of 
Scotland
 and 
Ireland;
 the one was his own, the other Col. 
Moors,
 both the best men that ever came to 
Jamaica.
 During the time of his Government, came Col. 
Stokes,
 the Governour of 
Me∣vis,
 as one of the Commissioners, with about 1700 People of all sorts, and they settle at 
Portmorant,
 where they began the first Plantation and Civil Government. But almost all these Planters, with General 
Stokes
 and General 
Bryan,
 die. In a short time 
Bryan
 was infinitely lamented, being a wise man, and perfectly qua∣lif
ed for the Command and Design: so the Government again falls to Col. 
Doyly,
 that neither loved, encou∣raged, nor understood Planting: In all this time the Fleet did nothing, only 
Goodson
 had taken 
Santa Mar∣tha

 Rio de Hach,
 and some such pitiful places that relieved the Sea men, but was no benefit to the Army, which now almost perish'd by Dis∣eases and want, tho they had divers supplies from 
England,
 yet the co∣vetousness, and ill conduct of the Officers, hindred them from making the best use of that, and the good Land that they were Masters of. But those that survived, being the most industrious and spirited men, were now grown season'd and acquainted with the 
Indias,
 and thereby capa∣ble of doing more than the great Army; and 
Cromwell
 having sent Capt. 
Mints
 in a Third Rate Frigat, Capt. 
Heytub
 in a Fifth, and Capt. 
Heylin
 in a Sixth, Col. 
Doyly
 puts on Board them 300 Souldiers Com∣manded by Major 
Wilbraham,
 Capt. 
Thomas Morgan,
 and Capt. 
Linch,
 these being got high enough to wind-ward, Landed and took 
Cu∣mana;
 afterwards rang'd down all

 that Coast, and Landed again at 
Puerto Cavalla Babanta,
 where they took two Ships thence again for 
Co∣row,
 where they met with about 30 or 40 Chests of the King's Money, so returned to 
Jamaica,
 with more Plunder in Money, Plate and Jewels than ever was brought thither before by the 
English.


In 1658. the 
Spaniards
 Landed 300 men at 
Chircras,
 on the North side, and endeavour'd to Fortifie and provide for a great Body that was to come from 
New Spain,
 by way of St. 
Jago de Cuba:
 But the General having notice, sent a Party that Razed the Fort, and kill'd and took almost all the 
Spaniards.
 Be∣fore this time, all the Women and Children were gone to 
Cuba,
 and only the men and Slaves remained under the Command of the Go∣vernour, who skult up and down the Mountains, and lived so wretch∣ed a life, that most of his 
Negroes


 had deserted him, and were come in to submit to the 
English
 General, under the conduct of one 
Juan de Bola,
 an ingenious Slave, that had from Col. 
Doyly
 a Commission (as 'twas call'd) to settle with them at 
Caymanos
 by St. 
Jago,
 where he Go∣vern'd them, and was afterwards kill'd by some of our Run-away 
Ne∣groes.


In 1659. the 
Spaniards
 sent the long expected Body of men, that consisted of about 1200. who Land∣ed and fortified at 
Rio Nova,
 on the North side; as soon as we had no∣tice, the General himself went thi∣ther with about 600 choice men and Volunteers that were embarked on the 
Grantham
 a Fifth Rate, and 
Blackmore
 a Sixth Rate, and some other small Vessels, who Landed the General and his men in the very Port; the next day they Attaqued and took the Fort, the most of the 
Spaniards
 being kill'd and taken in

 it, which was the bravest and last Action the 
English
 Army did on 
Ja∣maica,
 for after this the 
Spaniard
 sent no more People or Supplies. But the Governour 
Don Christopher
 en∣deavour'd to get off himself. The latter end of this year Col. 
Doyly
 sent to 
Cromwell
 10 or 12 Colours as Marks and Trophies of this Victory. But the Messenger Col. 
Barry
 found him Dead: so he never had one syl∣lable of any thing that was grateful from the vastest Expence and greatest Design that was ever made by the 
English.


In 1660. there was a Mutiny, for which Col. 
Tyson
 and Col. 
Boymond
 was shot to Death.


In 1661. his Majesty sent Col. 
Doyly
 a Commission for Governour, with order to Disband the Army; upon which he Erects a Civil Go∣vernment, and People begin to Plant, judging the Island would not be sur∣rendred again to the 
Spaniard.




In 1662. came my Lord 
Windsor
 a Governour, and brought with him 
 Donative of 20000 l. which the King was pleased to give the Army at their Disbanding. My Lord pre∣sently after his Arrival, sent Capt. 
Mims
 in the 
Centurion,
 with some Souldiers to take St. 
Jago de Cuba,
 which they performed with most Remarkable Resolution and Success on their return. My Lord being ve∣ry sick and uneasie, embarques on the 
Bear
 for 
England.


Sir 
Charles Littleton
 in 1633. is Deputed Governour by my Lord 
Windsor;
 he sent Capt. 
Mimms
 in the 
Centurion,
 with divers Privateers and Land-men in the Bay of 
Cam∣peach,
 where he bravely enough took the Town, but no great Plunder, neither there nor at St. 
Jago.
 In Sir 
Charles Littleton
's time was 
Charles
 Fort almost built, the Government form'd, and the first Assembly call'd, and Laws made; But he being sick, and

 having left all his Family, was like∣wise disposed to return, and having the King's Licence for; as also an Order to Invest the Council with the Power.


In the beginning of 1664. the Council chose Col. 
Thomas Linch
 their President, and Sir 
Charles Lit∣tleton
 made him Commander in chief, which he exercis'd till the Ar∣rival of Sir 
Thomas Modyford.


Sir 
Tho. Modyford
 came in 
June,
 1664. and a week before him Col. 
Edw. Morgan;
 and now People be∣gan vigorously to apply themselves to Planting, Sir 
Thomas
 understand∣ing and incouraging it exceedingly. In the 
Griffin
 he sent his eldest Son, the Major General, for his Lady: But the Frigat and he was both cast away near the Gulph of 
Florida;
 so she came not till the year follow∣ing. At the beginning of his Go∣vernment he endeavour'd a Peace with the 
Spaniards:
 But not being

 able to effect it, he encourages the Privateers; and Capt. 
Henry Mor∣gan
 having signalized his courage by burning a 
Spanish
 Admiral that shut him and Capt. 
Pennant,
 and other Privateers, up in the Bay of 
Mari∣caio;
 Sir 
Thomas
 made use of him to Imbody the Privateers, which he effects in the year 1668. and Sir 
Thomas
 makes him Admiral. And that joyning with several 
French,
 by the assistance of a 
Dutch
 man, Lands in the Bay, and came over the Moun∣tains by night into the Town of 
Porto Bello,
 which they surpriz'd and resolutely took the Castle that com∣manded the Town: and afterwards that which commanded the Har∣bour, then quitted both, having —pieces of Eight for delivering the Powder, and not Razing their Forts. With this Money he brought the Plague to 
Jamaica
 that kill'd my Lady 
Modyford,
 and many People. And in the year following Sir 
Thomas

 Modyford
 employ'd Major 
Beeston
 to draw the Privateers together again, to serve under Admiral 
Morgan;
 which he effected, and they joyning with divers 
French
 Vessels went for 
Panama,
 and bravely took the Fort of 
Changra.
 But before they came to 
Panama,
 they found it set on fire by the President, so returned to their Ships; but in beating up to 
Jamaica
 many Vessels fail'd, so that Men most miserably perish'd on barren Islands and Rocks. By this and such like Designs, many brave men were lost, and no real advantage brought to the Island. And in the year 1670. the Treaty about the 
West Indies
 was concluded at 
Madera,
 and Sir 
Thomas Modyford
 removed.


Sir 
Thomas Linch
 made his Maje∣sties Lieutenant, Governour and Commander in Chief, and arrived at 
Jamaica, June
 24. 1671. The same Month he sent Major 
William Beeston
 to 
Cartagena
 in the 
Assistance


 Frigat to notifie the Peace; and the 
March
 following, he made Sir 
Tho∣mas Modyford
 a Prisoner (aboard the Frigat) and sent him for 
Eng∣land
 for breaking the Peace with the 
Spaniards,
 contrary to his Majesties Express Orders. And five or six Months after Admiral 
Morgan,
 on the same account, Sir 
Thomas Linch
 endeavoured to procure a good un∣understanding between the two Na∣tions, according to the Treaty and his Orders, and put to Death. One 
Jonson
 a 
Dutch
 man, which was the only Privateer ever suffered for all the Murther, Rapine and Violence those dissolute People have com∣mitted on the 
Spaniards.
 In his time the 
Portland
 took a 
Caper,
 and the 
Thomas
 and 
Francis,
 His Maje∣sties Hir'd Ship, and a Privateer, took a 
Dutch
 Ship of 544 Negroes, which were more beneficial to the Island than all the Prizes ever brought to it. During the time of

 his Government, many Ships were loaded with the Product of the Island; before, it never one. And in the end of his Government, Land was risen to five times the value it was at in the beginning. Col. 
Tas∣sel
 and Mr. 
Rogers,
 at his command, run a Chain round the Island. An exact Mapp and Survey was sent home by my Lord 
Vaughan:
 in his time were abundance of Cattel Im∣ported from 
Cuba,
 which brought down their Price from 12 to 14 
l. per
 Head, to 4 and 5 
l.
 In his time Fairs and Markets were Erected at St. 
Jago, Liguania, Port-Royal,
 &c. Sir 
Thomas Linch
 remitted to the Kings principal Secretary of State, a large and exact State of the Govern∣ment of 
Jamaica:
 of the Church, the Laws, the Militia, and Revenue, which was in brief thus:


His Majesty is Soveraign Lord and Proprietor of this Island, in all

 Writs, Commissions and Grants; He is stiled, 
King of
 England, 
&c. and Lord of
 Jamaica; the Gover∣nour Represents His Person, and is invested with his Power, being en∣abled by his Commission under the Great Seal, and directed by his In∣struction how to Govern; and it is alwaies during his Majesties plea∣sure.


Here 12 Councellours are cho∣sen by the Governour, and Consti∣tuted in all Emergencies and Causes, like the King's Councel here, the which they Resemble, and the House of Lords, because they Sit with the Assembly; the Governour cannot suspend them without giving Advice to the Principal Secretary of the Cause. This Government by pra∣ctice as well as order from His Ma∣jesty, is Assimulated as near as pos∣sible to that in 
England,
 which ren∣ders it grateful to the People, who believe they ought to enjoy their

 Property and Native Right, where they are under the King's Dominion, so nothing be inflicted on them but by the course of Law, nor taken from them but by Acts themselves have consented to. Therefore they have by His Majesties Order in 
Ja∣maica
 Assemblies that consist of 32 Persons, chosen indifferently by the Freeholders of the 14 Parishes. In these Assemblies the Governour has a Negative Voice: he Calls, Prorogues and Dissolves them at pleasure; the Governour, the Councel, and the Assembly are invested with the Le∣gislative Power, and are Convened to make some little Municipal Laws, proper to the usage of the Island, about Governing Servants, Slaves, Officers, High-waies, Church, Mi∣litia, but chiefly to raise Money for the support of the Government. What Laws they make are to be sent into 
England,
 and to be of force but for two years, unless the King con∣sent;

 then perpetual, unless Re∣voked as they were made.


There is but seven Churches in the Island, that is, one at St. 
Davids, Liguania, Port-Royal,
 St. 
Jago,
 St. 
Johns
 and 
Vere.
 The Governour seems to be the King's Deputy, or Bi∣shop of 
London
's Suffragan, for he Presents and Inducts; and the Par∣sons being admitted, every Parish is bound to allow 100 
l. per annum,
 at the least, 
Pot-Royal
 200 
l.
 St. 
Jago
 130 
l.
 by Act of the Assembly made in Sir 
Thomas Linch
 his time, when only these Parishes above-named were supply'd.


The Governours Residence was at St. 
Jago,
 more within the Land, and easier for People to apply them∣selves to him; he named or appoint∣ed all the Officers, only such as the King made under the Great Seal of 
England,
 as the Secretary of the Island, that makes all the publique Dispatches, keeps the Office of In∣rollment.

 And the Marshal, who is the Executive Officer of Justice, in the nature of a Sheriff, Usher of the Black-Rod, and Jaylor, for the Ad∣ministration of Justice, and better Government of the Parishes. There is Sessions of the Justices Quarterly held at 
Morant, Liguania, Port-Royal,
 St. 
Jago,
 St. 
John Clarendon,
 St. 
Eliza∣beth;
 every of these Precincts have a particular 
Custos Rotulorum
 appointed, who with the Justices and other Of∣ficers Present, Reform, Examine and punish all Crimes, Disorders and Misdemeanors that are within their Cognizance by the Laws of 
England,
 or those of the Island. All 
Pleas of the Crown
 and 
Civil Causes,
 are heard and Determined in the Grand Court that Sits Quarterly at St. 
Jago,
 and thither 
Errours
 and 
Causes
 are brought from the Inferiour Courts, this be∣ing like the 
Kings-Bench, Court of Exchequer
 and 
Assizes
 in 
England.
 In some extraordinary Cases the Go∣vernour

 Grants Commissions of 
Oyer
 and 
Terminer.
 The Governour is Chancellor and Keeper of the Great Seal of the Island; which the King sent by Sir 
Charles Littleton
 to my Lord 
Windsor.
 It's a Cross charged with four Pines, the Reverse his Majesty in his Throne, an Indian kneeling and presenting him. All publique Commissions and Grants are seal'd with this Seal. To every Planter the Governour Grants Thir∣ty Acres 
per
 Head, for which he gives his Warrant, then the Survey∣or of the Precinct within which it lies, runs it out, and returns it to the Clerk of the Pattents, which draws the Grant; so 'tis held of the King in Common, and pays for what Sir 
Thomas Modyford
 Granted 25 
s. per
 1000. for what Sir 
Thomas Linch
 Granted a half penny 
per
 Acre.


By an Act of the Assembly an Of∣fice of Inrollment is Erected, and kept by the Secretary, where the

 Pattent and all Deeds and private Writings are Recorded to prevent Law-suits and fraudulent Convey∣ances, and is in the nature of a Re∣gistry. All Actions at Law between Neighbours, are tryed in the Inferi∣our Courts, which are in the nature of Court Barons here. There's one at 
Morant, Liguania, Port-Royal,
 St. 
Johns, Clarendon,
 St. 
Elizabeth,
 and the North side; each Court has its Judge, 12 Assistants, Clerk, Mar∣shal; and any person may plead his own Cause. They hold Pleas of any sum under 20 
l.
 and of greater sums, when they take a 
Justicias
 out of the Chancery, which the Gover∣nour grants of course; and here all Appeals, with the assistance of some of the Councel that sit as the Pro∣bate of Wills, Licences for Marri∣ages, 
&c.
 are dispatch'd in the Se∣cretarys Office; and the Governour seems to be in the nature of Judge of the Prerogative Court.




At 
Port-Royal
 is establisht a Na∣val Office that takes care of the En∣trys, dispatches of Vessels, and the observance of their Acts of Navi∣gation.


The Governour is Vice Admiral to his Royal Highness, and has a Com∣mission to Command all his Maje∣sties Ships that come to the Island; and likewise a large Commission to Erect Courts of Admiralty, and ex∣ercise all those Maratime powers his Royal Highness hath; so there's at 
Port-Royal
 a Judge-Admiral, with all the needful Officers that proceed in the Court according to the forms of Admiralty used here and in other parts.


The Militia is Commanded by the Governour, according to the power he Reigns from His Majesty and the Laws of the Country, for there's a particular Act that appoints the time of Mustering the Persons, the Arms, aad the Places of Rendezvous.

 Here's no Souldiers paid by the King; all the Officers are made by the Go∣vernour. At St. 
Thomas
 and St. 
Da∣vids
 is one Regiment, another at St. 
Andrews, Port-Royal,
 St. 
Catherines,
 St. 
Johns, Clarendon,
 St. 
Elizabeth,
 and North side: and in every one of these Regiments is one Troop of Horse; the Company and Troop that is at St. 
Jago
 wait on the Gene∣ral as his Guards on 
Sundays
 to Church; and on any other occasion the Regiment at 
Port-Royal
 keep the Fort there by half a Company at a time. All the Militia here is much more obedient, useful, better Dis∣ciplin'd and Arm'd than in 
Eng∣land.


The Revenue of this Island con∣sists in what is properly the Kings, as Quit-Rents, Fines, Forfeitures, Escheats, Seizures that are Collected by His Majesties Officer, and ac∣comptable to his Order, and a Re∣venue paid by the Assembly by an

 Impost on Strong Liquors Imported, and a Tax for Licences for Ale-houses; the Licences are received by the Secretary, and the Impost by such Collectors the Governour and Councel name and appoint; these, and all that receive any of the Kings or Publique Money, give an account thereof to a Treasurer, who Issues it out according to the Governours Order, of which he gives him and the Councel an ac∣count once every six Months, and keeps fair and open Books to shew the Assembly, or any that desire to inspect them, that every body may see the Money not misapply'd, or ill managed, that they may be encourag'd thereby to raise more when needful. In Sir 
Thomas Linch
 his time, all the Kings and Countrys Dues did not amount to 3000 
l. per Annum,
 which was not near suf∣ficient to pay the Governour and Officers Sallarys, and maintain the

 Forts, and defray other contingent Charges.


This was the manner of Govern∣ment and State of the Island of 
Jamaica,
 when Sir 
Thomas Linch
 was remanded thence in 1675.
















Sir 
Henry Morgan
's VOYAGE TO Panama, 1670.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
Thomas Malthus
 at the 
Sun
 in the 
Poultry,
 1683.














Sir 
Henry Morgans
 Voy∣age to 
Panama,
 1670.




At a Council held at St. 
Jago Delave∣ga


the 29th day of 
June, 1670.
 by Adjournment; 
Present,




His Excellency Sir 
Tho. Modyford
 Baronet, Governour,


Lieutenant General 
James Modyford,


Major General 
Thomas Modyford,


Lieutenant Collonel 
Thomas Ballard,


Lieutenant Collonel 
John Cope,


Lieutenant Collonel 
Richard Hope,


Lieutenant Collonel 
Robert Bindles,


Lieutenant Collonel 
William Ivy,


Major 
Thomas Fuller,


Major 
Anthony Collier.




WHereas it evidently appeared to this Board, by a Copy of a Commission sent his Excellency by the

 Honourable 
William Berk,
 Governor of 
Quariza,
 that the Queen Regent of 
Spain
 did by her 
Shadula,
 dated at 
Madrid
 the 20th of 
April 1669.
 Com∣manded her respective Governours in the 
Indies,
 to make open War against the Subjects of our Soveraign Lord the King in these Parts; and also that the Governour of St. 
Jago,
 of 
Cuba,
 hath executed the same by granting Commis∣sions of War against us; and lately in a most Hostile manner Landed his Men in three several places on the North side of this Island, marching as far as he durst into the Country, burning all the Houses they came at, killing and taking Prisoners all the Inhabitants they could meet with, and now lately they ap∣peared with three Ships on the South side of this Island at 
Michaels-hole,
 within eight Leagues of our chief Har∣bour, and came near the Shore full of Men; but finding the Inhabitants pre∣pared for them, went out again; and the next day Landed at 
Paratee-Bay,

 18
 Leagues to Lee-ward, and there burnt two Houses; and that divers of the rest of the 
Spanish
 Governours have also granted Commissions, and are le∣vying of Forces against us, and have, as we are credibly informed, made 
St. Jago
 of 
Cuba
 their present Magazine and their Rendezvous, where their pre∣sent Forces are to unite and embody, for the speedy Invasion of this Island; which intention, if it be suffered to ripen so far, as that the Enemy be ena∣bled to Land their Forces in this Island, we shall be inforced to quit the present care of our Plantations, and attend on the Enemies motion, where∣by our said Plantation will run to ruin, our Cattle and other Stock run wild, our Slaves take the Woods; and although by chance of War Conquers, put to be∣gin the World again, to our insupporta∣ble loss, and most infinite damage to his Majesties Service.


And whereas His Majesty hath out of his most Princely fore-sight and

 great care of us, directed in his last Article of Royal Instructions, which his Excellency hath been pleased on this extraordinary occasion to communicate to this Board in these words:


As, forasmuch as there are many things incident to that Government there, for which it is not easie for us to prescribe such Rules and Directions for you as our service, and the benefit of that Island may require, instead of them you are with the Advice of the Council, to take care therein as fully and effectually as if you were instructed by us, of which extraordinary causes giving us due in∣formation, you shall receive farther sa∣tisfaction from us as our Service shall require; In discharge therefore of that great trust which is by that Instruction put in us by His Majesties Council of this Place, and in this great and ur∣gent, necessity, we humbly advise and pray your Excellency, for the seasona∣ble prevention of these impending Evils. It may Ordain, and be it so Ordained

 by his Excellency, and His Majesties Ciuncil now Assembled, and by Autho∣rity of the same, That Commission be granted to Admiral 
Henry Morgan,
 to be Admiral and Commander in Chief of all the Ships of War belonging to this Harbour, and of all the Officers, Souldiers and Seamen belonging to the same, requiring him with all possible speed to draw into one Fleet, and with them to put to Sea for the security of the Coast of this Island, and of the Mer∣chants Ships, and other Vessels Trading to and about the same. And to Attain, Seiz and Destroy all the Enemies Ves∣sels that shall come within his reach; and also for destroying the Stores, Ma∣gazines laid up for this War, and dis∣posing such Forces as are or may be brought together for prosecuting the same. That he have power to Land in the Enemies Country as many of his Men as he shall judge needful; and with them to March to such places as he shall be informed the said Magazines or

 Forces are, and them accordingly take destroy, and dispose of; and to do and perform all manner of Exploits which may tend to the preservation and quiet of this Island, being His Majesties chief Interest in the 
Indies.
 And that for the better Government of the said Fleet, Officers, Souldiers and Seamen, he have power to execute Marshal Law, according to the Article of War already made, or which hereafter shall be made by his Excellency, the same having been first published unto them. And it is further Ordained, in regard there is no other pay for the encouragement of the said Fleet, That they shall have all the Goods and Merchandises that shall be gotten in this Expedition, to be di∣vided amongst them, according to their usual Rules; and for their better en∣couragement to engage in this so necessa∣ry a Service. It is further Ordained, by the Authority aforesaid, That no person already belonging to the said Fleet shall be molested for his Debts,

 but are hereby protected until furthe Order, of which the Provost Marshal is to take notice of at his peril.


C. Atkinson,
 Cl. C.






Sir 
Thomas Modyford
 Baronet, Go∣vernour of His Majesties Island of 
Jamaica,
 Commander in Chief of all His Majesties Forces within the said Island, and in the Islands there∣unto Adjacent, Vice Admiral to his Royal Highness 
James
 Duke of 
York,
 in the 
American Seas.


To Admiral 
Henry Morgan
 Esq; Greeting:


WHereas the Queen Regent of 
Spain,
 hath by her Royal 
Shadula,
 dated at 
Madrid
 the 20th of 
Apr.
 1670. Commanded her respe∣ctive Governours in the 
Indies,
 to publish and make open Wars against

 our Soveraign Lord the King in these Parts. And whereas the Col. 
Pedro Baijonaii billa uneba
 Captain General of the Province of 
Paragnay,
 and Governour of the City of St. 
Jago de Cuba,
 and its Province, hath exe∣cuted the same, and lately in a most Hostile and barbarous manner land∣ed his men on the North side of this Island, and entred a small way into the Country, firing all the Houses they came at, killing or taking Prisoners all the Inhabitants they could meet with; and whereas the rest of the Governours in these Parts, have granted Commissions for executing the like Hostility against us, and are diligently gather∣ing Forces together to be sent to St. 
Jago
 of 
Cuba,
 their General Rendez∣vous and place of Magazine; and from thence as the most opportune place, to be transported for a thro Invasion and final Conquest (as they hope) of this Island, for preventi∣on

 of which their mischievous In∣tentions, in discharge of that great trust which His Gracious Majesty hath placed in me, I do by vertue of full Power and Authority in such Cases from his most Excellent Maje∣sty, and his Royal Highness 
James
 Duke of 
York,
 His Majesties Lord High Admiral, derived unto me, and out of the great confidence I have in the good conduct, courage and fidelity of you the said 
Henry Mor∣gan,
 as also of your great Experi∣ence you have in Marshal Affairs, both by Land and Sea, and by the advice and consent of His Majesties Council, constitute and appoint you the said 
Henry Morgan
 to be Admi∣ral and Commander in Chief of all the Ships, Barques and other Vessels now fitted, or hereafter shall be fit∣ted for the publick Service and de∣fence of this Island, and also of the Officers, Souldiers and Seamen, which are or shall be put upon the

 same, requiring you to use your best endeavours, to get with the Vessels into one Body or Fleet, and cause them to be well Man'd, fitted, arm'd and victualled, and by the first op∣portunity, wind and weather, per∣mitting to put to Sea for the Guard and Defence of the Coast of this Island, and of all Vessels trading to or about the same; and in order thereunto, to use your best endea∣vours to surprize, take, sink, dis∣perse and destroy all the Enemies Ships or Vessels, which shall come within your view; and also for pre∣venting the intended Invasion against this place. You are hereby further Authorized and required, in case you and yout Officers in your Judg∣ment find it possible or feazable to Land, and attain the said Town of St. 
Jago de Cuba,
 or any other place belonging to the Enemies, where you shall be informed the Magazine and Stores for this War are laid up

 or where any Rendezvous for their Forces to Imbody, are appointed, and there to use your best endea∣vour for the Seizing the said Stores, and to take, kill and disperse the said Forces. And all Officers, Soul∣diers and Seamen, which are or shall be belonging to or Embarque upon the said Vessels, are hereby strictly enjoyned both by Sea and Land, to obey you as their Admiral and Com∣mander in Chief in all things as be∣cometh them; and you your self are to observe and follow all such Orders as you shall from time to time receive from His most Excel∣lent Majesty, his Royal Highness, or my self.


Given under my Hand and Seal of Arms 
this 22d of 
July,
 and in the 22d year of our Soveragin Lord King 
Charles
 the Second, 
Anno Dom.
 1670.
 
By Command of his Excellency 
Thomas Modyford.
 








Cary Helier,
 Regist. of the Admiralty.


Instructions for Admiral 
Henry Mor∣gan
 Esq; delivered him 
the 2d of 
July 1670.
 together with his Com∣mission.


1. YOU will with these Instructi∣ons receive my Commission, which you are enjoyned with all Expedition to publish and put in due Execution, according to the full ex∣tent and import of the same, for the accomplishing whereof, you shall have all the assistance this Island can give you.


2. You are to make known unto me what strength you can possible make, what your want may be that on a due Calculation of both, we may supply you with all possible speed.


3. You are to take notice and ad∣vise your Fleet and Souldiers that you are upon the old pleasing Ac∣count of no purchase no pay, and

 therefore that all which is got, shall be divided amongst them according to accustomed Rules.


4. In case you shall find it pru∣dential, as by your Commission you are directed to attain St. 
Jago
 of 
Cuba,
 and that God blessing you with Victory, you are hereby di∣rected, in case you do it without any considerable hazards, to keep and make good the place and Country thereabout. until you have advised me of our success, and received my farther Orders touching the same, lest your sudden quitting, and their as sudden returning beget us new work, and put us on new charges and hazards for the second defeating.


5. In order to this you are to pro∣claim mercy and enjoyment of Estates and liberty of Customs to all the 
Spaniards,
 that will submit and give assurance of his Loyalty to His Majesty, and Liberty to all the Slaves that will come in; and to such

 as by any good service may deserve the same, you are to give notice to their fugitive Masters Plantations to be divided amongst them as rewards for the same, & make them sufficient Grants in Writing, both for their Li∣berties and Estates, reserving to the Crown of 
England
 the fourth part of the produce to be yearly paid for the yearly maintenance of such Forces as shall defend these parts.


6. In case you find that course to take approveable effect, you are then as much as will stand with the same to preserve the Houses, Sugar-works and Canes; but if otherwise it ap∣pear to you, that in reason you can∣not make good the place for any long time, and that the 
Spaniards
 and Slaves are deaf to your Propo∣sals, you are then with all Expedi∣tion, to destroy or burn all Habita∣tions, and leave it as a Wilderness putting the Men-Slaves to the Sword, and making the Women-slaves Pri∣soners

 to be brought hither, and sold for account of your Fleet and Army, such of the men also that can∣not speak 
Spanish.
 Or any new Ne∣gro, you may preserve for the same account; or if any Ships present, to carry them for 
New-England
 or 
Vir∣ginia,
 you may send them all on the same Account.


7. You are to enquire what usage our Prisoners have had, and what Quarter hath been given by the Ene∣my to such of ours as have faln un∣der their power, and being well in∣formed, you are to give the same, or rather as our custom is, to exceed in Civility and Humanity, endea∣vouring by all means to make all sorts of People sensible of your Mo∣deration and good Nature, and your in a pritude and loathness to spill the blood of man.


8. You have hereby power to execute Marshal Law, according to such Military Laws as have been

 made by me, and the Laws made by Act of Parliament for the Govern∣ment of the Fleet, which I approve of as fitting for the Service; and hereby Authorize you to put them in Execution against such as shall of∣fend you, having first published the said Laws unto them, that none may pretend ignorance.


9. If any Ship or Ships shall pre∣sent, which have not any Commis∣sion, you are hereby impowered to grant Commissions to them accord∣ing to the form I have used, taking security of 1000 
l.
 Bond for the per∣formance of the same.


10. What Ships in this Expediti∣on you shall keep with you under your Command, and them order and dispose for the best improve∣ment of this Service, not suffering the takers or pretenders to sell them until they come into their Commis∣sion Port.


11. In regard many things may happen in this Action which cannot be by me fore-seen and provided for in these Instructions, therefore all such Matters are left to your well known prudence and conduct, refer∣ring it to you that are in the place, to do therein what shall be needful; thus wishing you good success, and this Island happy thereby, I remain


St. 
Jag. Delav.


2 
July
 1670.




Your faithful Friend and Servant,
 Tho. Modyford.


By his Excel. Command. 
Cary Helier
 Reg. of the Admiralty.










A true Account and Relation of this last Expedition against the 
Spa∣niard,
 by vertue of a Commission given unto 
H. Morgan
 by his Excel Sir 
Tho. Modyford
 Governour Ge∣neral of His Majesties Island of 
Jamaica,
 with the advice and appro∣bation of His Majesties Honoura∣ble Council fully Assembled; the pro∣secution of which I humbly here pre∣sent.


HIs Commission bearing date the 22 of 
July
 1670. the te∣nour of which was to fight with, take or destroy all the Ships that I shoul
 meet withal belonging to the subject of his Catholick Majesty in the 
Ameri¦can
 Seas, as also to Land on the Islan
 of 
Cuba,
 attempt the City of St. 
Jag
 upon the said Island, if himself an
 the Commanders find it feazible an
 farther more to Land in any of th
 Dominions of his said Catholiqu
 Majesty in 
America,
 and to attemp


 take or surprize by force of Arms any of his said Catholique Majesties Cities, Towns, Forts, or Fortresses where he should by any intelligences be advised that they were storing up or making Magazines of Arms, A∣munition, or Provisions, or levying any men for the propagating or main∣taining of this War against his Ma∣jesties Island of 
Jamaica.


1670. In order whereunto they sailed from 
Port-Royal
 the 14th of 
August,
 with 11 Sail of Vessels, and 600 men, and having rounded the Island, we arrived at the Isle of 
Ash,
 the place of Rendez∣vous the 2 of 
September
 following, from whence we having no Advice of the course of the Enemy or their design, we dispatched away Vice Admiral 
Collier
 the sixth of the same Month, with six Sail of Vessels, and 350 men, to go for the Course of the 
Main
 to get Prisoners for Intel∣ligence for the better stearing our

 Course and managing our design, for the most of his Majesties Honor and Service, and the safety of 
Ja∣maica.


The last of 
September
 arrived to us at the Isle of 
Ash,
 Capt. 
John Mor∣ris,
 who brought with him 
Imanuel Riveras
 Vessel of eight Guns, who burnt the Coast of 
Jamaica,
 having taken him on the Coast of 
Cuba,
 and in her three original Commissions, 2 of which they sent his Excellency; the 7th of 
October
 following so vio∣lent a Storm happened in the Har∣bour that drove all the Fleet ashore except the Admirals Vessel, then consisting of 11 Sail; all of which, except three, were got off again and made serviceable.


In this Month arrived here three 
French
 Vessels, and conditioned to sail under our Flag, and in 
Novem∣ber
 arrived seven sail more from 
Ja∣maica.
 Now being of force enough to attempt St. 
Jago,
 we examined

 some of our own men, who had been lately there Prisoners; and al∣so those 
Spaniards
 that were taken in 
Imanuel Rivers:
 One of our men in particular, Captain 
Richard Powell,
 Captain of the Prize that was 
Ri∣ver
's Ship, who had not been above 30 daies from St. 
Jago,
 declared that time of year being Winter, and be∣ing but one landing place, and that strongly fortified, it was impossible for us to attempt that place without the hazard of the whole Party, and the certain loss of the most, if not all our Vessels, by foul weather; all the knowing Prisoners examined, affirming the same, upon which we relinquished that Design.


The 20th of the same Month Vice Admiral 
Collier
 returned from the 
Main
 with good quantities of pro∣visions, and two of the Enemies Ves∣sels, one of which called the 
Galer∣deene,
 was assistant to 
Riveras
 in the burning the Coast of 
Jamaica,
 and

 in her were 38 Prisoners, who the 29th of the same Month were exa∣mined, and what was said by two of the most sensiblest of them redue'd into 
English
 is as followeth:




Nov.
 the 29. 1670.


The Deposition of
 Marcus de Cu∣ba, 
Spaniard, Master Pilot of the
 Galerdeene 
Prize, born at the
 Grand Canaries, 
aged 47 years or therea∣bouts, being disposeth saith,


That he did see the People at 
Car∣thagena
 Listed and all in Arms of∣fensive against the 
English.
 And far∣ther saith, that several 
Spanish
 Ships have had and now have Commissions from the president of 
Panama,
 named 
(Don Juan Perez de Gusman)
 and that they have taken several 
English
-men, and that the last 
Spaniard
 have by the said President great incourage∣ment against the Island of 
Jamaica,
 and the more by reason of a Fleet fitted out of old 
Spain
 for those parts, under

 the Command and Conduct of one 
(Don Alonso)
 and further saith not.


Sworn the day and year above written
 Coram.
 
 Henry Morgan, 
and the rest of the Officers of the Fleet.






Nov.
 29. 1670.


The Deposition, of
 Lucas Peroz 
a Seaman, born at
 Palma, 
aged 31 years or thereabouts, being disposeth saith,


That he did see the People at 
Car∣thagena,
 some of them in Arms, others Listing of themselves; and two Ships ready fitted against 
Jamaica,
 one with 
18,
 and the other with 
12
 Guns; and also that the President of 
Panama
 hath granted several Commissions against the 
English,
 by vertue of which, several 
English
 Ships hath been taken, and further saith not.


Sworn the day and year above written
 Coram.


H. Morgan 
and the rest of the Officers of the Fleet.










Upon 
December
 the 22d Comman∣ded all the Captains on board me being 37 in number, and demanded their advice what place was fittest to attain for His Majesties Honour, and preservation of 
Jamaica;
 and to put the greater curb to the Insolencies of the Enemy; in answer to which they all unanimously agreed on 
Panama,
 as by their resolutions under their hand in these words appears.








On Board the 
Satisfaction
 Frigat, 
Dec.
 2. 1670.


Honoured Sir,


WE having seriously considered of what place may prove ad∣vantagious for the safety of the 
Eng∣lish,
 and more especially for the securi∣ty of his Majestys Island of 
Jamaica,
 to prevent the Invasion of the 
Spani∣ards,
 it being referred by the rest of the Commanders in the Fleet in Gene∣ral

 to us whose Names are here under written, to pitchupon a placeth at we thought might be most feazible and just to take for the good of 
Jamaica,
 and Honour of our Nation; do all of us conclude it stands most for the good of 
Jamaica,
 and safety of us all to take 
Panama,
 the President thereof having granted several Commissions against the 
English,
 to the great anoyance of 
Ja∣maica
 and our Merchant Men, as by the Oaths of two 
Spaniards,
 have been made most evidently appear.


This is the Judgment and Resolution of




Lieutenant Col.
 Joseph Bradley,


Richard Norman,


Thomas Harrison,


Robert Delander,


John Harmonson,


John Galoone,


John Pyne,


Dego Moleene,


Vice Admiral
 Ed. Collier,


Lawrence Prince




John Morris,


Thomas Rogers,


Cha. Swan,


Hen. Wills,


Richard Ludbury,


Clement Simmons.








To 
Henry Morgan
 Esq; Admiral and Commander in Chief of His Maje∣sties Fleet belonging to the Island of 
Jamaica,
 for this present Expe∣dition.


TO the which the Admiral con∣sented, and having called the Captains again on Board to consult of the manner of carrying on that attempt, and whereby to find Pri∣soners to be guides for 
Panama,
 it was voted that Providence being the Kings Antient propriety, and most of the people there being sent from 
Panama,
 that no place could be more fit.




December
 the 8th we sailed, and the 14th arrived at 
Providence
 by 8 of the Clock in the morning, and by two in the Afternoon were pos∣sessed of the great Island without resistance; the 15th, sent a Sum∣mons to the Governour to deliver the little Island, who willingly sub∣mitted to that he might have good Quarters, and Transportation to any part of the 
Main,
 which was granted and duly performed; but four of his Souldiers took up Arms with us, and became our Guides; and by them understanding the Castle of 
Changra
 blocked our way, the Admiral called a Councel of all the chief Captains, where it was determined to attain the Castle of 
Changra;
 and forthwith there was dispatched 470 men in 3 Ships, under the Command of Lieu∣tenant Gol. 
Joseph Bradly,
 with 3 Captains and 4 Lieutenants, and up∣on the 27th were safely landed with∣in four Miles of the Castle by twelve

 of the Clock, and by two had made their approach one of the other, and by three into Trenches where they continued fighting till eight the next Morning, and then had return∣ed 
re infecta;
 if in playing of their Granadoes, they had not by good fortune set a Guard-house on fire that stood upon the Walls, which caused a breach, where our men couragiously stormed, and the Ene∣my as bravely defended it to the last Man, refusing Quarters, which cost them the lives of 360 men, and of our side was lost 30 out-right, one Capt. and one Lieutenant, and 76 wounded, whereof the brave 
Brad∣ly
 was one, with two Lieutenants, who died within ten daies after their wounds, to the grief of himself and all in general.


Jan.
 2. the Adm. arrived with the whole Fleet, and understood that the Enemy lay with Forces to endea∣vour the taking of the Castle, where∣upon

 he gave order for the Fleet to follow him into the Harbor, but had the ill fortune to be cast away the Ship that he was in, and four more, but saved the men; the rest being come in fell to preparing to go up the River, where they understood the Enemy had entrenched themselves, and had six several retreating Breast-works upon the River.


Whereupon the Adm. gave order that 7 Sail of lesser Vessels should be rigged to go up the River, and filled them with Men and great Guns; and left to Guard the Castle and the Ships 300 men, under the Com∣mand of Captain 
Richard Norman.
 Monday the 9th we began our march 1400 men in the said 7 Vessels, and 36 Boats and Cannons.


Upon the 12th Instant we got to the first Entrenchment, where the Enemy had lately quitted it, and set all on Fire, as they did all the rest, without striking a stroke for it, and

 there was forced to leave our Ships and Boats with 200 men to Guard them under the Gommand of Cap∣tain 
Robert Delander,
 and betook our selves to the wild Woods, where was no path for 24 Miles, but what we cut. The 14th we arrived with∣in two Miles of 
Venta Cruce,
 which was the Landing place, where was a very narrow and dangerous pas∣sage, where the Enemy thought to put a stop to our further proceed∣ing, but were presently routed by the forlorn, Commanded by Cap∣tain 
Thomas Regers;
 the rest of our men never firing shot, and without any loss, saving three men slightly wounded; but the Enemies loss we could never learn. 
January
 the 15th we arrived at 
Venta Cruce,
 which is a very fine Village, and the place where they Land and Embarque all the Goods that comes and goes to 
Panama,
 where we though we might be relieved, having marched three

 daies without Victuals, but found it as the rest, all on Fire, and they fled.


The 16th we began our March, the Enemy constantly galling us with Ambuscades and small Parties, and we still beating of them for a League together, although they had all the advantage that could be of us, the way being so narrow that we could but march 4 a breast, and such a deep hollow, that the Enemy lay over our heads; about noon that day we got to the 
Savanes
 safe, with the loss of three men killed out∣right, and six or seven wounded; and of the Enemy 20 killed, and one Captain, besides many wound∣ed, we marched three Miles further, and then took up our Quarters to refresh our men, and thanked them for that daies service. The 17th we began our March forward, but had no opposition, and about nine of the Clock in the Morning, saw that

 desired place the South Seas, and likewise a good parcel of Cattle and horses, whereupon the G. comanded a general hast to be made, and our men killed Horses and Beef enough to serve them all; about four of the Clock in the afternoon, our men having refreshed themselves, we marched again, and about five the same day we came in sight of the Enemy; where he lay in Batalia with 2100 Foot and 600 Horse, but finding the day far spent; we thought it not fit to engage, but took up our Quarters within three Miles of them, where we lay very quiet, not being so much as once alarm'd. The next morning being the 18. betimes in the morning, the Gen. gave order to draw our men in Ba∣talia, and it was accordingly per∣formed, and they were drawn in the form of a 
Tertia;
 the Vant Guard was led by Lieutenant Col. 
Lawrence Prince,
 and Major 
John Morris,
 they

 being in number 300 men, the bo∣dy containing 600; the Right wing was led by the Gen. and the left by Col. 
Ed. Collier,
 the rear-ward of the 300 was Commanded by Col. 
Bledry Morgan;
 after having viewed our men, and a little encouraged them, the G. commanded the Officers eve∣ry man should repair to his Charge, the Enemy being drawn at such ad∣vantage, they still kept their Stati∣on; although often provoked, yet would not stir from their Ground, which we presently perceived, and gave order that our men should wheel their bodies to the left, and endeavour to gain a Hill that was hard by, which, if gained, we should have forc'd the Enemy to fight to their disadvantage, by rea∣son he could not bring out of his great body more men to fight at a time, than we could out of our small body, and likewise that we should have the advantage both of Wind

 and Sun. The Officers putting this Command in execution, and the Hill, and a dry Gut accordingly gained, the Enemy was forced to fight upon, their long March having not room to wheel his Battel, by reason of a Bogg that was drawn behind on purpose (as he thought) to entrap us, but we taking another ground, in the end proved a snare to himself, whereupon one 
Francisco Detarro,
 gave the Charge with his Horse upon the Vant Guard, and so furiously that he came upon the full speed, we having no Pikes, gave or∣der that they should double their Ranks to the Right, and close their Files to the Right and Left inward to their close order, but his career could not be stopt till he lost his life in the front Rank of our Vant-Guard, upon which the Horse wheel off to the Right, and their Foot ad∣vanced to try their Fortunes, but it proved like their fellows, for we be∣ing

 ready with the main Battel to re∣ceive them, gave them such a warm welcom, and pursued so close that every one thought it best to retreat, but they were so closely plyed by our left Wing, who could not come to Engage at first, by reason of the Hill, that the Enemies retreat came to plain running. Although they did work such a Stratagem that hath been seldom or never heard of, that is when the Foot Engaged in the Flank, he attempted to drive two Droves of Cattel of 1500 apiece in∣to the Right and Left Angles of the Reer, but all came to one effect, and helped nothing for their flight to the City, where they had 200 fresh men, and two Forts, one with six Brass Guns, the other with eight, and the Streets Barricadoed, and great Guns in every Street, which in all amounted to 32 brass Guns, but instead of fighting he command∣ed the City to be fired, and his chief

 Forts to be blown up, the which was in such hast that he blew up forty of his Souldiers in it, we followed into the Town, where, in the Mar∣ket-place they made some resistance, and fired some great Guns, killed us four men, and wounded five. At three of the Clock in the after∣noon we had quiet possession of the City although on fire, with no more loss on our side in this daies work than five men killed, and ten wound∣ed. And of the Enemy about 400 where we were all forced to put the fire out of the Enemies Houses; but it was in vain, for by 12 at night it was all consumed that might be cal∣led the City; but of the Subburbs, there was saved 2 Churches, and about 300 Houses; thus was con∣sumed that famous and antient City 
Panama,
 which is the greatest Mart for Silver and Gold in the whole World, for it receives all the Goods into it that comes from old 
Spain
 in

 the King's great Fleet, and likewise delivers to the Fleet all the Silver and Gold that comes from the Mines of 
Peru
 and 
Potazi.
 Here in this City we stayed 28 daies, making daily Incursions upon the Enemy by Land for 20 Miles round about, without having so much as one Gun shot at us in anger, although we took in this time near 3000 Priso∣ners of all sorts, and kept likewise Barques in the South Seas, crusing and fetching of Prisoners that had fled to the Islands with their Goods and Families.


Feb.
 14. we began our March to∣wards our Ships, with all our Priso∣ners; and the next day came to 
Ven∣ta Cruce
 about 2 in the afternoon, which is from 
Panama
 five 
English
 Leagues, where we stayed refreshing our selves till the 24th. the 26th we came to 
Changra,
 where the Plunder was divided amongst the Souldiers and Seamen, which amounted to

 about 30000 
l.
 The sixth of 
March
 we fired the Castle, spiked the Guns, and began our Voyage for 
Jamaica,
 where some are arrived, and the rest daily expected. The reason that there was no more Wealth, was be∣cause they had two Months notice of us, and had Embarqued most of their Treasure into Ships, and sent them to 
Lima
 in 
Peru;
 one Ship w
s laden with Gold, Silver and pre∣cious Stones, that contained 700 Tuns, and one of 300 Tuns.


Jan.
 31. 1671.


By Command 
John Peeke
 Secretary.








At a Council held at St. 
Jago
 
the 31 of 
May
 1671.


Present,



His Excellency Sir 
Tho. Modyford
 Baronet, Governour,


Lieutenant Col. 
John Cope,


Lieutenant Col. 
Robert Brindlos,


Lieutenant Col. 
William Ivy,


Major 
Cha. Whitfield,


Major 
Antho. Collier,


Capt. 
Henry Molesworth,




Admiral 
Henry Morgan
 gave the Governour and Council a Relation of a Voyage to 
Panama,
 who gave him many thanks for the Execution of his late Commission, and ap∣proved very well of his acting.




This is a true Copy of the Record,
 Cha. Atkinson, 
C. C.


The Deposition of 
John Peeke
 Gentleman, aged 30. years or there∣abouts, taken before the Right Ho∣nourable Sir 
Thomas Linch
 Knight, Governour of 
Jamaica,
 this 3d day of 
April
 1682.


The Deponent saith that he was Secre∣tary to Admiral 
Henry Morgan
 all the 
Panama
 Voyage, and that he wrote all his Letters, and saw those that were sent to the said Admiral from Sir 
Thomas Modyford,
 or any other person in 
Jamaica,
 that he was present when the two 
Spani∣ards, Marcus de Cuba,
 and 
Lu∣cas Perez
 were sworn on board the 
Satisfaction,
 and that upon their de∣position, it was resolved by the Com∣manders that they would attain 
Pa∣nama,
 and that Sir 
Thomas Mo∣dyford
 had knowledge of the De∣sign by a Ship that was sent on pur∣pose, and that Col. 
Bledry Morgn


 Came to the fleet in a Sloop that de∣parted from 
Jamaica,
 ten days after the arrival of the said Ship, and that Sr. 
Thomas Mudyford
 in his Letter which he sent by the Sloop gave no Countermand at all. And this deponent further saith, that this is a true Copy of the Journal which was delivered to the Council the 
13
 of 
May,
 for which they gave him thanks and ordered it should be recorded. And this deponent further remembers that the Sloop which came to them and brought Sr. 
Thomas Mudyfords
 letter, in answer to these which were sent upon the advice they gave of their resolutions for 
Panama,
 arrived three days before we marched for the City, and further, this Depo∣nent saith not.


Sworn 
Coram
 
this 
3
 day of 
April, 1672.




John Peeke


Tho. Lynch.
























A short account of the Life of 
Christo∣pher Collumb
 or 
Collumbus
 the first Doscoverer of 
Jamaica.


COllumbus
 was born at 
Cugnero,
 or (as some say) at 
Nervi,
 in the Territory of 
Genoa;
 he was a Mariner from a Child, and traded into 
Syria,
 and other parts of the East. After this he became a Master in making Sea Carts, and went to 
Portugal
 to Learn their Navigations on the Coast of 
Affrica.


The 
Spaniards
 who Envy the Honour of the Discovery of the 
New World
 to a stranger, Report that a certain Caravel sailing in the Ocean by a strong East Wind, long con∣tinuing was carryed to a Land un∣know, which was not expres'd in the Mapps and Cards, it was much Longer in Returning than in Going; and arriving, had none left

 alive but the Pilot, and three or four Marriners, the Rest being Dead of Famine and other Extre∣meties, of which also the Remnant perish'd in fews days, leaving to 
Collumbus
 (then the Pilots Host) their papers, and some grounds of this Discovery; the time place, Country and name of the man, is Uncertain; some Esteem this pilot an 
Andaluzian,
 and that he traded at 
Madera
 when this befel; some a 
Biscaine,
 and that his traffick was in 
England
 and 
France;
 and some a 
Portugal,
 that traded at the 
Mina;
 some say he arrived in 
Portugal,
 others at 
Madera,
 or at one of the 
Azores;
 all agree that he Died in the house of 
Christopher Collumbus,
 it is most Likely at 
Madera.
 This Relation as it hath no witness to prove it, the whole company being dead, nor any good circumstances, so the most look on it to be a fable and 
Spanish
 trick, envying a foraigner and 
Ita∣lian


 that Glory to be the first Finder of the 
Indies,
 and the most Juditi∣ous and sincere of the 
Spaniards
 themselves esteem but a tale, as appears by the Testimony of 
Gorsalo Fernando De Omedo
 in his Summary, and more fully in his General Hi∣story of the 
Indies
 they shew, and and so doth he which then Lived in the Court of 
Spain; Peter Martir
 another Cause that mov'd 
Collumbus
 to this Discovery and not that Pi∣lots paper or Reports; for he being a Mariner used to Sea from his youth; and sailing from 
Cales
 to 
Portugal,
 observed that at certain seasons of the year the winds used to blow from the West, which continued in that Manner a long time together, and believing that they came from some Coast beyond the Sea; he bu∣sied his mind so much therewith, that he Resolved to make some try∣al and proof thereof. When he was now forty years old he propounded

 his purpose to the Senate of 
Genoa;
 undertaking if they would lend him Ships he would find a way by the West, unto the Island of Spices, but they Rejected his proposals as Idle fancies.


Columbus
 frustrate of his hopes at 
Genoa,
 yet leaves not his Resoluti∣on but goeth to 
Portugal;
 and Com∣municates this Matter with 
Alphonsus
 King of 
Portugal,
 but finding no Entertainment to his suit, he sends his Brother 
Bartholomew Collumbus
 to King 
Henry
 the seventh of 
England
 to sollicit him in the Matter, while, himself passed into 
Spain
 to Implore the Aid of the 
Castillian
 herein.


Bartholomew
 in his Voyage to 
Eng∣land,
 unfortunately fell into the hands of Pirates, which Robbed him and his company, and forced him to sustain himself with making of Sea Cards; and having gotten some∣what about him, presents a Map of the World to King 
Henry;
 with his

 Brothers offer of Discovery, which the King Gladly accepted and sent for him into 
England.
 But he had speed of his suit before in 
Spain,
 and by that King and Queen was employ'd according to his Request, for com∣ing from 
Lisbon
 to 
Pallos di Moguer;
 and then conferring with 
Martin Alonso Pinzon,
 an expert Pilot, and Frier 
Jo. Perez
 a good Cosmogra∣pher; he was Counsel'd to aquaint these with his project; the Duke 
De Medina Sidonia
 and of 
Medina Ce∣li,
 which yielding him not Credit, the Frier Counsel'd him to go to Court, and wrote in his Behalf to Fryer 
Fernandi Di Telavera
 the Queens Confessor.


Christopher Collumbus
 came to the Court of 
Castile, Anno
 1486. and found cold welcome to his suit at the hands of the King and Queen busied with Hot Wars in 
Granada;
 whence they expel'd the 
Moores;
 and thus remain'd he in Contempt

 as a Man meanly Cloathed, without other patron then a poor Frier, save that 
Alonso Di quintalignia
 gave him his Diet, who also at the last pro∣cured him Audience of the Bishop of 
Toledo;
 by whose Mediation he was brought before the King and Queen; who gave him favourable Countenace and promis'd to Dispatch him when they had ended the wars of 
Granada,
 which also they per∣formed. Thus 
Collumbus
 is set forth with three 
Caravals
 at the Kings charges, who, because his treasure was then spent in the Wars, Borow'd 16000 Duckets of 
Lavis De Sanct Angelo;
 and on Fryday the 3 of 
August,
 in the year of our Lord 1492 in a Ship call'd the 
Gallega,
 ac∣companied with the 
Pinta
 and 
Nin∣na;
 in which the 
Pinzors
 Brethren went as pilots, with the Number of 120 persons or thereabouts, set sail for 
Gomera;
 one of the 
Canary
 Islands; and having there Refresh'd

 himself followed his Discovery; af∣ter many Days he Incountered with an Herby Sea which looked like a green Field, so thick that he could scarce see the water, which not a little amazed the 
Spaniards
 and had caused their Return, had not the sight of some Birds promis'd them Land not far of. He taught the 
Spaniards
 to observe the Sun and Pole in their Navigation, which till this voyage they had not used nor known.


But the 
Spaniard
 after three and thirty days sailing, Desperate of success, Mutined and threaten'd to cast 
Collumbus
 into the Sea; dis∣daining much that a stranger a 
Ge∣nois
 had so Abused them: but he pacified their Enraged fury with Mild Speeches and Gentle promise. On the eleventh day of 
October
 one 
Rodrigo De Triana
 espied and cry∣ed, 
Land, Land,
 the best Musick that might be, Especially to 
Colum∣bus;


 who to satisfie the 
Spaniards
 Im∣portunitie had promis'd the day be∣fore, that if no Land appear'd in 3 Days he would Return. One the Night before had Descried fire, which Kindled in him some hope of great Reward at the Kings Hand when he Returned into 
Spain;
 But being herein frustate he Burn'd in∣to such a flame as that it consumed Both Humanity and Christianity in him, and in the Agony of Indigna∣tion made him Leave his Country and Faith, and Revolt to the 
Moors,
 But 
Collumbus,
 how can I but Re∣member, but Love, but Admire, sweetly may those Bones Rest; Sometimes the pillars of that Tem∣ple where so Divine a spirit Resided, which neither want of former Ex∣ample nor publique Discourage∣ments of Domestique and forreign states, not private Insultation of proud 
Spaniards,
 nor length of time, which generally Devoureth the

 best Resolutions, nor the unequal plains of Huge unknown Seas, nor Grassy Fields in 
Neptunes
 Lap, nor In∣portunate Whispering, Murmuring, threatning of enraged companions could daunt. O name 
Collon,
 wor∣thy to be named to the Worlds end; which to the Worlds end hast con∣ducted 
Collonies;
 or may I call thee 
Collumbo,
 for thy Dove-like simpli∣city and patience; the true 
Collonna
 or Pillar whereon the knowledge of the new World is founded; the true 
Christopher,
 which with more then Giant-like force and Fortitude, hast Carried Christ his name and Religi∣on through unknown Seas, to un∣known Lands, which we hope & pray that it may be more Refined than Popish Superstition, and 
Spanish
 pride will yet suffer. Now let the Antients no Longer Mention 
Nep∣tune, Minos, Erithras
 or 
Danaus;
 to all which Divers authors Diversly Ascribe the Invention of Navigation 
Missians, Tirrians, Trojans
 vail your

 bonnets, strike your Top-sail to this 
Indian
 Admiral, that deserveth the Top-sail indeed, by aspiring to the top that sailing could Aim at in Discovering another World; Let 
Spaniard, French, England
 and 
Dutch
 Resound thy name, or his name ra∣ther, 
whose name who can tell,
 Psal. 30.4. that would acquaint thee and the World by the news of a new World.


But lest we drown our selves in this Sea of Extasie and Admiration, let us go on shore with 
Collumbus,
 in this new discover'd 
Island,
 and first methinks I see the 
Spaniards
 yester∣day in Mutiny, now as far Distract∣ed in Contrary passions, some gaz∣ing with greedy eyes on the Desired Land, some with tears of Joy not able to see that which the Joy of see∣ing made them not to see. Others Embracing and almost adore∣ing 
Collumbus,
 who brought them to that sight, some also with secret Repining, Envying that glory

 to a stranger, but biting in their biting Envy, and making shew of Glee and Gladness; all new awak∣ed out of a long trance into which that step-mother Ocean with Dan∣ger, Death, Dread, Despair had Dejected them; Revived now by the sight of their Mother Earth; from whom in unknown Arms they had been so long weaned and de∣tained. On then they go, and fel∣ling a tree, make Cross thereof, which they there Erected, and took Pos∣session of that 
new World
 in the name of the Catholick King; this was done on the 11 of 
October, Anno.
 1492 In the 
Island Guana ha∣ni,
 one of the 
Lucai,
 which 
Collum∣bus
 named 
San Saluatore;
 from whence he sailed to 
Baracoe
 a Ha∣ven on the North side of the Island 
Cuba;
 when he went on Land and asked of the Inhabitants for 
Cipango (Japan)
 they understanding him of 
Cibao
 (where are the Richest

 Mines of 
Hispaniola
) signed him that it was in 
Haiti
 (so was the Island then Called) and some of them went with him thither.


What Wordly Joy is not Mix'd with some Dis∣aster after their Admi∣ral here spliteth on a Rock, but the men are saved by the help of the other Ships. This fell out in the North part of 
Panicola
 (so named by them) where they had sight of Inhabitants, who seeing these strangers Ran all away into the Mountains; one woman the 
Spaniards
 took, whom they used Kindly, and gave her Meat, Drink and Cloathes and so let her go, she declaring to her people the Liberalitie of these new comers, easily perswad∣ed them to come in troops to their shiping thinking the 
Spaniards
 to be some Divine Nation sent thither from Heaven: They had before

 taken them for the 
Caribbes,
 which are Certain 
Canibals;
 which use Inhumane Huntings for Humane Game, to take men for to eat them; Children likewise which they geld∣ed to make them more fat; and then to devour them; the women they did not eat, but used them for Procreation, and if they were old, for other Services. The Islanders had no other Defence against them but the Woody Hills, and swiftest Heels; to which they betook them at the 
Spaniards
 arrival, thinking them (as 'tis said) to be 
Canniballs,
 and such have they since proved in effect, not leaving of three Millions of people, which here they found so many hundreds, and that long-since the Divil had forewarned them of this by Oracle, that a bearded Na∣tion should spoil their Images, and spill the blood of their Children, which was all verified, as may be seen by any that has been Conver∣sant

 in such Tracts as Treats of those parts.


Collumbus
 obtained leave of 
Gua∣canarillus
 the 
Cacick
 or King, to build a fort in which he Left 38 
Spaniards,
 and taking with him 6 
Indians,
 Re∣turned to 
Spain,
 where he was high∣ly welcomed by the King and Queen. Some Controversie fell out between 
Collumbus
 and one of the 
Pinzons,
 Masters of one of the 
Caravels,
 about leaving those men behind; but 
Col∣lumbus
 sent a Letter to Reduce him to peace by the 
Indians,
 who held the Letter in a most Religious Re∣gard thinking it had some Spirit or Deity, by which they could under∣stand one another being absent.


The Pope (then a 
Spaniard) Alexander
 the 6 hearing of this, de∣vided the World by his Bull betwixt the 
Portugal
 and 
Spaniards,
 bearing date the 4 of 
May
 1493. Drawing a Line one hundred Leagues beyond the Island of 
Azores
 and 
Cape verde;


 this 
Alexander
 giving (more then great 
Alexander
 could conquer) the East to the one and West to the other. The Bull soon after turned into a Unicorn, his 2 horns grew into one by the uniting of these two Nations.


Collumbus
 Graced with the title of Admiral, and Enriched with the tenths of the 
Spanish
 Gaines in the 
Indies,
 is sent a second time with his Brother 
Barthol.
 who was made De∣puty of 
Hispaniola;
 they had fifteen hundred men; the first Island he Espied in his Second Navigation he called 
Desteada,
 or Desired, be∣cause he had longed to see Land, ar∣riving in 
Hispaniola,
 he found the 
Indians
 had Murther'd these 38 
Spa∣niards
 which he had left there, and lay the blame on the 
Spanish
 Insolen∣cies. He now built and peopled the town of 
Isabella,
 which was their chief place of Residence and Govern∣ment, which in the year one thou∣sand

 four hundred ninety eight, was Removed to the City of 
San. Dom∣ingo;
 they built also the fort of S. 
Thomas.
 But both in the one and the other, the 
Spaniards
 Died of famine through the 
Indians
 wilful∣ness, who unwilling to have such Neighbours, would not plant their 
Maze
 and 
Jucca,
 and so starved both themselves and their Guests. As for the Pox the 
Spaniards
 in this Voy∣age got it of the 
Indian
 women, and brought them into 
Spain,
 and they after paid the 
Indians
 in Re∣compence with a Disease as deadly and Infectious to them which con∣sumed thousands, and was never known before amongst them: That is the 
small Pox,
 the other were Improperly named of the 
French;
 or of 
Naples,
 seeing that in these wars of 
Naples,
 which the 
Spaniards
 Maintain'd against the 
French;
 some carryed this Disease with them out of 
Spain
 and communicated the same

 both to the 
French
 and 
Neapollitans,
 having been usual and easily Cu∣rable in the 
Indies.
 Another di∣sease also assaulted them of a little kind of flies, called 
Niguas,
 which would eat into and Breed in the flesh, and made many lose their toes.


Collumbus
 at this time Discover'd 
Cuba
 and 
Jamaica,
 with the Neigh∣bour Isles, Returning to 
Spaniola,
 he found his Brother and the 
Spani∣ards
 in Dissention and separation, and punishing the Authors of sedi∣tion, Returned home. In the year of our Lord 1492 he made his third Voyage and then touched on the Continent, Discover'd 
Cubagua paria
 and 
Cumana.


But 
Roldanus Ximenius
 raising a Rebellion and accusing the 
Collumbi
 to the King, effected that 
Bovadilla
 was sent Governor into 
Spaniola,
 who sent the two Brethren Bound as Prisoners to 
Spain;
 Base ingratitude; for the brave attempt of the wor∣thys,

 the King freeth them and Im∣ploy'd 
Christopher
 a fourth Voyage, Anno 1502. in which 
Ovandus
 the Governour forbid 
Collumbus,
 the first finder, to Land on 
Hispaniola.


He then discover'd 
Guanaxa, Hig∣vera, Fondura, Veragua, Ʋraba,
 and learned news of the South Sea. He stay'd at 
Jamaica
 to Repair his fleet, where some of his men were sick, and then they which were sound in Body were more then sick, froward and tumultuous in Behaviour, and many left him; upon this occasion the Islanders also forsook him, and brought in no victualing; herewith 
Collumbus
 neither able to abide nor depart, was driven to his shifts, no less admirable for subtilty then Re∣solution; he told the Islanders, that if they did not bring him in pro∣vision the Divine anger would con∣sume them; a sign thereof they should see in the Darkned face of the Moon 2 Days after, at that

 time he knew the Moon would be Eclipsed, which the simple Islanders seeing, with fear and Grief, humbled themselves to him, and offered them∣selves ready to all kind and dutyful offices.


At last returning into 
Spain
 he there died, 
Anno
 1506. his body was buryed at 
Sevil
 in the Temple of the 
Carthusians.
 This was the end (if ever there can be an end) of 
Collumbus. Pinzenus,
 one of 
Col∣lumbus
 his Companions, by his Ex∣ample invited, made new Discoveries: 
Vespatius,
 and 
Cabbet,
 and many other every day making new Searches and Plantations, till the World at last is come to the knowledge of this 
new World
 almost wholly.


FINIS.













