Proposals for setling the East-India trade·
Approx. 27 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 13 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A56041




Wing P3745



ESTC R212949





99825517




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Proposals for setling the East-India trade·
22, [2] p.   


London :


printed, and are to be sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall,


1696.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
East India Company --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  Commerce --  East Indies --  Early works to 1800.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-12
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-01
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2014-01
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






P3745


R212949


99825517


29901












PROPOSALS For Setling the East-India TRADE.


LONDON,
 Printed, and are to be Sold by 
E. Whitlock,
 near 
Stationers-Hall,
 1696.




















PROPOSALS For SETLING the 
East-India
 Trade.


THE best Way to carry on that Trade, to the General Advantage of the Na∣tion, is by an Establishment of a Regu∣lated Company, whereby all the Sub∣jects of 
England
 may have Liberty to concern themselves therein at all times, upon an equal Foot.


'Twill be a great Encouragement for Adventu∣rers, to make new Discoveries, when every one may have the Management of his own Affairs, and reap the Benefit of his own Industy; the Trade will be driven to its utmost Extent, more Ships employed, His Majesty's Customs advan∣ced, many of the Younger Sons of the Gentry provided for by beneficial Employments, greater Quantities of the Commodities of our Native Growth and Manufactures exported by many Buyers, which will consequently raise their Va∣lue here; and there will be larger Importations

 from 
India,
 consequently lower the Price of these Goods, by the many Sellers at our Markets, give us great Advantages to surmount our 
European
 Competitors in that Trade, and inable us to sup∣ply all these parts of the World with the Com∣modities of those Countreys much cheaper than they, especially if the whole Subsidy may be re∣paid upon all that shall be Ship'd off for Parts be∣yond the Seas.


And Lastly, By such an Establishment, Three great Evils which have been practised by the pre∣sent Joynt Stock, will be effectually remedied, 
viz.


That of a Monopoly, wherein is but one Buyer and one Seller of all the Goods Imported and Exported to and from so great a part of the World.


The taking up vast Sums of Money at Interest upon a common Seal, which is a thing very un∣equal and hazardous to the Subject, because no particular Men's Estates are liable for Payment of the same. And,


That pernicious and infamous Trick of Stock-Jobbing, whereby several Families have been al∣ready ruined, and had its Original from this Company.


Now for the Constitution of a Corporation to manage this Trade, and the Powers requisite for such a Company, we do further most humbly propose,


That a convenient Number of Persons be ap∣pointed and chosen annually, to direct the General

 Affairs, who may be empowered to raise Money at a certain Rate 
per Cent.
 on all Merchandize, as may be agreed by a general Court of Adventu∣rers, which shall be the Company's Stock, for maintaining an Ambassador at the Court of the 
Great Mogul,
 Consuls at the principal Ports, ma∣king such Settlements as may upon due Consi∣deration be judged necessary, and for defraying all other Publick Charges.


That every Person at his Admittance into the Company, shall pay for his Freedom a small Sum for the Uses aforesaid.


That the Adventurers at a General Court may make such By-Laws, for the better regulating and carrying on the Trade, as shall be approved of by the Lord Keeper, the Lords Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron for the time being, to be consistent with the Laws of the Land.










SOME REASONS AND CONSIDERATIONS
 Why the 
East-India
 Trade should not be Setled in a Joynt Stock Exclusive.


THough at the first Constitution of a Joynt Stock it is made as diffusive by the Subscriptions of many in small Summs, as the nature of the thing is capable of, yet by Purchase, or otherwise, it soon comes into few hands, and is attended with all the Evils that a destructive Monopoly brings with it,

 without having the least of those specious and pretended Advantages so much talked of; and the Assertion, that the 
Dutch
 out of choice have setled that Trade in a Joynt Stock, and that the 
Scotch
 have so setled it, because it's the most advanta∣gious, is ill grounded, being done by them for the Reasons following.


The 
Dutch
 had the beginnings of their Trade to 
India
 in the Minority of their State, when they strugled with the Mighty Power of 
Spain,
 in a long and bloody War; and the 
Spaniards
 and 
Portugueze
 (who were then under the same Mo∣narch) being Masters of the whole Trade of the 
Indies,
 the States, to weaken their Enemies, wisely Encouraged their Merchants to send Ships into those Seas, by giving them Commissions of War; and they effectually did it, by taking considerable Booties from them, and by aug∣menting still their Force, had great success at Sea, and seized on some of their Fortifications. This brought the Merchants of their several Towns to joyn: where, by prosecuting their Trade, and their Privateering several Years, they became very considerable. Then the States United them further, that they might yet be more serviceable to annoy the Enemy, and brought the whole Trade and War into a Joynt Stock, and gave it mighty Priviledges; as of paying no Customs In, or Out, 
&c.
 which they enjoy to this day.




This was the Reason so long since that indu∣ced the States to this Settlement, by way of Hostility and depredation; and not that they thought it was best so to do for the general good of the Trade, or that it could not be as well managed by a Regulation, if their Cir∣cumstances had been otherwise.


The 
East-India
 Company of 
Holland
 being thus Established, as it were by Conquest, and there∣by incumbring themselves with many Fortres∣ses in the South-Seas, and 
Ceylon,
 to maintain to themselves their most advantagious Spice-Islands (without which the Company must fall) there seems a necessity upon them to drive that Trade in a Joynt Stock; for indeed their Esta∣blishment in 
India
 is another Common-Wealth, and their Charge to maintain their many Forts is so extravagant, being forced to send out twelve or fifteen hundred Men yearly; that though they bring home many very Rich Ships Annually, yet their Dividends are but small, and those suspected by most, to be rather out of their Quick Stock, for they owe and continually take up vast Summs of Money at Interest, at home, as well as in 
India;
 wherein our Company hath imitated them, though they had no Spice-Islands, or profitable Colonies to help defray those Charges, but only a plain Trade, which might as well, nay much better, be carried on without Forts. And as we cannot in the one, so we humbly conceive there is no Reason to

 imitate them in the other; because we have bet∣ter ways, even by a Regulation, to out-do them. For, 
Anno
 1653. to 1657. while our Trade to 
India
 lay open to all, the 
Holland East-India
 Company sunk greatly in their Stock and Credit: we under-sold them in all those Commodities, and brought home Spice in spight of th
, procured at 
Macossar
 (a considerable Mart in the South-Seas, where we once had a Settlement) and elsewhere; which gave them such apprehensions of losing their Trade, that to prevent it, they employed some Persons to influence 
Oliver Cromwell
 to Establish this pre∣sent Joynt-Stock, 
Anno.
 1657. And they gave also Pensions in 
England,
 to forward the De∣sign.


And though they so much applaud the 
Dutch,
 calling them a Wise People, Masters of the My∣steries of Trade, 
&c.
 they do not tell you that they have not the Act of Navigation upon them. So that the Condition of the People of 
England
 will be infinitely different from theirs: For if the 
Holland
 Company set their Goods too high, and use the People ill, though they cannot send Ships direct to 
India,
 they can send to 
England, France,
 and 
Spain,
 or any other Countrey, to buy all Goods except Spices. But if our Company be thus Established, the People of 
England
 have no way to help themselves. For the Act of Navigation Prohibits the Importation of all Goods from any Port or Place, except that of their Growth, Production, or usual place of

 their first Shipping. And then, if an Act passes that none is to Trade to those parts, but by a Joynt Stock, then can no 
East-India
 Commodities be imported but by them; and then if those Gentle∣men will demand one hundred pounds for what cost them but five pounds, the People must pay it, or be without; for we can buy none of those goods in 
Holland,
 or any where else, because those two Laws have staked us down, and wholly sub∣jected us to those Men.


In all other Taxes we have this satisfaction, that we know the most can be demanded of us; but were this Company setled, we are left to their boundless will, to order them from time to time as they list.


The Company do indeed pretend that they can∣not set their own Rates, and get what Prizes they please, because their Goods are always ex∣posed to Sale by publick Candle, and put up low, where every Person is admitted to buy, and the Buyer sets the price. Now that this Salvo is in∣significant, is known almost by every Trader's constant practice; for when a Ship, or any Goods are exposed to Sale by Candle, the Sellers have always Friends in the place, who bid until it comes up to the Seller's price. So this Relief by a publick Sale will not help; besides, the Com∣pany can import so little, that the Peoples wants of the Commodities, will force them to give what price they please.




The 
Scotch
 chose a Joynt-Stock before a Re∣gulated Company, because they never yet had any Trade to 
India,
 nor have their Merchants wherewithal to manage it, so must call in the assistance of other Nations, both for Money and Experience, which, God be thanked, is not our Case, being very well acquainted in those parts of the World, having a large improved experi∣ence in Trade, and Stock enough to carry it on to its full extent; such a Genius to Traffick and Na∣vigation, that wherever we have met with Com∣petitors, and not been clogged with Joynt Stocks (whose Mannagers are Chose, not because of their knowledge of those Trades, or for their In∣tegrity, or any other Endowment, but because they will promote the particular interest, and observe the directions of some Towring Men;) we have Out-Traded them all; witness, to 
Tur∣key, Spain, Portugal,
 &c. And in the 
West-India
 Trade, which the 
Dutch
 mannage in a Joynt Stock, we have so much exceeded them, as no History can parallel.


And since the present 
East-India
 Company do so much value their Forts, we say, That Fort St. 
George
 is Scituate where is neither Port nor Harbour, only an open Road, where no Ships can Ride upon breaking up of the 
Monsoons
 with any tolerable safety. Nor is this Road well Commanded by the Town, or Fort; nor can any Passengers or Goods be Landed or Shipt off in other than the Country Boats, which are ex∣posed to great hazard, and can be mannaged by none but the Natives, and carry but six or eight

 Bales at a time; nor have they Water, Fuel, or Provisions enough within themselves to hold out a ten days Siege, being supplied with all from the Countrey.


It is the worst seated for Trade, or to make in∣vestment of Goods, of any on the Coast of 
Cor∣mandel;
 and is now much oppressed by a Custom-House the 
Mogull
 hath lately set up very near it, which exacts 5 
l. per Cent.
 upon all Goods going in, and coming out of the place; so we believe the Company had no such Penniworth of it, when they agreed to allow the former Company six Thousand Pounds for it.


Bombay,
 it's true, is more defensible; there is a Port, and it may be relieved by Sea, yet it's a Place without Commerce, and the safety and conveniency of Ships Harbouring there would be more, were it in the 
Mogull
's hands; for he will not suffer any hostility in his Ports nor Roads, but protects all People that come thither to Trade, as may be instanced in the 
Constantinople Merchant,
 which was secured at 
Mechlapatam,
 an open Road, from five 
Dutch
 Men of War, 1665. and in the 
Success
 (a private Ship) and the 
Benja∣min,
 a Company's Ship, who were secured two years since from five 
French
 Men of War in the Ri∣ver of 
Suratt.
 As also two 
French
 Ships, who by the last Advices were still riding in the Bay of 
Ben∣gal
 under the 
Mogul
's Protection, notwithstanding the 
Dutch
 had six Men of War to take them, but durst not offer them any violence, although there are no Forts or Fortifications in any of those pla∣ces. Besides this place of 
Bombay
 is extreamly un∣healthful.




But to inform you more truly, we here set down four Paragraphs out of Sir 
John Child,
 the Compa∣nies General, and two more of their Councils Letter, Dated 
June
 the 7th, 1689. to the pre∣sent 
East-India
 Company, 
Viz.


We wish this Island may Prosper and Flourish suitable to your Desires, but we truly think it will never be otherwise than a Charge to you; and if the 
Mogull
 takes the Countrey round about us, it will be next door to an impossibility to maintain the Fort against him.


The Shopkeepers at best are but poor needy Fel∣lows, and what they sell is but just enough to supply their necessities from hand to mouth; however, in compliance to your Order, shall see and raise a moderate Duty on the Shops, as may be most for your interest.


We shall be glad to raise your Revenues suitable to your Desires, and wish the Island was in such a Condition as to be able to bear such a Charge as your Honours propose; We fear that will never be in our days, and find no reason to hope that ever it will be.


If ever there be a 
Dutch
 War, believe it from us, that at best we shall be but in a bad Con∣dition in these parts of the World, they being so very numerous: But for your Island of 
Bombay,
 we do verily believe they will ne∣ver offer to meddle with it; for we cannot conceive what should induce them to such an Ʋndertaking.




And we presume to add, nor no body else, except it were to make a Present of it to the Great 
Mogull;
 for the 
Dutch
 find Forts charge∣able things, where they support the Trade, and will not be so mad to load themselves with them, where no Trade is to be expected. Fo
 they have not long since abandoned 
Policat,
 a better Fort of their own in the Bay. But should they be so, it's not doubted the same Fate will attend that, that did 
Gambo,
 a Fort of our Royal 
Affrican Companies,
 mounted with 74 pieces of Cannon, which Surrendred to Monsieur 
de Genes
 with three 
French
 Friggots, upon his first Summons in 
July
 last.


All the good these two main Forts of St. 
George,
 and 
Bombay,
 have done the Company, is, they have rais'd them in Opinion and Greatness of themselves; for they have, without any regard to the Honour of the Nation (which they only pretend unto) exposed it the most ever Subjects did; for after their Factors had ran above Three Hundred Thousand Pounds in Debt at 
Suratt,
 their President made his escape from thence by particular Order of the Company, in these words, 
viz. That he should leave them, but leave them as the
 Israelites 
did the
 Egyptians.


They took, and contrary to the Faith of Na∣tions, plundered those very Ships they had gi∣ven their Passes to, and sent home several of the Goods, which they sold and divided. After

 they had so taken the Ships, they made a for∣mal Declaration of War, and proceeded therein, until by woeful experience they found the in∣consistency of War with Trade, and what a Condition they were in; as doth appear by the following Paragraphs of the aforesaid Let∣ter, 
viz.


We cannot see any hope of Trade, without making Peace with the 
Mogull;
 and we must then pay our old Debts; and after that is done, we shall not be over-stock'd with Money.


Your Honours may be assured, that the 
Mogull
 is a Potent Prince, and he doth not at all value your Trade; his Subjects are not so poor as you are pleased to think; we heartily wish the Wars with him and his Subjects were at an end.


Your Honours may firmly believe that we are willing enough not to part with any thing that we have taken, more than what we see of abso∣lute necessity for your interest.


Your Honours have neither 
Mergeen
 nor 
Chat∣tegann,
 and we fear will not have so Honour∣able a Peace with the 
Mogull
 as is expected; but we shall do what we can towards it, as becomes us.


And accordingly they did, and sent up Mr. 
George Welden
 an 
Englishman,
 and 
Abraham Na∣varra,


 a 
Jew
 (which latter when they kept their High Court of Admiralty in 
India,
 was styled His Majesty's Attorney General) to the Court of the 
Great Mogul
 to sue for Peace, where, after they had been some time, and made their way by Presents, they were admitted to the 
Mogul
's Pre∣sence, but it was in the Posture of Malefactors, obtain'd his Pardon and Allowance of Trade, in a Phirmaund granted them in the Words follow∣ing:

All the 
English
 having made an humble submissive Petition, That the ill Crimes they have done may be pardoned; and requested a Noble Phir∣maund, to make their being forgiven manifest; and sent their Vakeels to the Heavenly Palace, the most Illustrious in the World, to get the Royal Favour; and 
Ettimand Chawn,
 the Governour of 
Suratt
's Petition to the famous Court equal to the Skies, being arrived, That they would present the Great King with a Fine of 
150000
 Rupees to his Noble Treasury resembling the Sun, and would restore the Mer∣chants Goods they took away to the right Owners of them, and would walk by the ancient Customs of the Port, and behave themselves for the fu∣ture no more in such a shameful manner.


Wherefore His Majesty, according to his daily Fa∣vour to all the People of the World, hath pardoned their Faults, mercifully forgiven them, and out of his Princely Compassion agrees, That the Pre∣sent be put into the Treasury of the Port, the

 Merchants Goods be returned, the Town flourish, they follow their Trade as in former Times; and that Mr. 
Child,
 who did the Disgrace, be turned out and expelled.


Having thus laid before you the Honour this Company hath done the Nation, in prosecuting the 
East-India
 Trade; and shewed how useful their Forts are to preserve that Trade, especially in time of War with the 
Dutch;
 we proceed to the Priviledges which the Company do pretend to have obtained in 
India
 with vast Expence and Charge: And do aver,


I. That they are all owing to the Embassie of King 
James
 the First, by Sir 
Tho. Row, Anno
 1615. of which the 
Mogul
 certified the King in these Words, 
viz.


I have sent forth my Phirmaunds through all my Countries to this effect, That if any 
English
 Ships or Merchants shall arrive in any of my Ports, my People shall permit and suffer them to do what they please freely in their Merchandizing Cases, aiding and assisting in all occasions of In∣juries that shall be offered them, that the least Cause of Discourtesie be not done unto them, that they may be as free, or freer, than my own Peo∣ple.


II. Those in the Bay were the Effect of a re∣markable Cure one Mr. 
Bawden,
 an 
English
 Sur∣geon, wrought about Forty Years since upon a

 Person of great Quality, for which he refused to receive any other Recompence, than a General Grant, That the 
English
 Nation should have a free and unmolested Trade in those Parts; which was given, and hath been continued until this late unaccountable War, but by the Peace restored in the Words following, in a Phirmaund from the 
Great Mogul.


Know this, that the good Fortune of the 
English
 hath directed them the right way to end their Faults; they are sorry and ashamed for what they have done, therefore have sent their Vakeels to our Noble Court, with a Petition for a Gracious Phirmaund, to pardon their Faults, which the King, out of his great Favour and Mercy, al∣ways ready to pardon, doth freely forgive them: Therefore his clear and unspotted Order is such, which you are to observe as you do his that you pray unto, That so soon as this gracious Phir∣maund reaches your Hands you suffer no body in your Jurisdiction to molest, hurt, or hinder the 
English
 Nation in their Business, but suffer them to carry it on in the same manner as formerly: This understand and act accordingly.


By all which it is most evident, That the Com∣pany have not any Priviledge exclusive of the rest of the Nation.


And this further manifestly appears in the two free Trading Ships, the 
Seymore
 and the 
Henry
 this last Year; however the said Company did what they could to oppose them: For the 
Seymore,
 in which were Captain 
Pitt
 and Mr. 
Katchpole,
 arri∣ving

 in the Bay, were accused as Pirates by the said Company's Factors, and as such brought be∣fore the Government; and his Excellency Sir 
John Goldsburrow,
 the Company's then Commissary General over all 
India,
 having heard that the 
Hen∣ry
 (another Private Ship, in whom was Mr. 
White
) was gone to 
Suratt,
 did write to the President there, acquainting him, 
That an
 English 
Pirate, one Captain
 Pitt, 
was come into the Bay, on pretence of Trade, was seized, and had upon Examination con∣fessed, that there was another gone for
 Suratt, viz. 
Mr.
 White, 
as great a Pirate as himself; requiring the President to acquaint the Governour therewith, that he might be seized also, to prevent all further Da∣mage to the
 Mogul'
s Subjects.


All this notwithstanding, and that these People are extreamly exasperated against Pirates, having suffered so much by Piracy, they could not by this Artifice be drawn from their accustomed Ju∣stice: But having entered into the matter, though the Company's Factors bribed high at 
Suratt
 to prevent it, that they might take it 
pro Confesso;
 they, upon the Merit of the Cause, admitted both these Ships to Trade, and to return to 
England
 with the Produce of their Cargo in the proper Commodities of those Places, which were as good and as cheap as ever were purchased by the Com∣pany; nor did they pay any more Customs, Du∣ties or Acknowledgments, than the present Com∣pany always did, and now do.




And this present Company are so far from ha∣ving enlarged the Trade to 
India,
 that they had be∣fore this late Charter, and Subscriptions thereunto, reduced their Trade to so low an Ebb, that the Farming it out to 
Jews, Armenians,
 and others, was the chiefest of their Business: For their Drift was not to enrich the Nation, but themselves: And their present Circumstances are such, that without an Act of Parliament exclusive to all others (upon which not only they, but the mean∣est of Men may raise Money to carry on the Trade) they cannot upon their own Bottom send out the number of Ships they have declared to dispatch thither this Year, although above the vast Sums they owe at Interest, they have advan∣ced 25 
per Cent.
 upon their Stock, in taking 80 
l.
 paid in Guineas at 30 
s. per
 Piece for 100 
l.
 and give Bills under their Common Seal for paying 112 
l.
 at the end of two Years; which is 20 
per Cent. per Annum
 for the Money received. And to avoid the Law against Extortion, the Condition is, If Twelve of the Ships named of those they have abroad, and now going out, do miscarry, then their Bond is void; but if any one of them arrives, it is in full Force and Virtue.


The Merchants of 
England
 are an industrious People, and Lovers of Trade; they do not upon small, no, not upon great Discouragements give it over, but do rather endeavour to recompence themselves by the same Voyages: Otherwise, the 
Newfoundland,
 the 
Malaga,
 the 
Virginia,
 and all

 the 
West-India
 Trades, with many others now closely pursued, had been left off long since. Where there is any hope of Vending our home-Commodities, they are ready to carry them even to unknown, and but in part discovered Places, far beyond a joint Stock, who cannot, being once so constituted (for it would be against their Oaths should they) prefer the Publick Good in Preju∣dice of their Joint Stock, which such Companies were never known guilty of, always Exporting and Importing no more of any Merchandize, than what will yield them their setled Profits; and employing few others than Men of broken For∣tunes, or Youths at very mean Salaries.


Whereas particular Merchants in a Regulated Company (who cannot make Combinations) will carry out and bring home much greater Quantities of all Commodities, imploy many of the Younger Sons of the Gentry, who may settle Houses, raise Estates there, without being at the Pleasure of a few Men; add greatly to our Navigation, Encrease the Customs, and will in every Point be of Infinite Advantage to the Publick, as well as themselves, whose Right and Property it is, that the Commerce and Traffick by Sea be as unlimitted and free as the Inland Trade.


It is therefore humbly hoped, That a Regula∣ted Company for 
India
 will be erected, whereby the Right of the Subject may be preserved, and the Trade carried on, to the Interest and Honour of the Nation.


FINIS.











