A particular account of the suddain and unexpected siege of Vienna, the capital city of Austria, and residence of the Emperour of Germany, at present besieged by the Turkish Army, consisting of a hundred and fifty thousand men (the 8th of July, 1683) under the command of the Grand Visier, and what passed during the seige [sic] as well within the city, as without it
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A56484




Wing P587



ESTC R20817





ocm 12610763




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A particular account of the suddain and unexpected siege of Vienna, the capital city of Austria, and residence of the Emperour of Germany, at present besieged by the Turkish Army, consisting of a hundred and fifty thousand men (the 8th of July, 1683) under the command of the Grand Visier, and what passed during the seige [sic] as well within the city, as without it
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


[London :


Printed for John Smith,


1683]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Kara Mustafa Paşa, --  Merzifonlu, 1634-1683.
Turkey. --  Ordu.
Vienna (Austria) --  History --  Siege, 1683.
Broadsides --  England --  London --  17th century
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-02
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2014-02
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






P587


R20817


12610763


64359












A Particular ACCOUNT Of the Suddain and Unexpected 
Siege of Vienna,
 The Capital City of AUSTRIA, And Residence of the Emperour of GERMANY, At present Besieged by the 
Turkish
 Army, Con∣sisting of a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Men, (the 8th. of 
July,
 1683.) under the Command of the 
Grand Visier,
 and what passed during the Seige, as well within the City, as without it.


THis famous City took its Name from the River 
Wien,
 which flows into the 
Danube,
 and is the Residence of the Emperour, and Metropolis of 
Au∣stria,
 a Royal Fortification, Surrounded with thick Walls, Bastions, deep Ditches, and lofty Towers, in such sort as She may well be Stiled the 
Bulwark
 against the 
Turks,
 the Key of 
Germany,
 and of the 
Christian
 World, as She made it appear in the Year 1529. When 
Solyman
 the 
Magnificent,
 Emperour of the 
Turks,
 Sate down before it, with Three Hundred Thousand Men, and after Six Months Furious and unusual Attacques, was forced to withdraw, whereupon that 
Christian
 City was delivered.


The 
Turkish
 Emperour, in this present Year, 1683, Like a Tyrant thirsting after 
Christian
 Bloud (by the Encouragement of the Rebel 
Count Teckley
) sent a∣gain into 
Hungary,
 Two Hundred Thousand Men, under the Conduct of the 
Grand Visier
 to Commence a War with the 
Christians,
 which is now carried on with great Fury: The 
Turks
 have lately made an Incursion near 
Raab,
 in which the Regiment of Dragoons Commanded by the Duke of 
Savoy,
 were Routed, the Duke himself, and the Prince of 
Arembergh
 Wounded, so that they Died; Whereupon the 
Imperi∣al
 Infantry retreated to the Isle of 
Schut,
 and the 
Cavelry
 to 
Vienna,
 near the 
Da∣nube.
 After which the 
Grand Visier
 passed the Cities of 
orra
 and 
Raab,
 and (the 8th. of 
July
) Beseiged the City of 
Vienna,
 with a Hundered and Fifty Thou∣sand Men; and ordered the Rest of the Forces, to lay waste the Country in their March, so as utterly to extirpate 
Christianity.
 The 
Besiegers
 immediately raised Three several Batteries before 
Vienna,
 and Fired thence into the Town, Day and Night, with great Fury, but the brave Governour, Count 
Starembergh
 made a Vi∣gorous

Defence, levelled the Batteries, and in many Assaults happily repulsed the E∣nemy, so as there were Slain of the 
Turks
 in these Attacques above Twenty Thou∣sand, and of the 
Beseiged
 about Twenty Persons killed, and some Wounded: The 
Turks
 sent several times their Proposals for a short Respite to Bury their Dead, which was refused them, so as in the End, the Annoyance from dead Bodies, and those they found in the Mines, that Died of the Pestilence, Obliged them to draw some distance off from the City. In the mean time, the Beseiged were refreshed, and Vow∣ed to Defend it to the last drop of Bloud. All Things in the City Remained in a good Posture, and at length they seize'd two Incendiaries, who had privately conveyed Matches of Gunpowder with Artificial Fires into many Houses with design to Burn them, and to Fire the 
Scotch Monastery
 and 
Church;
 but their Designes were timely Dicovered, and the Contrivers were first Torterd, then cast alive into the Fire.


The Beseiged did then believe the Enemy had forsook the City, but they returned and raised new Batteries, on which they mounted Six large peices of Ordinance and many new Mortar—peices, which they Discharged with greater Vigour than before. They gave out, that the 
Grand Signior
 wou'd come in person before his Army, and bring extraordinary Supplies with him. Notwithstanding, the Besieged supported themselves with great Resolution, for there came over not long before an Engineer who brought with him a Draught of the 
Turkish
 Camp to the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 and assured him, that the 
Turk
 wanted Provisions; and there∣fore that if the Three Mines they had sprung were ineffectual, they must speedilly raise the Siege: The Enemy blew up two of them, which were between the 
Castle
 and 
Karndter Gate;
 One of which was countermined, and in it many of the 
Turks
 slain: but the Second, weakened the 
Counters Carp,
 and the 
Turks
 lodged them∣selves in the 
Ditch,
 but by a brisk Sally, they were beaten off again,


The 29th. of the last 
Month,
 were slan in a general Assault more than Ten Thousand 
Turks.
 In short, the City of 
Vienna
 wou'd endure, with the help of God, four or five Months longer, being so well stored with Provisions that Governour 
Starembergh
 sent as much Bread for two Pence to the 
Turkish
 Camp as wou'd cost with them six Crownes: Wee hope by the Divine Assistance, that the Cheif 
Christian
 City will be preserved from the Cruelty of the 
Turkish
 Emperour, and that he may languish in his Desires and return to 
Mahomets
 Stables, and that the great God will dwell in the Garrison of 
Vienna,
 consisting of twenty Thousand Men Effective, besides the Scholars and Young Men, the Auxiliary Forces of 
Poland
 and those of the Empire.


Made 
English
 from the 
High—Dutch.










LONDON,
 Printed for 
John Smith,
 1683.









