The adventures of (Mr. T.S.) an English merchant taken prisoner by the Turks of Argiers, and carried into the inland countries of Africa : with a description of the kingdom of Argiers ... / written first by the author, and fitted for the public view by A. Roberts ; whereunto is annex'd an observation of the tide, and how to turn a ship out of the straights mouth, the wind being westerly, by Richard Norris.
T. S.
Approx. 214 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 134 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A57371




Wing R1576



ESTC R36789





ocm 16016349




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The adventures of (Mr. T.S.) an English merchant taken prisoner by the Turks of Argiers, and carried into the inland countries of Africa : with a description of the kingdom of Argiers ... / written first by the author, and fitted for the public view by A. Roberts ; whereunto is annex'd an observation of the tide, and how to turn a ship out of the straights mouth, the wind being westerly, by Richard Norris.
T. S.
Roberts, A., 17th cent.
Norris, Richard.
[6], 252, [2] p.   


London :


Printed and are to be sold by Moses Pitt ...,


1670.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Slavery --  Africa, North.
Adventure and adventurers --  England.
Algeria --  Description and travel.
2010-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-10
Pip Willcox
Sampled and proofread
2010-10
Pip Willcox
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






R1576


16016349


104773














THE ADVENTURES OF (M
r
 
T. S.
) AN ENGLISH MERCHANT, Taken Prisoner by the 
TƲRKS
 of 
ARGIERS,
 And carried into the INLAND COUNTRIES OF AFRICA: With a Description of the Kingdom of of

ARGIERS,
 of all the TOWNS and PLACES of Note thereabouts.


Whereunto is added a Relation of the Chief Commodities of the Countrey, and of the Actions and Manners of the People.


Written first by the Author, and fitted for the Publick view by

A. Roberts.


Whereunto is annex'd an Observation of the Tide, and how to turn a Ship out of the 
Straights Mouth
 the Wind being Westerly; By

Richard Norris.


London,
 Printed, and are to be Sold by 
Moses Pitt
 at the 
White Hart
 in 
Little Britain,
 1670.










To his very worthy Friend THOMAS MANLEY ESQUIRE.


Sir,


H
Ere I send un∣to you the 
Memoires
 of our Deceased Friend, that you have oft∣times desired to peruse; I hope you will meet in

 them with that satisfacti∣on that you do expect; for they contain many use∣ful Observations, adorned with variety of most pleasant

ADVENTURES:
 They may appear very strange to such as have seen nothing but their Cradle; with them they may obtain the Credit of a well humoured 
Ro∣mance:
 But 
Sir,
 You are sufficiently acquaint∣ed with the integrity of 
 the 
AUTHOR,
 to cause you to put a higher value upon this Relation; and I know that you are so well informed of the Proceedings of the 
Afri∣can
 People, that you will not find in it such incre∣dible Wonders as preju∣diced persons may ima∣gine. Two or three Pas∣sages look like Miracles, but they may be confirm∣ed by several of our Na∣tion, both Merchants and 
 Travellers, that have seen in those parts the things related; from them any may be further in∣formed. The Author was not willing to let the world know so much of his Life, had he not been sollicited and almost for∣ced to it by the importuni∣ty of those whose Request he did not dare to deny. Death hath carried him another Voyage while he was writing this, and 
 forced him to leave his Work unperfect in my hands; could he but re∣turn, I doubt not but we might have another Re∣lation from him as plea∣sant as this, and no less wonderful.


This Age in which we live is apt to discre∣dit what it understands not, or sees not acted be∣fore its Eyes; but its Malice or Censures will never injure the Author; 
 he is safe out of the Reach of Envy: So may this his Relation be in the Pro∣tection of so powerful and kind a Patron. I am,


Sir,


Your most Faithful Servant, A. ROBERTS.












The Adventures of an 
English
 Merchant taken Captive by the 
Turks
 of 
Argiers,
 and carried about the In-land Countries of 
Africa,
 with ma∣ny excellent Observations both curious and profitable.


T
Here is nothing ap∣pears more wonder∣ful than Gods Pro∣vidence in the Go∣vernance of the World, and in the disposition of Mankind; it carries us through various Estates, it brings us in Dangers and Miseries, and in a due time leads us out again by means 
 not discoverable to our shallow foresight; it causeth us to meet with such different Accidents, which some may attribute to Chance; but if we take the pains to examine and question them, we shall find them to be appointed by a Divine Wisdom for the Publick and our own Advantage:

Joseph
 in 
Egypt
 is a Famous Instance; He was sold by his Brethren, he past through 
Potiphera
's House to the Common Gaol, and from the next door to the Gallows, he was promoted to

Pharaoh
's Elbow, to preserve that Kingdom from the Fury of seven years Famine. Some it raises from a Cottage to a Throne; it tumbles others down to the most despicable condition: We may see a

Bellisarius
 the most successeful Warrior of his time re∣duc'd to beg his Bread in that City that he had rescued from the

 Enemies hands; A proud 
Bajazet
 who makes the World bow to his Scepter, serves many times for a Footstool to his Enemy. Modern and Ancient Histories are full of such strange Examples of the Pro∣ceedings of Providence, which tend many times only to fashion and frame us to a certain temper that may make us more useful in our Generations.


I shall not engage my self to shew all the Intrigues, all the Rea∣sons and secret Actings of Gods Providence, that is the business of a Divine, and not of one whose Profession is to Trade.


Some of my Friends have ear∣nestly desired me to give the Pub∣lick an Account of some Observa∣tions that I have made in my Tra∣vels into the In-land Country of 
Affrica,
 where my Misfortune carried me; I hope that some may 
 make no small Advantage of them.


My Name will be useless to the Judicious Reader; I will only tell him, That I was first designed for a Scholar; but an old Pedant soon frighted me from my Studies by his extraordinary Rigour; he gave me such an aversion for Learning, which formerly I esteem∣ed, that I could not endure the sight of a Book.


My Estate being that of a youn∣ger Brother, and but very small, I was perswaded next to embrace the employment of a Merchant; therefore I was bound an Appren∣tice to a noted Trader in 
London.
 After five years abode in his house▪ he resolved to send me as his Fa∣ctor to 
Smyrna,
 and other Places within the 
Straights.


At that time, in the Year 1648▪ my Father dies, and my Elder

 Brother was kill'd in our unhappy Troubles. They left me an Estate which might have obliged me to reside at home, had not the desire of seeing Foreign Places, and the vain-glory of being named a Tra∣veller, with my Masters Com∣mands, forced me abroad, and to continue in my former Design. Be∣fore my departure, I sold some of my Estate, and bought a

Cargo
 of Goods to the value of two thou∣sand odd hundred Pounds.


With this and some Goods be∣longing to my Master, I embark∣ed towards the latter end of 
July
 in a Vessel of 
Hamborough
 of 350 Tuns, called the 
Sancta Maria,
 whereof 
Peter Janson
 was Master, in the River of 
Thames.


The Wind favoured us very much out of the Channel, and al∣though we met with contrary Gusts, in 20 days we reach'd as 
 far as the Cape St. 
Vincent.


Our Business made us direct our Course towards

Cadiz,
 where we had some Goods to unload.


Assoon as we came near the Cape, we saw two Ships to Wind∣wards, making all Sail to come up with us; we began to be jealous of their Intentions, and to prepare for our Defence. The Decks were cleared, the Guns charged, and every one had his Place and Office appointed him; we were all between hope and fear, as in such Cases is usual, until their Co∣lours had satisfied us. Many idle Conjectures did spread amongst us; some imagined them to be 
French
 by the make of their Ships, others that they were 
Turks;
 one wiser than the rest, knew them a∣far off, and affirm'd them to be 
Ostenders,
 the same in which he had formerly sailed, naming the 
 one the St. 
Patrick,
 the other the 
Capitain.
 Our distrust made us seek the shelter of the Land, until at last we saw 
French
 Colours out, and heard a Gun that commanded us to strike Sail. Some of our Company well acquainted with such Tricks of Pirates, advised our giddy headed Skipper not to trust their Appearance, but to con∣tinue still his Course. But his ill Fortune and ours would not suffer him to follow such wholsom Coun∣sel, which might have put him and us out of all danger. For although it was the Morning when the Chase began, and that the Enemy had won much upon us that day, they could never have come up to us until Evening; and in the Night we might have made our Escape, and got into the Harbour. But he had a Design which we never could well understand. There∣fore 


 he commanded to lay by the Wind, until the Ships came within Call. They came too soon for us; at half a League distance they disco∣vered themselves to be 
Turks
 Men of War by their bloody Colours, which they put out instead of the White: Then began our Skip∣per to be amazed, our Company to be frighted, and every one to bestir himself. I observed a Fel∣low who before had some Disease in his Legs and hands much like unto the Gout, which made him unprofitable all the time of the Voyage, when he saw the danger, he began to skip about, and han∣dle the Guns as if nothing had e∣ver ailed him. We had then a∣board about a hundred Men with the Passengers of several Nations, and thirty great Pieces of Ord∣nance, with other smaller Guns. It had been an unworthy Act to de∣liver

 our selves into the Enemies hands without a stroke, being so well provided for our Defence.


About seven of the Clock in the Afternoon the 
Turks
 overtook us, and the formost Vessel gave us a Broad Side, the other followed, and saluted us in the same manner. We stood not still in the mean while, but returned them the like. The Fight was furious and bloody on both sides for four hours: Our men hehaved themselves gallantly; neither Death nor Wounds could force them from their Charge and Posts. Some when their Limbs were all bruised, their Bones shat∣tered, and their Bodies torn with Splinters, did obstinately continue to handle and manage the Guns. Every one resolved to die with his Weapons in his hand, rather than to shrink in the least from the Fight.


In the space of four hours we received near fifty Broad sides, and our Enemies were as obstinate as our selves.


At last our Number was redu∣ced to 18 men, and those were wounded in several places, the rest were either dead or disabled. The Skipper was shot through the Thigh, my self through the right Arm; so that we could no longer resist the Numbers and Fury of our Enemies, that continued still to poure upon us great and small Shot: Besides we had another Misfortune that happened unto us happily as it fell out; our Ship was wounded with a great Shot between Wind and Water, so that being in such a crasie Vessel, and with such crasie Bodies, we made but a faint resistance, which the 
Turks
 perceiving, and fearing that the Sea would at last swallow us, 
 and deprive them of their Booty, they resolved to venture to board us: On both sides they grappled with us, and entered their men, which we from our Fore-Castle and Steerage did force aboard a∣gain with our Murdering Pieces; at last, for fear our Obstinacy would cause our Ship to sink un∣der us, and deliver us into the hands of a more merciless Enemy, the raging Sea; we called for Quarter, which the 
Turks
 were glad to grant, having almost lost all Courage and hopes of forcing us to a Surrender; therefore they willingly accepted of the first Mo∣tion: We found that near 300 of their men had been killed, and their Ships were miserably torn and maimed. One thing passed during the Fight worthy our No∣tice, and which I did then look upon as an ill Omen; at a Broad

 Side one great Shot was forced back again, and split in pieces; we did conceive that it had met with a more violent one, which had driven it upon us.


The 
Turks
 treated us very ge∣nerously, that we expected not from Enemies which we had an∣gered by so long a Resistance. They commended our Courage, and wondered at our Resolution. And when they saw the rich Loading that they had got into their hands, they quickly pardoned us the In∣juries we had done them.


The Captains and Owners of the 
Turks
 Ships called me & our Skip∣per to an Account for the Bills of Loading, which, when there was no remedy, we delivered into their hands.


I made some Reflections upon my former Condition, and wished my self upon some Christian shore 
 as poor as

Job;
 Liberty was sweet to me that was taken a Slave: I remembred then that excellent ad∣vice, 
Trust not unto uncertain riches, &c.
 I then condemned the joy I had felt for the rich Patrimony that was left me, and the earnest desire for to see Foreign Places. Now to my sorrow I began to re∣member my former Condition; but all these Reflections and Re∣grets could not turn the Wind, nor stop our Course from

Argiers,
 where we were bound next; for when our Ship had been seized, we that were alive were disposed of into the Enemies Ships, and stript of our best Attire, which some lusty Rogues did us the kindness to wear for our sakes before our eyes.


Our dead Bodies, and those that were wounded desperately, of whom there was small hopes, 
 were stript naked, and sent in that condition to feed the Sharkes and other Ravenous Fishes of the Sea; some we saw at that Instant wait∣ing upon us, as we did conceive, for that intent: It may be they were as sensible of dead Bodies a∣mongst us, as Vultures are, who constantly hover about a House or Tent in these Countries, where the Sick are contained that will in∣fallibly die, in hopes to enjoy the Prey when it is to be exposed and carried out.


During our stay a shipboard, we were as civilly treated as we could expect from 
Turks,
 and did feed as they did upon Garlick & Rusk, poor 
John,
 Rice, & such like food. I observed them very inquisitive to find out our Qualities, and the Estates that we had remaining, our Friends, and what Assistance and Favour we might expect from 
 them. To know these Particulars, we were examined apart: We had been forewarned of this Proceed∣ing, and therefore we had prepa∣red our Answers, that we might not be found in a contradiction. I had desired our Company to make me pass for a poor Fellow, whose Industry had obtained the Trust of that considerable 
Cargo,
 which as we did give out did belong to my Master.


This Answer satisfied them for a while, but meeting in the Ship with some 
English
 Renegadoes, by an inconsiderate Discourse about several Particulars, one of them began to have some suspition and knowledge of me, because he had seen me at the unloading of some Goods by the Water side, and did remember that then more respect was paid to me than such a poor Fellow could expect or claim. I

 laboured to excuse my Rashness, and to justifie my former Declara∣tion; nevertheless one word made me to be suspected for an eminent Person, powerful in Friends and Acquaintance, which made them put a higher Value upon me, and hope for a greater Ransom.


We sailed into the 
Streights,
 and at the Entry, over against 
Gibral∣tar,
 we met with a 
Spanish
 Man of War at some distance from us; he laboured to come to speak with us, but the

Turks
 were not in a Posture, nor able to answer him in his own Language so loud as he could speak; for in the despe∣rate Fight they had broken some of their Ribs, and weakned them∣selves; therefore they hoised up all their Sails, and made away as fast as the Prize-Ship could sail. She received some Chase Guns from the 
Spaniard,
 who had almost

 retaken her, but the Evening drawing on, she had the opportu∣nity of saving her self in the dark night: And the better to hinder the 
Spaniard
 from further Pursuit, one of the 
Turks
 staid behind, and resolutely gave a few Broad Sides to his Enemy.


In the mean while the Prize got out of sight, and the

Turks
 Vessel followed with all speed. The Night coming on apace, rid them of the importune company of the 
Spaniard.


The next day we anchored in the Bay of 
Algiers,
 where some Officers of the Town came to take notice of our Number, and of the Prize that was taken; one was a 
Cornish
 man, that by his Aposta∣sie had procured unto himself great Wealth amongst the 
Turks;
 he was a Trader in Slaves, and knew well how to make his advan∣tage 
 of his own Nation. He drew near us that were 
English,
 and en∣quired of us in what part of 
Eng∣land
 we had been born; such Que∣stions being unpleasing to us, I de∣sired as he was our Countreyman, that he would shew us some Fa∣vour, and buy us for himself; we hoped to meet with a kinder En∣tertainment from one of the same Language and People: He told us that if we did give him hopes of returning his Money, he would venture to lay out some to do us a pleasure, that we might not fall into severe hands that might en∣danger our Lives by a rough U∣sage. He informed us, that if we came on shore, we should be led to the Market, and there sold as Horses; That there are constant∣ly waiting some that knew how to find us out, that would treat us most inhumanely, and oblige us 
 to redeem our selves; That they would exact from us the remainder of our Estates to be at liberty; That we had best come into his hands; That he being our Coun∣treyman, would endeavour to be our Friend, and take no more from us than it cost him: Therefore he conjured us to discover our selves if we did love our own safe∣ty and welfare, and to tell him what Encouragement he might have to lay out his Money for us, and what Security to have it re∣turned. We began to look one upon another, to understand with our Eyes how inclinable each was to comply with his Desire. We were something jealous of the 
Turk
's Faith, and did believe that he that had not kept it to his God, would scarce be more careful to keep it with Men. We were long silent, and knew not what we 
 should do in this case; but at last I ventured to deliver the Sense of the Company, and to thank him in the name of four or five 
English
 that we were, for his kind Information, telling him that our Losses were great, that our Friends were many, that we had some∣thing yet left at home able to re∣deem us, were not too high a va∣lue put upon us, and that we could give him sufficient assurance that what I said was true.


At this Discovery all my Com∣rades began earnestly to intreat him to shew some Favour to his Countreymen promising to re¦quite his Kindness with double in¦terest.


Unto all our Offers the Deceit¦ful 
Turk
 began to listen diligently for we afterwards saw that he in¦tended only to make a Prey of us and get such Information from u
 
 as might serve his turn. We be∣gan to suspect him, and be sorry for our credulity, when we per∣ceived him in the company of the Owners of the Ship, offering for the most considerable of us large Sums of Money, leaving the rest to their ill fortune, without the least regard: They could not then agree about the Price, so that we were transported ashore. At our first Landing, great Companies flock'd about us to see us, having been fore-informed that we had behaved our selves like men of Courage in the Fight. Some whose Relations had been killed, gave us such Welcome as became the cruelty and impertinency of Hea∣thens: They loaded us with Curses and Imprecations, and did strange∣ly insult over us. Had not our Guardians protected us from their Violence, I think we had been torn

 in pieces. One amongst the rest was animated with a strange fury and desire of revenge for the death of his dear Comrade; both were 
Spanish
 Renegadoes: He drew his Cymeter at us, and begg'd the li∣berty to sacrifice one of us, promi∣sing to pay his Ransome: When that could not be obtained, he de∣sired only to cut off our Ears. I know not how it happened that he came near one of us, and with a Blow struck off part of the Cheek of a 
German,
 which he took and greedily swallowed, telling the Assistants that he never tasted so sweet a Morsel in his days as that was; so strangely Vengeance had transported him, that he was con∣tent to feed upon us. It was our happiness that our Lives did not depend upon his pleasure, we had then accompanied his Comrade in the other world; but our Keepers 
 did safely convey us into the City, where we found our Chains ready made that waited for us. Every one of us had a great strong Chain about twenty pound weight link'd to our Legs and tyed to our Gir∣dle, that if we did meditate an es∣cape, it might not be without dif∣ficulty.


We were conducted next in this strange equipage with our jingling Chains at our sides to the Kings Palace; we did not a little wonder what they intended to do with us in a place of so much Ho∣nour. We past the first Guard, and entred into a large and spati∣ous Court paved with white Mar∣ble-Stone, of which there is a great quantity in that Country; especi∣ally in the 
Quarries about old Car∣thage
 or 
Tunis.
 There was a high Brick Wall that inclosed us, and before us opened a large Gate 
 Chequer'd with divers Colours, which led into a great Hall, where our Keepers led us, and command∣ed us to rest our selves until the King of 
Argiers
 did give us a Visit; an honour that we expected not; but it seems it is the Custom that all Slaves should come in his sight when they first Land; for out of them he chuses for himself the Tenth Person; and when that Number is not compleat, he never∣theless takes one whom he pleases.


We were placed round about the Hall to be prepared for his Coming in, which was not speedi∣ly; for being about Noon, he had been bathing himself, and after∣wards taking another Recreation, which is usual at that time of day in the hot Climates.


About Two of the Clock in comes a lusty Officer clothed in Scarlet, with a Rod in his hand, 
 and a great Turbant about his Head; it seems he was the King's Gentleman Usher: He was fol∣lowed by six Persons of good Meen and Appearance: They were armed with Cymeters.


Next came a Grave Fellow with a Turbant almost as big as our

En∣glish
 Half Bushel; at one side of it he had a Set of Diamonds, that did sparkle as his Eyes; his Ve∣sture was green, his Legs were bare, on his Feet he did wear San∣dals.


We had time to observe him as he entred the Door; for his Pace was slow and grave: I could have numbred 20 between every Step; He marcht in that manner to the upper end, where there was a Ca∣nopy of State over his Head, and two Turky Carpets, with a large Pillow covered with Damask under him; he sate upon it, 
 and then the Owners of the Ship that took us, presented themselves before him, kissing the Hem of his Garment; they discoursed among themselves about an hour, shewing unto him our Bills of Lading; a 
German
 of our Company under∣stood something of their Discourse, he told us that the King, who only sate, all the rest standing about him, was displeased that they had not followed his Orders when they set out; for it seems he had com∣manded them to sail along the Coast of 
Genoa,
 and to endeavour to revenge him for the great loss which he had lately sustained, when one of his best Vessels that was sent out upon his private account, was made Prize by the Galleys of that Republick.


The Dispute ended with the submission of the Owners of our Vessel, and a Present very consi∣derable 
 in Cloth and other rich Commodities taken out of our Prize.


The Kings Displeasure was soon abated, when he saw such an Ho∣nourable Gift enter into his Hall. He took a view of it, and then commanded us to come before him one by one; He look'd upon us with a stern Countenance, and took notice of our Features and Stature; for it seems the

Turks
 are excellent in the Art of Physiogno∣my; they know a man and his In∣clinations at the first view, as well as an expert Farrier can the good or ill Qualities of a Horse: It con∣cerns them much, especially those that trade in Slaves. He cast a Jest upon every one of us, which gave the Company a great deal of Mirth, and increas'd our sadness. I was inform'd that he said, That he advis'd him that should be my

 Master, not to trust me too much with his Women.


At last, when he had consider∣ed us all, he made us stand before him together; out of the Compa∣ny he chose my self, the Skipper, and a pretty 
German
 Boy of a rud∣dy Countenance: I did not a lit∣le wonder at this last Choice, be∣cause there were some of whom he might expect a greater Ransom than of the Child, who was born of poor Parentage; but I under∣stood the good old man was a greater Lover of his Pleasures than of Money, and therefore he pitcht upon him as upon one who might procure unto him some in his old Age; a strange Fancy pos∣sesses the minds of all the Southern People; they burn with an unna∣tural Fire, which consumed

So∣dom
 and 
Gomorrah.


It is strange to see how passio∣nate 
 they are for handsom Males: I was glad to be in the possession of the King, for I hoped to pre∣vail with him and get my Free∣dom to return for

England;
 but I was much deceived of my ex∣pectation, as you shall learn. The King being returned to his private Chambers sent for me, and en∣quired of my Quality, and of my Friends, and what Trade I under∣stood best: I was puzzled at this last question, and knew not how to answer him best for my advan∣tage; I was afraid to render my self too necessary to him, that he might not retain me in his service; or to make my self too conside∣rable, that he might not put a higher value upon me than I was willing to pay for my Ransom: Therefore I told him that I was born of poor Parentage, who not being able to keep me, put me to 
 be an Under-Cook to a Noble Man of our Country; that from that employment I was removed to be an Apprentice to a rich Merchant, who received me be∣cause he found me able to do him service; and that I was sent with his Goods to 
Smyrna,
 and other Parts, as his Factor; that it was true, some of the Bills of Lading did mention my Name, but the Goods did belong to my Master, and some Friends who had intrust∣ed me with them.


I saw the Information pleased the old man, especially when he heard I was a Cook; for one that had served him in that employ∣ment was lately dead. I was sent immediately to the Kitchin, and had order to dress a Couple of Wild Ducks for my Master; that I did without much difficulty: but when I had other Meats less 
 usual in our Country, I made such mad Sauces, and such strange 
Ra∣goux,
 that every one took me for a Cook of the 
Antipodes,
 whose People have Palates that relish things that ours abhor: I was full of Mistakes; sometimes I put Oyl instead of Vinegar, and Salt instead of Pepper. But that I might keep up my Credit amongst the Beholders, I did handle my Meat so nimbly, that they all be∣lieved I had been used to Coo∣kery.


I had not been long in the Kit∣chen, but I heard that the King lamented the Death of his former Cook, and was not pleased with the Sauces I had made; neverthe∣less I continued in my em∣ployment about six Weeks, more esteemed for my new-found mis∣mashes than I deserved.


At a great Feast that my Master 
 made, I had several sorts of Fishes that I never saw before; the Liver of one hath a most loathsom tast, I thought it good in the Sawce; therefore I sent it up stewed under the Fish, with a Dish garnish'd with many sorts of Flowers: The Guests seeing so pleasant an Ap∣pearance, expected the Fish to be as extraordinary as the Beauty; they all prepared their Stomachs to feed upon this Fish, and neg∣lected others that were much bet∣ter; but when they tasted the Sawce, they imagined some had put a Sir-reverence in it, and all began to spue and spit. I anger∣ed so much the King with this Ma∣ster-piece of Cookery, that he gave Order that I should receive for my Sallery ten Bastonadoes. It was in vain to plead Ignorance, & our Country Fashion; I was for∣ced to suffer the punishment with Patience.


At the Feast there was an Inha∣bitant of the Town who had been very much pleas'd with the Sauces that others did dislike; when he saw the King so angry with me, de∣sired him to part with me for the usual Ransom; he refused it for the present: but afterwards he was glad to be rid of me at any rate.


I was removed from being Ma∣ster Cook to a lower place, & a

Spa∣nish
 Slave was placed in my room. He did so domineer over me that I could not suffer his Impertinen∣cies: I plaid him several Tricks; once I made a strange Infusion in a Dish that was to be presented to the King; it almost cost the Slaves Life; he excuses, and laid the Fault upon me: I pretended a great deal of Ignorance, but was not believed. This caused my removal to another employment, 
 which I heartily longed for. I was made by a wonderful change of Fortune Keeper of the Kings Bath. It seems some of his Women had seen me in the House, and interce∣ded for me when the last Disgrace happened to me. I thought my self then a pretty Fellow, and not inferiour to my former Estate; but Fortune left me not long rejoy∣cing at my Promotion; her sud∣den Favour was followed by a grievous Frown, that almost sent me to my Grave: The occasion of it was this; One of the Kings Wives having so happily pleaded for me, as the good man thought, out of a tenderness natural to all that Sex; and as she then pre∣tended, out of a Kindness for Peo∣ple of my Nation, she sought a fit opportunity to discover her self to me, and make use of my Bath when the King was abroad: I was at 
 first more respectful than she did desire, and left her to the Atten∣dance of her Women Slaves; one that was her Confident, informed me of the Matter of her Mistresses Pleasure, and added, that I

hould do well to comply, and not 
¦ry or disappoint her Kindness by any ungrateful severity.


The Business came soon to the Kings Ear; his jealous Pate had an Eye upon a young Stripling that was not unworthy to supply his place; but it seems he never had a right Information, only some light suspitions of our Correspondency; they were sufficient to cause him to remove me from my pleasant Of∣fice; which angered me more than any thing that happened to me all the time of my Slavery.


I found an opportunity to make my Complaints to my good Lady, who was no less troubled at the 
 old mans peevish humour than my self.


There was no Remedy to our Grief, but the hopes of meeting in some other Corner of the House.


I was sent next to work in the Fields, where I met with such dif∣ficult and painful Labour, and such cruel Task-Masters, that I fell grievously sick; my good Lady did not forget to administer Com∣fort unto me by the means of her 
Spanish
 Woman: In my lowest Estate she vouchsafed to pay me a Visit, and would not suffer me to want any thing that Credit could procure.


It was a happiness to me to meet here with such a true Friend▪ I could have wished that my Sick∣ness had lasted longer for her sake.


I was no sooner recovered, bu
 
 my old doting Patron fearing a Relapse, or rather growing more jealous of me, gave order that I should be led into the Market-Place and there sold: I had made my application to him to be re∣deemed, I had sent Letters into 
Spain
 and 
England,
 and endevou∣red to be released, but all in vain; he lookt upon me as so needy a fel∣low that could not procure the ordinary Ransom of a Slave from my Friends. I had laboured to perswade something of it, during my abode in his service.


When I saw my self with an ill-favoured 
Turk,
 leading me by a Chain, as a Horse or a Bullock, thorough the streets, I then began to lament my hard fortune, and remember my former Estate; I knew not what Providence had prepared for me, nor what surly Master I should meet with next: 
 I went with a sad Countenance, and as sad a Heart to the publick Place, where I was to be exposed to Sale.


The 
Turk
 that led me, cryed be∣fore me in 
Franca Langua, Who will buy a Christian? Who will buy a Christian?


It was a grievous change of for∣tune, in so short a time as a year, to be reduced from that honoura∣ble Estate in which my Father left me, to the lowest Misery, to a Slave, to be sold as a Beast, in a strange Countrey, where I had no Friends that did dare to own me. I must confess I was never so deject∣ed as at this time. I did complain of my hard Fate, and did send up many sighs and groans to Heaven, to implore the assistance and care of Divine Providence: In this low Condition I knew not what it had prepared for me.


Assoon as I was come into the Market-place, a Fellow, a Stran∣ger to me, addresses himself to my Keeper, and offers Money for my Person: He seem'd to be a man of no great Appearance; yet his Looks discovered him to be a good man.


Several others came about me, and amongst the rest, that ill-na∣tur'd 
English
 Renegate that enqui∣red of our qualities so exactly on shipboard, accosted my Keeper, and would needs have me at any Rate: I trembled for fear of fal∣ling into his hands, knowing how grievously he had handled some of my Comrades.


My Keeper made advantage of the Press, and ask'd a hundred Dollars more than he was com∣manded to take for me. The first would not let me slip out of his hands; therefore he paid the mo∣ney, 
 and led me away with him to a House next to the Grand Mosque of the City, very near the Kings Palace.


I was not a little pleas'd to be so near the Place from which I might expect some Assistance; much more, when I saw the good

Spanish
 Woman pay me a Visit from her Mistress.


It seems she had ordered this Fellow to watch when I was to be sold, and to buy me for her Ser∣vice. I thought my self happy to be a Slave to so excellent and kind a Lady: I never dreamt of a Change whilst I belonged unto her: I had no reason; for nothing was wanting unto me useful to the Life of Man. I only wore a Chain out of Formality, because other∣wise my good Fortune might have been suspected. I did also employ my self in slavish work for that 
 intent, but not above measure.


The Lady became very devout after my coming to that place; she seldom miss'd a day, but came in some Disguise to pay her Devo∣tions at the Mosquette, from whence there was a passage into my Lodgings,


By this frequent and constant Attendance at Publick Prayer, she purchas'd unto her self a very great esteem with the People, and a favour with her Husband; and ever after she was named a Saint.


I continued her Slave about two years, in which time I did view the City of 
Argiers,
 and took an especial notice of many Parti∣culars worth the publick know∣ledge.


It is a City not so large as popu∣lous, fortified by Art and Nature; the Walls are 60 foot high, in some places 70 and 80; they are built

 with square Stone and Flints: they are about 12 and 13 Foot broad.


The City is not above a Mile round. At the East-side, on the top of a high Hill stands a strong Cittadel very well fortified, built at first by the 
Spaniards:
 It is fur∣nished with 40 or 50 Pieces of Ordnance, and kept by 300 Re∣negadoes in Garrison.


At the West side another Castle somewhat less, but altogether as strong, doth overlook the Town. In the Harbour is built a very commodious Mould, able to con∣tain above 200 Sail. Upon it stands a strong Fort, that threatens De∣struction to all Vessels that dare adventure near without leave, or in a Hostile manner: Three Tier of Guns are planted in it; the lowest is level with the Water.


The Mould lies in such a croo∣ked manner, that no Ships can

 with their full Sail come straight in without turning: So that it is a very difficult work to break the Chain and enter it by force.


This Nest of Pirates is very well prepared for the Attempts of any Christian Enemy. None can do them the least injury by Land or by Sea: so that here they re∣treat as the Wild Beasts in their Dens to enjoy their Thefts and Prey.


That which renders the Town more strong, is, that it is built upon a hard Rock, and cannot ea∣sily be undermined.


I have taken notice of 3 Places in the Castles that are but weak; In the great Cittadel, on the South side, is a rising Hill as high as the half of the Wall, if it was possess∣ed by a powerful Enemy, it might serve very commodiously either for Battery or Mining.


On the East side is but a weak Wall, that would not endure long the Fury of the Canon.


The other Castle hath many lit∣tle Hills that are equal in height; besides, the Wall in the Town in one place is not so strong, but an Enemy might enter by it.


Charles
 the 5th. attempted to drive these Pirates out of their Nest, but it was to no purpose that he brought a Navy by Sea, and Landed a puissant Army to besiege the Town; the violence of a storm broke his Vessels to pieces, and forced him to raise his Siege with the loss of a hundred Ships, and ma∣ny thousand Men. Since that time

Argiers
 is much stronger, and bet∣ter fortified: Daily something is added to the strength of it; so that unless the Christian Princes join together, or some powerful Monarch by Sea & Land lay siege

 to it, it will be one day impregna∣ble but by Famine.


In the City the Houses are very pleasant, and more beautiful with∣in and without than in other Parts of 
Affrica.
 The greater lie open in the middle, with handsom Gal∣leries and Turrets.


Several Mosquets are built for Publick Devotion, into which no Christian hath liberty to enter, un∣less he intends to Apostatize; for he must either burn or turn that enters the Place of their Prayer, that handles the 
Alcoran
 before Witnesses, or that repeats their 
Illa Alla Mahumet,
 &c.


They have a great number of their 
Talubs,
 Religious Men, whose Duty is to read their Publick Prayers. They have many other sorts of Men appointed to attend in their 
Mosquets;
 some are to ex∣pound the 
Mahumetan
 Law, and 
 they are called

Cadirs;
 others are to invite the People to their De∣votions, and they are named 
Der∣vises;
 some live by the Alms of the People; others are Prophets and holy Men.


Over all the Religious Orders there is one established as the Su∣preme Judge of all Controver∣sies, and he is honoured with the Title of

Marabut:
 He is the Judge between Man and Man, of Matters of Equity and Justice. A certain sti∣pend is allowed unto him from the Publick Treasury. He lives not upon the Inferiour Orders; every one hath a setled Salary. The great swallow the little ones, as Fishes; they feed upon them, and from their Labours derive a main∣tenance to their idle Bodies: a sad encouragement to Laziness & Vice, and the grand Cause of the Disorders of a Nation.


Other Persons besides the King and Bashaw are eminent in this City; the 
Lagaw
 is the Chief in the next place, He is the first per∣son of the 
Duan,
 and is the Gene∣ral of the Armies abroad: Under him are the 
Cheuses,
 which are like our Justices of Peace, or Sheriffs. The next are 
Boulgebushes,
 Men like our Bayliffs; they are Ser∣vants to the 
Duan:
 They remain three years in their Offices, and then go out with the Armies as Controulers of the rest.


Besides these, are other 
Bushes,
 Captains and Officers of the Mili∣tia; they wear a Badge of Honour on their Heads, and are distin∣guished from the rest by their Turbant, that is wound about in the form of a Sugar-Loaf; behind a Red Cross falls down: It is not lawful for any to take this At∣tire but themselves. It is the 
 Badge of their Office, as the Red Scarf is the Sign of Command a∣mongst Christians.


In the Camp there are other Great Men; as 
Daventees, Mou∣chees,
 &c.


An 
Acha Basha
 is an experien∣ced man amongst them, one that hath been in several Encounters, who commands a Party when it is separated from the Main Body. He must be an old man, and when once he comes to that Employ∣ment, he can rise no higher as o∣ther Officers can.


About the City are most plea∣sant Gardens, Orchards, and fair Houses belonging to the Inhabi∣tants.


Further in the Countrey, very good Corn grows upon the little Hills that appear round about.


Here is plenty of all things un∣less it be of Wine, which is not

 made by the 
Turks
 or 
Moors.
 They of

Argiers
 are not so scrupulous as the stricter sort; their Consciences can suffer them to be drunk with Wine when they take good store in Prizes.


In the City, towards the East side, is a very strong House built, and some Souldiers to keep guard. I enquired what the Place was, and I was informed that it was the Publick Treasury-House: Every year they cast in vast Sums of Mo∣ney, according to their happiness in the Encounters with Christians. They never take out of it: It is thought there are many Millions shut up in that Hole. The last 
Barbarossa
 built it for the Publick; and to encourage the rest to give liberally, he put in 2000 Dol∣ars.


When the Ships come in, and when the Lots are made, there is

 alwaies something for the Treasu∣ry, and a good Portion for 
Maho∣met.


It seems these Heathens have Religion enough to make them honour their Prophet, and those that represent his Place amongst them; for the most part such are good for nothing else but to say the Publick Prayers: Yet the People are so far from despising them, that they bear a great re∣spect unto them; and suffer not any to be in want that attends at their Devotions.


This Portion which is called the Portion of 
Mahomet
 in the Divisi∣on of the Prize-Goods, is put in∣to the Hands of a Treasurer ap∣pointed for that purpose, and he distributes equally to all their Re∣ligious men: If they find at any time that he hath converted the least part to his private use, he is 
 put to death in a most cruel man∣ner: He is stript naked, and at the Door of the 
Marabut
 he is em∣paled alive, and then in that man∣ner raised to the top of the Steeple of a 
Mosquet,
 where he is exposed to Publick view for three daies; and then his Body is carried out of the City, to be given for food to the Wild Beasts.


His Estate is all sold for the be∣nefit of the Religious Men; for they look upon it as consecrated to 
Mahomet,
 when the least part of what belongs to him hath been mingled amongst it.


This People hath wisely provi∣ded against their Covetousness & disorderly Behaviour, that rob or diminish from the Maintenance of those Orders of Men that serve the Publick in the Worship of God, and that keep up the Honour of Religion amongst them; for they

 are sensible that the preservation of themselves and Goverment de∣pends upon their esteem, their Credit and Prosperity, who only are able to perswade men to sub∣mit to the establish'd Laws; there∣fore there are here most severe Punishments inflicted upon all those that venture to injure such either in their estates or Persons. And there is very good provision made that they may not fall into the disesteem of the People.


There are excellent Orders to stir them up to the Service of God: they are often summoned to Prayers; In the Morning, which time they call

Salam,
 at Twelve of the Clock, named 
Do∣char,
 at Four in the Afternoon is their 
Assara;
 at Sun-setting, 
Mog∣harb;
 at Twilight, 
Ʋsher;
 at Mid∣night is 
Ou-el;
 the next is

Istanay:
 At these several times great Num∣bers

 of all sorts do resort to their 
Mosquets,
 and there in an humble manner they pray to God and 
Ma∣homet.


Those that are negligent or careless in coming to Prayer, are taken notice of, and if they have been formerly Christians, they are excluded from all hopes of Employment, and at the least of∣fence severely treated.


The Ceremonies observed in the Consecration of their Religi∣ous Men are not unworthy of our Notice; The Father of the young man must bring him to the 
Ma∣rabut,
 when he sits in the Chief

Mosquet
 of the City with a numorous Attendance, to be Wit∣nesses of his Dedication to that Service. They enter the Place, the Father holding the Son by the Right hand, and both together go straight to the 
Marabut,
 and kiss 
 the Border of his Robe. After this Ceremony, the 
Marabut
 asks the Father whether he can read; the Father answers, Yes. A Book is immediately presented to the young Fellow, usually the

Alcoran,
 who reads in it a Page: If he doth not miss a word, but pronounce well and distinctly, he is then ad∣mitted: The 
Marabut
 calls him by his Name, and causeth it to be enrolled in the Catalogue of the Order: Then comes a Fellow with a sharp Knife, and cuts in his Right Arm the Figure of a half Moon; into the Wound is put some Gunpowder, which being blown up, leaves a blew Impressi∣on, that nothing can take away, unless the place be cut off.


Afterwards some Prayers being made, tending to the Confirmation of him into their Holy Orders, he is obliged to swear by 
Mahomets


 Lock of Hair to observe certain Rules.


He is then cloathed in another manner before the People, and the

Marabut
 takes him into his Arms, and gives him a Kiss, which sanctifies him for ever; the solem∣nity ends in Musick and Dancing. This is practised at their admit∣tance into that Rank of Men which they esteem holy, and who only may publickly read the 
Alcoran.


I shall say nothing of their Mar∣riages and Circumcisions, their Customs are not much different from the 
Turks.


I did observe many particulars in the Happy time of my Slavery, for I had liberty to view the City, and to walk up and down; my business and work was only to wait upon my Lady at the time of her Devotions, sometimes it was at 
Moghar,
 and sometimes 
 in the Day at 
Dochar.
 I did dis∣cover my self to her, and told her of the happiness of a 
Christian
 Life in our Countrey; I laboured to perswade her to escape out of the old Mans reach; I promised my Assistance, and that if she would consent unto it, I ingaged my self to her to Marry her. She had two Children, a Boy and a Girl, that kept her in that place, otherwise I think I had then got my Freedom and carryed her a∣way; but she would not for that cause hearken to my perswasions, nor suffer me to talk of my Liber∣ty, telling me, that I should want nothing whilst I remained in that place, and in her service; that if I rendred my self unworthy of it, by offering to run away, I should become the most miserable of all men.


I was ever after more humble 
 and dutiful, and was afraid she should discover in me an inclina∣tion to be gone.


During this time I received se∣veral Letters from 
Cadiz, Malaga,
 and other 
English
 Factories, that mentioned my Redemption, but I could never expect to obtain it from my kind Mistress.


About that time she departed this Life, and left me sufficient cause to lament: Another of the 
Sultan
's Wives was suspected to have poysoned her, because the 
Sultan
 had conceived a greater Love for her, by reason of her constant Devotions, than for the other. Before her Death, about six moneths, she was brought to Bed of a pretty little Girl, some∣what whiter than ordinary; the old Fool thought himself to be the Father of it. I was once ad∣mitted to see it; but now my

 Mistress was dead, I was left to the Misfortunes and Miseries of a slavish Life. I was forced again to return to a hard Service, al∣though her Goodness had labour∣ed to free me; for she sent to the man at whose house I lay, being her Cousin German, to speak with him before her Death: She did then make him promise to give me my Release after her Burial in re∣quital of my good Service, and by her Gentlewoman sent me a Pre∣sent of Gold, to a considerable va∣lue, which I did not possess long. You may easily imagine my grief to part with so true a Friend: It was not a little increas'd when I perceiv'd the Fellow would not perform his Cousins request; but instead of sending me away, carri∣ed me to the Market again to be sold. I did long expostulate the business with him, but could ne∣ver 
 have other Reasons of his pro∣ceeding but this, That I should not anger him for fear he should publish the Mystery, which would infallibly cost me my Head.


I was forced to submit to his un∣just pleasure. He led me to the Market, and there I was sold for 300 Dollars; for I never made my self known to him; he always look'd upon me as a pitiful Fellow, unable to redeem my self.


My next Master was by Profes∣sion a Gardener, he had me into his Orchards, and there with a good Cudgel he made me under∣stand a trade I never knew before. I endured much with him; for he gave me such great Tasks to per∣form, that I was not able to hold out.


At the least displeasure he threat∣ned to stab and kill me; therefore the fear of Death made me seek 
 my efcape. I was sometimes sent to fetch Lime for a Building that he had in hand near the Sea-shore. A Vessel was lately arrived from 
France,
 to redeem the Captives; it lay without the Mould.


At that time that I was on the Sand it was dusky, a

French
 man offered me his assistance, I accept∣ed of it, and went into his Boat; but I was discovered before I could get off the Mould, and sent back to my Master, that punished me with a hundred blows on the Soles of my Feet, which rendred me uncapable for his Service many days.


He was soon weary of my Com∣pany, and sold me to the

English
 Renegado that came on board our Ship at our Arrival. I expected from him a kinder entertainment, but found less: He was cruel and severe to me, he made me work 
 night and day. I often treated with him for my Ransom, but found his Demands to be so high, that I could not comply with him. He abus'd me most sadly about five Moneths, and then Death de∣livered me of his Tyranny.


His Executors sold me again a∣mongst his Goods and Chattels. I fell next inro the hands of an 
Ita∣lian
 Renegado, named 
Ishmael Reiz,
 who was not kinder to me than my former Masters; my Work was painful, my Diet mean, my Labour continual, and my Re∣wards the Blows of a hard Cud∣gel.


I could not suffer long this Ser∣vice; therefore I sought to dis∣please my Patron, and make him sell me to another.


He gave me next to an Officer of the Militia called 
Hally Hamez Reiz,
 who was so well pleased 
 with my Person and Countenance, that he resolved not to part with me for any Money. I offered un∣to him 800 Dollars: He told me I should first go with him in the Countrey, and at his return I should have liberty to be redeem'd if I behaved my self well.


At that time the 
Turks
 did send out a strong Army to gather the Contributions of the People, and to relieve 
Tremsen
 or

Climsan,
 a strong and populous City in the Country.


There is a Garrison of 
Turks
 that are sent every year to that place, and another that comes from thence; for as it is a great City, the Countrey round about do always submit to those that are Masters of that Place. It concerns therefore the 
Turks
 to fortifie and preserve that City for themselves against the Attempts of the 
A∣rabs,


 that are their deadly Ene∣mies.


Having run through so many strange and unexpected Fortunes, I did not hope to meet with less Variety in this Expedition, in the which I was engaged amongst the rest; my Master was a Comman∣der of a hundred Men: He was very passionate and lascivious, ne∣vertheless Valiant; as I did after∣wards learn.


We marched out in very good Order, with our Flying Colours and some few Field-Pieces very small.


The Army was composed of Twelve Thousand Men; Four Thousand were to go Westward, and gather the contributions along the Sea-Coast as far as 
Tetuan
 and the Kingdom of 
Fez:
 The next Four Thousand were to march to∣wards 
Tunis;
 and the third Four

 Thousand were to enter into the Country.


The Custom of the 
Turks
 is to gather the Contributions upon the Inhabitants who do not pay wil∣lingly; therefore they venture not amongst them but in great Numbers, well armed, able to op∣pose an Enemy, or prevent a sud∣den surprizal. There is a Natu∣ral Antipathy between them. The 
Moors
 that dwell in the Kingdom, and the 
Arabs
 do hate the 
Turks,
 because they are imperious, and and because they are obliged to pay unto them an yearly Tri∣bute.


The time that these Armies set forth was in 
June,
 the Harvest, when the Corn was ripe and fit for use: then the Country was able to furnish the yearly Revenue ei∣ther in Corn or Money.


The Commander of the We∣stern 
 Circuit was

Abel Hamed Si∣mon;
 of the Eastern were two Chieftains, 
Halac Rigla Reiz,
 an old Renegado of 
Spain,
 and 
Halec Sim Haly,
 a young Blade that had more Precipitation than Wisdom; they met with many Mischances, as you shall afterwards hear, and had it not been for our unexpected Approach, the whole Army had been cut in pieces.


Our Commander was a judici∣ous man, but very unfortunate; cruel, bold and valiant, a great Enemy of the 
Arabs;
 his Name was 
Ben Osman Bucher,
 he had been a great Commander at Sea, and fought in many notable Encoun∣ters against the Christians, never with so much success as in the Year 36. against a 
Portuguese Caraque,
 near the Island of 
Tenerifa,
 sayling from the 
East-Indies,
 and bound for 
Lisbon,
 laden with very rich 
 Commodities to a great value. His share was so considerable, that he was raised from a poor and a mean Estate to a good Fortune, and to the Esteem of the 
Divan;
 especi∣ally because the good Success of that Fight was attributed to his Valour and Resolution: For the 
Christians
 making a stout resi∣stance, the 
Turks
 were discoura∣ged from further Attempts, and not willing to continue their En∣terprize longer, when he with his drawn Cymeter did compel some, and perswade others to try again the 
Portuguez
 Courage, and so by that means won the Ship, and brought great Riches into the Ci∣ty: He was ever after highly e∣steemed, and employed in great Affairs where any danger or diffi∣culty did appear. For that Rea∣son he commanded the Army that was to go the middle Circuit; be∣cause

 there are a sort of People very valiant and stout, that some∣times make a strong Resistance to the 
Turks,
 and when they see their advantage, they refuse Tribute.


Our Army was composed of Horse and Foot; a thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot were num∣bred at the Musters, besides Slaves and Servants.


The Cavalry was composed of 
Turks
 born, and

Moors
 that had quitted their Countreys interest to serve them of

Argiers;
 and for the most part they were Inhabi∣tants of the City, and had there their Wives and Children.


The Infantry was made up of Renegado-Christians, whereof there are such number in that place, that they bear all the sway and command both by Sea and Land. They are as Imperious o∣ver the rest as the

Janizaries
 in 
 
Turky
 over the

Greeks,
 and the 
Mamalukes
 in 
Egypt
 were over the ancient Inhabitants.


The 
Divan
 is composed of this sort of men, who are most skilful because they are acquainted with the Affairs of

Europe,
 and better able to manage the Publick Busi∣ness relating to that part of the World, and to give Orders. Some of them do get vast Estates, others are miserable and poor, and there∣fore are obliged to the meanest Offices.


With this strong Party we set forward, and came to a Place the first day called 
Atsabah,
 at two Leagues distance from the Sea: It was a pretty little Town situate on the Decline of a pleasant Hill, that was covered on the right hand with a Large Wood, extream Bushy, about two Miles in length. The Houses were more handsom 
 than we could expect in a Coun¦trey Village. About it were to be seen the Ruines of old Buildings that did only appear out of the Earth. A Christian Renegado that had studied in the University of 
Salamanca,
 informed me, that this place was named anciently 
Stilpeia,
 and that it had been an Episcopal See in the time of the Christian Churches.


The Chief man of the place was a 
Turk,
 retired from the Affairs and Noise of the City, here he was resolved to spend the rest of his days, that were not very ma∣ny; for I conceive he was above fourscore.


We lodged that night about this little Town. Round about

Argeirs
 there are many such, at some distance from the place.


The next morning we marched by break of Day, and went five

 Leagues before we did rest. We passed by the Tents of many 
A∣rabs,
 who had gathered all their Corn. The Chief of every Fa∣mily paid our Receiver in Dollars and Gold, whereof there is a great quantity all along the Sea-Coast. They informed our General that a small number of their Countrey∣men were met together, and were resolved to dispute unto us the pas∣sage of a River.


This News made us stand upon our Guards, and was the occasion of frequent Alarms given to our Camp; for at the sight of a few Horsemen, we did imagine the E∣nemy to be at their Heels, and rea∣dy to charge us.


This days Journey was very pleasant; for although I had my Masters Lance, and a Gun to car∣ry on my Shoulder, our Victuals that we brought with us were not 
 yet spent, the way was very good, and we had several Accidents that we met with, that gave us a great deal of sport; besides I had acco∣sted an 
English Turk,
 with whom I did entertain my self of the Af∣fairs of our Nation; I found him desirous to seek his escape, because he had not lighted upon so good a Fortune as others in their Aposta∣sie, and because he had been put by an Employment that he had sought after; and I think his Conscience did a little trouble him to have obscured that Truth that he knew to be so; therefore when I took the liberty to lay it before his Eyes, he could not re∣strain his Tears.


Our General had no difficulty this day; for several came and brought in at the place appointed theit usual Tribute. The Inhabi∣tants are so near the City, and have 
 so great a dependency upon it, that they are affraid to disoblige it in the least. Therefore when those other people that were in Arms, did think to revolt from the

Turks,
 they sent some to sollicite these to join with them. They did all wish to be delivered from the 
Turks
 Ti∣ranny, but they were affraid to venture, because their near Habi∣tations were likely to suffer first the 
Turks
 Vengeance and Fury.


The Country we found very fruitful of Corn and Fodder. As we passed by a Wood, we had the sight of several Wild Beasts that returned from seeking their Prey. Our Van-guard did shoot at many of them; one of our Company, to shew his Valour, met a Lion that advanc'd towards us, and with his Cymeter in his hand en∣countred him: The sport almost cost the Fellow his Life, for the 
 Lion was very strong, and with his Paws he had twice struck him down, the last time the Lion in a rage had bit off part of his Arm; he had instantly devoured him, had not we all shot at him, & fixed above 100 Bullets in his Body. The Fellow we found almost dead with fear, under the Lion. He was glad with the loss of some of his Flesh, to be so happily escap'd; none pitied him, or was sorry for his wounds, his rash Enterprize did deserve no less.


We journeyed about three Leagues, and we came to a little Valley very fruitful of Palms and Olive Trees, a small Rivulet, co∣vered with Strawberry Bushes, did run through it, and water the Plain; at each end a Grove did grow.


In one, as we passed, I saw a Flying Serpent, about the

 bigness of an ordinary Dog, with a long Tail, and a Head like an Ape, with a larger mouth, and a long Tongue, the Body had about four Foot in length; we shot at it, but could not kill it: It threat∣ned some of our men when they ventured to come near it, and could not be obliged to depart un∣til a great number of us were arri∣ved at the Place. I saw it near a pleasant Fountain that did rise in one side of the furthermost Grove. I enquired of the Name, but could not learn it; it had Wings of di∣vers Colours, the chief were Red and White: It hovered long o∣ver our heads, and had not the Noise of our Guns frighted it a∣way, I think it had ventured a∣mongst us again. I could not dis∣tinguish of what substance the Wings were; they were bigger than those of our winged Fowls; 
 all the Birds that saw it at a di∣stance were glad to fly. I imagi∣ned it to be a kind of Basilisk, a desperate Serpent, and extraordi∣nary Venomous. This sight was no less wonderful to the rest than to me; for all professed to have never seen the like: That made me believe it was some In-land Creature not usually seen near the Sea-Coast.


We met in this Journey nothing else remarkable, but some Ancient Pillars of Marble; upon one I saw some 
Arabick
 Letters; A

Moor
 told me that they signified the Name of a great Commander that won a Battel fighting against the Inhabitants, when he led the

Ara∣bians
 into that Country, 
I
 Zidi Dockra Moukadem 
under the Re∣nowned General and Prince
 Abel Hamed, 
do erect this Pillar in me∣mory of a great Victory obtained of 
 the
 Brabbers,

in the which I kill'd their Commander with my own Hands, whose Name was
 Azoret Moudem; 
he was followed by
 6000 
Stout Souldiers; I had only
 2000 
of my Countrey-men; but our good Prophet would not suffer us to be op∣prest by his Enemies; he lent us a favourable Assistance, and in one hours time we destroyed
 3582 
with the loss of
 37 
of my Men, and of the
 Hageria 130.


About a League farther we met with several Heaps of Stones, and near unto them, in the way side, a large Cave, into the which, with my Masters Leave, I entered: It was hewn out of a Rock, there were several Chambers about five Foot broad, and as many long; there was nothing remarkable but several heaps of Bones: It seems the Wild Beasts did make it their Retreat when they had seized on 
 their Prey. I imagined it to be a Place made for the Dwelling of some solitary 
Anachoret
 of the Pri∣mitive Christians, retired out of the World into that remote place. That which confirmed me in this Belief, was a great Number of Crosses and Crucifixes artificially made in the Rock, in the inner Chamber, which had no other Light but that which entered in by Reflections from the Caves Mouth through the other Rooms. I had only time to look upon this Religious Place; for the coming up of the Rear hastened me away. That Night we reach'd as far as 
Boumelli,
 a good Town situate upon a River side, very pleasant because of the Medows that did encompass it, and several little Hills that were to be seen afar off, crowned with Orange and Limon Trees that are always green in 
 those Countries. The Inhabitants furnished us with all things neces∣sary, and when our Army began to approach, they came in a very humble manner to pay homage to our Commander in Chief; the 
Shack
 of the Place went in the Head of them on foot, and kiss'd the Hem of our Generals Garment, and presented unto him a Basket full of Loaves, two white Cows, and half a dozen young Barbs. The Present was accepted, and they were confirmed in the posses∣sion of their Lands.


There were in the Town about 600 Houses or Huts; some were pretty considerable, and adorned with Marble Pillars, and good Workmanship.


They were most Graziers; for we found hereabouts several Droves of Cattel very fat.


The Country People informed 
 us of the Design of the 
Arabs
 to resist us: They were gathered to∣gether beyond the River 
Talna,
 where they were resolved to try the Fortune of a Battel: All their Substance they had transported to the Top of a high Mountain, cal∣led by the Inhabitants 
Azar,
 unto which they were resolved to flee, if they did lose the Day.


The reason of their Revolt, as was pretended, was the

Turks
 Ty∣ranny, the Poverty of the Year not able to furnish for their own Livelihood, and for the Tribute demanded from them; therefore they had made haste to gather up the Corn, and had prepared them∣selves to make resistance.


This kind of People did not want a Resolution to fight, nor good Conduct in the management of their Affairs; for they had dis∣patch'd away several Messengers 
 into the Neigbouring Countries for Aid, and had drawn a great com∣pany to their Assistance.


Our General gave notice of all things to the other Armies, that they might draw towards him, if Occasion did require it: Never∣theless he proceeded in his March, and did send every day several Parties of Horse from the main Body to receive the Offerings of the People.


The third day, which was ac∣cording to our Account the 20th of

June,
 we past over high Moun∣tains fenced on all sides with crag∣gy Rocks; we were obliged some∣times to climb over them: Our Horse took a compass about by a way more easie.


About Noon the Sun was extra∣ordinary hot, which obliged us to seek a Repose under the shady Trees that grew in this Stony

 ground; as I was resting my self at a distance from my Patrons Company, a great Scorpion spies me in her way, and as I was be∣tween sleeping and waking, the venomous Creature fixed her sting in my naked Leg so gently that I had not felt it, had not my next Neighbour advertised me. I had heard much of that Beast; when I saw my self wounded by it, and my flesh swelling, immediately I began to fear the increase of the Venom, but some had already kil∣led it, and brought the Blood un∣to me to apply to the Wound. It was wonderful to see the present cure that the Blood gave; it had no sooner touch'd the tumor, but it began to decrease, and out of the little prick came forth a Li∣quor white as Milk, by that I found that the blood of the Scor∣pion hath an attractive virtue.


I had no sooner escaped this Mischief, but I fell into a worse; my Master had sent me to the Rear to buy Victuals for himself; for there were some in that place that did sell Bread and Meat ready dress'd: As I was returning load∣ed, I fell down with my burden a steep Rock, and bruised my self; but the fear lest my Master should cudgel me for my Misfortune, rouzed me up, and made me speed towards him.


From this unhappy place we removed up Hill through a Coun∣trey that was not inhabited, un∣less it be by Monsters and Wild Beasts, whereof we saw a great many; some not known to me be∣fore.


It seems the Design of our Ge∣neral was to surprize the

Arabian
 Army on a sudden, and to come upon them by a way that they least 
 suspected. We marched here through Woods, over Rocks and Hills three days together. I had the satisfaction for my pains to see several Creatures; of which I shall give a brief Account.


This Mountain is part of the 
At∣las,
 it runs all along through this Kingdom, and that of 
Fez,
 and reaches as far as the main Ocean; some part of it is very high.


We came to a place in this hot time of Summer, which was very cold: In the Corners that were not exposed to the Sun was a great deal of Ice and Snow. This place which gave us a Prospect over all the Countrey, was in the second Region of the Air.


Here we found plenty of woods and Trees, and several sorts of Birds; one we did kill that had four Legs as a Beast: Its Body was as big as a Turkie-Cock, the 
 Head was like an Owl, its Tail was extream broad, the Plumes were grey, and the Head only black; it did not fly very swiftly, therefore our people had not much difficulty to kill it.


We saw several sorts of Lions; towards the Evening they did go out of their Dens, when the 
Jac∣kals
 began to bark.


The noblest sort of Lion is that which is called the

Royal;
 it is the biggest and the strongst sort; it hath a Shape somewhat differing from the rest, and a Voice more stout: When any of the others do meet such an one, they seem to yield a respect unto him. He is more grave in his Motion, more fierce in the Encounter, undaunt∣ed in the greatest danger.


There are other sorts of a lesser Size. Every night we were visit∣ed with several Companies of wild 
 Creatures; some had the bold∣ness to break in upon us, but these never returned again to their com∣pany to tell News.


In an Evening we discovered a∣far off a great Beast; some of us went nearer to it to discharge our Guns at it: It was a Monster of a large Bulk, the Head was like a Lion, the Paws like a Bear, the hinder parts much like to an Ass; when it was killed, every one in the Army had a sight of it; I then did remember the Saying of the 
Romans, Africa semper apportat ali∣quid novi;
 every year there is some strange Creature or other to be seen in these remote places.


Some make it their business to watch them at the Season of the Year that they usually come into the World, and employ all their Art to catch them, that they might lead them from place to place a∣live,

 to shew them to the Inhabi∣tants for money.


There are here a great number of wild Goats, we had the sight of some that climbed up the steepy Rocks, but could not come with∣in Shot of them.


Another Creature I saw here much like unto a Dog, very nim∣ble and quick sighted, but yield∣ing an extraordinary stink; it is called by the Moore 
Subsib.


There is also another of the same shape, only this diffe∣rence, that it hath a white Tail, and adventures in the night a∣mongst the Inhabitants to steal the Good-wives Hens and Geese; it is called

Thaloub;
 it is of the na∣ture of our 
English
 Foxes, very subtil and crafty.


I saw here in this wild place se∣veral other sorts of Serpents and Beasts, of which I could not come 
 near to take a full view, therefore I shall not adventure to describe them.


I had almost forgot one of a strange Nature; it appear'd unto us as a White Lamb, something differing in the shape, as we were marching through a Valley; but when it perceived us to approach in such Numbers, it fled before us; our Captain thought it had been some stragling Lamb belong∣ing to some Mountainous People, and because we were not well pro∣vided with good Victuals, he sent some of us to overtake it before it got into the neighbouring thick∣ets of a rising Hill: I had Order to pursue it, and accompany the Hunters. As we came within a hundred Paces of it, it made more haste than ordinary, and began to shift for it self amongst the Trees; but as it could not well escape 
 from us, because it was already weary, and very fat, we overtook it at the entry in of the Bushes; but perceiving us so near, it ran under one, and that we might not find it, it changed in an instant its white colour into the same with the Bush, which unexpected alte∣ration gave us a great deal of trou∣ble. We had never found it a∣gain, had not one of the Compa∣ny discharged a Musket; at the Noise it rose up in a fright, and began to run for its Life; we lit∣tle thought it to be the same, ne∣vertheless some of us did venture after it, and some remained in the place, seeking the white Beast: The Pursuers shot off one of its Legs, and then cried to us to for∣bear seeking, and that the coun∣terfeit Lamb was caught. We went to be Eye witnesses of the Wonder; it was the same shap'd 
 Beast, but the colour was no more White as before, the Milky Colour was changed into a Black∣ish Gray: Its Coat was a fine Wool, the Head was like a Wolf, not altogether so long, it had ve∣ry sharp Teeth, and a fierce Look, the Hinder-parts were like a Sheep: It is one of the strangest Creatures I ever saw. I wondred how it could alter its White Wool into a Colour so different: I imagined this to be the Beast mentioned by the Learned, that takes the Colour of the place where it lays; a good Emblem of an Hypocrite.


We spent three days climbing over these mountainous places, and fighting with strange and un∣known Creatures to me: But as this was not the business we inten∣ded, we made haste into the plain Countrey; our Horse and Car∣riages 
 we had sent by another way, a little about, so we arrived at the Passage of the River before them.


The 
Arabs
 slept in great secu∣rity, little thinking that we would adventure over the Mountains and Rocks.


Our General Commanded us to rest, and fit our selves for Action, for he imagined, that assoon as we should come into the Plain, our arrival would be known to the Enemies, and that they would not fail to make Attempts upon us on a suddain. We refreshed our selves all that Evening, until the next Morning, when an Alarum was sounded, at the which we all ran to our Arms, and put our selves in order, expecting the On∣set of some

Arabs,
 but no Enemy appeared, unless it was a company of Apes pursued by a few Jaccals, 
 who made such a noise in the Wood that was near us, running up and down the Branches, that those upon the skirts of the Army thought them to be the Enemy, that took the advantage of the place to fire upon us; their need∣less Fear did assoon appear as the nimble Creatures recover'd the tops of the highest trees, to whose protection they did dare to com∣mit themselves; nevertheless the Allarm continued, and ran, as nimbly as the Apes, all over the Army, it could not be stopt until every one was informed of the cause of the Fright.


We Marched all that Morning until Noon, and then came to the foot of the Hills, where our Ge∣neral was resolved to stay till E∣vening, intending with a Party at Midnight to fall upon the Ene∣my, who was not above six Miles 
 distance from us: as it began to dawn, we advanc'd, and found some few Tents stragling from the rest; the

Arabs
 that were in them, told us that the main Body was at the Ford of the River 
Tafna,
 ex∣pecting our Arrival; that they had broken down all the Bridges all along, and were resolved to fight us; they further informed us of the cause of their Revolt: A Person of a Noble Family of one of their Tribes, named 
Isha Muker,
 whose Parents had been very con∣siderable in the Kingdom of 
Fez,
 was that year come amongst them, with all his Substance; that he was look'd upon as an Eminent Commander, skilful in Affairs of War and Peace, and that he was therefore well received, because also that he was very rich; That this was the man had perswaded them to shake off the 
Turkish
 yoke.

 At first they were timorous and fearful to revolt; but at last he en∣couraged them, by representing how imperious they were, the po∣verty of the Year, that could not furnish the Tribute-Money, and to their subsistency. Besides he told them that the 
Turks
 were not true

Mahometans,
 that they were He∣retical in their Opinions, and pro∣phane in their Practices, and that it was not lawful to submit to, and own such for their Masters. These Reasons had work'd upon the mul∣titude, but could not cause them to take up Arms until he had ad∣vis'd himself of this Stratagem; A Fellow was lately come into those Parts from 
Mecha,
 and feigned to be lame; His Pilgrimage was much more esteemed because of the pretended Impediment of his Feet.


Before he was arrived, 
Elmswar 
 Tapnez,
 for that was the Noble Mans Name, had sufficiently in∣structed him how he should behave himself: He brought with him a Letter which was directed to the Chief Leading men of the Coun∣trey, from the Keeper of

Maho∣met
's Temple; the Contents were, That 
Mahomet
 had appear'd unto him in a Dream, and commanded him to signifie unto them that it was his Pleasure to assist them this year in a notable manner, and free them from the Slavery of the 
Turk:
 It promised besides the re∣wards of Heaven to those that should be valiant, and eternal pu∣nishment to the Cowards and Dis∣obedient.


This Letter was given almost at the same time to the Grandees, and divulged all abroad amongst the 
Arabs
 in the Kingdom; some did give credit to it, others did look 
 upon it as an Imposture. Never∣theless an Assembly was called of the Chief of them, where the Letter being again produc'd in the presence of 
Tapnez,
 the

Hage
 or Religious Pilgrim seeing him come in, fell on his Face and kiss'd the hem of his Garment; the Assist∣ants wondred at this humility, not usual in persons of that Holy Or∣der, until he had told them the Cause: He affirmed that the Great Prophet had appeared that night unto him, and in consideration of his great pains he had suffered in his Travels to 
Meccha,
 he would cure him of his Lameness, that he had shew'd him the Person in his shape that should lay his hand up∣on him and cure him, and that it was this same man that was pre∣sent: 
Tapnez
 seem'd to increase the number of the Wonderers, and would not be perswaded the Re∣velation 
 had been real, until the

Hage
 or Holy Man with all the As∣sembly earnestly requested him to try what he was able to do: At last he consented to their Prayers, and with his Right Hand began to stroke the Lame man.


He no sooner felt the others sin∣ger, but he began to leap, and falling at his Feet, adored him as a Holy Man.


The Assembly taking notice of the Cure, and the manner of it, did really believe the 
Hage,
 and without delay established

Tapnez
 for their General and Chief Com∣mander, until they could give no∣tice of their Designes to some of the Blood-Royal of 
Mahomet,
 who only may command over them as King or Emperor. It was then re∣solved also that they would no longer pay Tribute to the 
Turk: Tapnez
 confirmed his Credit by 
 many other feigned Miracles; so that he was look'd upon in the the Countrey as some extraordina∣ry Fellow sent from Heaven to their Assistance.


He had gathered together thir∣teen thousand Horse and Foot; the Countrey People reported more: and with this Army was resolved to wait for the 
Turkish
 Army that came that way to ga∣ther Contributions, and to relieve the Garrison of 
Chinsan
 or 
Tremi∣sen,
 a City in the middle of the Countrey, not inferiour to 
Fez.


The Numbers of our Enemies did startle us when we heard how they were resolved to revenge themselves for all past Affronts; therefore the Commanders did de∣sire the General not to expose them to so eminent a danger until the other Armies had joined with him.


His Courage was great, he could not yield to this wholsom advice; his Hopes were greater: He was resolved to get all the ho∣nour of the Victory to himself; therefore he proposed to fall upon the

Arabs
 that night; he shewed it to his Captains, to perswade them, what an easie thing it was to rout the Enemy that was so se∣cure, and that had not any no∣tice of their Approach; and that unless they did speedily make use of the Opportunity, the Horse and Baggage would be delivered into the Hands of the 
Arabs,
 whose Numbers were able to op∣press the small Party that came di∣rectly that way. It was too late to go back, we were now so near, that unless we did surprize the E∣nemy, it was impossible to es∣cape.


According to our Generals Or∣ders, 
 as it began to dawn, we march'd with all speed into the Plain along the River, and about two or three hours in the night we came within the Noise of the Peo∣ple in the Tents.


Our General divided us into three Parties, appointing over each a skilful Leader, an 
Acha Ba∣sha,
 and commanded that we should fall upon the 
Arabs
 in three places.


Out of the Main Body he had separated a certain number to seise on certain stragling Horses which might be feeding about the Camp; These he intended to employ in case he put the Army to flight.


Assoon as we came within a quarter of a Mile of the Enemy, we found a small Party lodged in a hundred Tents, which we sur∣rounded according to our Orders. We killed all that we found alive,

 with very little noise. In the Me∣dows and by the Bank of the Ri∣ver great Companies of Horses were taken for our use.


It seems these Tents had been placed to guard them from Moun∣tainers or Wild Beasts: Our Ge∣neral made very good use of them in the Disorder and Confusion of the Rebels, for he caused them to be mounted by some of his own Party, and commanded them to pursue the Enemy.


Assoon as we came to the first Tents, we fell upon them without Mercy, and did great Execution. The two other Parties entred the Camp by several ways, having fetch'd a Compass about; we found no resistance until we came to the middle of the Tents.


There was a large Spot of Ground unto which the 
Arabs
 did run together at the sound of the 
 Alarm: They had not time to put themselves in a good Order; therefore at the third Volley of Shot they began to disperse, and to shift for themselves by divers ways. The two other Parties met several Companies of them, which they either kill'd or took Prisoners. The most of them re∣covered their Horses, and fled for their Lives.


Our small Party of Horse was not idle in the mean whiles; they ven∣tur'd after the Enemy with more Noise, than Ability to do harm.


In the dark their Numbers could not be well discerned; but this hindred them from viewing us the next day; for knowing that we had both Horse and Foot, they would not hazard themselves near us, until they had been informed by some Runaways of our small Numbers.


They fled to the next Hills, where all their Substance had been stored.


The Plunder of the Camp was but small; such things we found that Beggars would scarce lift from under their Feet; a few nasty Tents we erected of such pitiful Stuff that I never saw the like. It seems the

Arabs
 delight not in rich Houshold-stuff, but in numbers of Sheep and Camels.


Some few Horses fell into our hands the next day.


In this Attempt we lost about 50 men, and 435 of the

Arabians
 were kill'd in and about the Camp. Our General found in some of the Tents Letters sent from the 
Arabi∣ans
 in the other Kingdoms, to en∣courage these to resist the 
Turkish
 Power, promising all assistance that they could furnish: For fear there∣fore that the Enemy should receive 
 from their Neighbours and Bre∣thren such Supplies as should en∣courage them to revenge them∣selves, and for fear we should lose the passage of the River, which was of so great importance to the 
Turkish
 Affairs and Designs, our General and his Council resolved to fortifie themselves on both sides in the best manner that the place would permit; and with all speed to dispatch away some Mes∣sengers to the other Armies, to ha∣sten them in their March to his as∣sistance; for he knew himself un∣able to encounter the

Arabs,
 or to proceed in his Designs and March towards

Chinsan
 with his small Number.


Three Trenches were drawn on the Enemies side, and one on the other. There we thought our selves secure; for the Enemies Horse were not able to come to us, 
 their Foot were poor and misera∣ble, ten of them do not dare to look a 
Turk
 in the Face.


The situation of the Place did favour our Enterprize; for the Ground on both sides is higher than the rest at the Ford. The River is deep in all other places, and runs in a narrow Channel; but when it comes there, it spreads it self, finding more Elbow room: The Rising Ground forces it to run in a larger Stream, and then again the Water is confin'd to a lesser Channel; so that only in this place we may pass on foot without fear of Drowning.


Two days after the Battel, our Cavalry and Baggage came safe to us, although they had been met by several Parties of 
Arabs,
 and forced to skirmish many times.


By this new Supply our Cou∣rages began to encrease; we were

 better able to resist our Enemies Attempts in case they should be so bold as to force our weak Fortifi∣cations,


We lay not long in this Posture, before we saw many resolute Par∣ties of Horse and Foot daring us out to Battel. They began to contemn those that they formerly feared, when they knew our num∣bers: Every Night we had two or three Alarms given unto us.


The second day after the arri∣val of our Cavalry, a strong Par∣ty of Horse rid within Musket∣shot of us, calling us Cowards and Hereticks. Our Generals Cou∣rage could not suffer long these small Affronts unpunished, there∣fore he commanded the Cavalry to hasten out and to charge them stoutly. It was a sad Enterprize to many of them; above a thou∣sand went out, but scarce five 
 hundred came back again. The cause of their Defeat was this; At the first Charge the Enemy re∣treats in good Order; but when the 
Turks
 gave another Onset, they ran away, only with a Design to draw us by that feigned flight far from the Main Body, and into a strong Ambuscado that was hid be∣hind a Hill about a Mile from the River: Our men perceived not the Design, but with more haste than good speed pursued them without consideration of the dan∣ger.


Assoon as they were past the place, a good Company of Foot salutes them with a Volley of shot on the left hand, and then the Ambuscado of Horse rises on the Right, at the same time the pursu∣ed Party turns their backs, and our poor men were surrounded, disordered, and killed like so ma∣ny 
 Sheep: Had they not had a stout Commander to lead them on and bring them off, they had all perished in the place; for the un∣equal Numbers of the Enemy did overpower them. About 500 es∣caped from the Slaughter.


This Misfortune did wonder∣fully heighten the Courage of the

Arabians,
 and give Credit to their Arms.


It made our General more wary for the future, and prevented greater Destructions which might have happened unto us, had we not been made wiser by our Losses.


The Enemy at several other times did endeavour again to catch us in the same Advantage; but our General was grown wary by Experience.


That the Spirits of his men might not be dejected, nor the

A∣rabs
 
 too proud of their Success, he drew out both Horse and Foot, and put them in a readiness to fight.


The Enemy came to look upon us; our Horse was sent to take a view of them: They returned again after a light Skirmish, in which the Rebels had the worst. Every day we did encounter with them, sometimes to our Advan∣tage, sometimes to our Loss. We lay not long in this place before we heard of the approach of the Eastern Army, Commanded by the two Generals. They had not met with any opposition in their Cir∣cuit, until they came within a days Journey of us; then a strong Bo∣dy of Horse opposes them, and forces them to seek the shelter of a Hill, where they were better a∣ble to receive the Onset of the 
A∣rabians.
 It seems they had heard

 of the March of that Army to∣wards us, therefore to prevent our joining together, or rather to defeat them before they came up with us, a great number of them had stollen over the River secret∣ly, at a great distance from us, and had expected them in their way.


Assoon as this News came to our Camp, our General resolved to meet them in person, leaving in the Fortifications a sufficient num∣ber to defend it, and the same ap∣pearance of his being present. It was my Masters and my Fortune to accompany the Army.


At a place called by the 
Arabi∣ans Stefee,
 we came up with the Enemy: A Party of Horse char∣ged us very stoutly with Lance & Musket: Not many of ours were wounded, only four or five killed. They met with as stout resistance, which forced them from us, not 
 without loss. Our Horse had the Chase of them a Mile. We did not dare to adventure again after them farther; besides, they were more nimble than ours, because they had not been tired with so long a Journey.


By this small Encounter and Vi∣ctory we opened a way to our men that we found in no small distress for want of Provisions and things necessary.


They could not proceed in their Journey for fear of the Enemy, that had had great advantage o∣ver them.


We found them entrenched in a strong place, in such a manner that all the 
Arabians
 were not a∣ble to drive them from thence, un∣less it were by Famine. They in∣formed us of what had passed be∣tween them; that the 
Arabians
 had beaten them twice, and kill'd

 above a Thousand Men. The first time they laid an Ambuscado in their way, near a thick Wood, and when some Companies were past the place they fell suddainly upon them without mercy, and had not the Generals exposed their Persons to the Peril, and main∣tained a Fight with the Victorious Enemy, until the others had ral∣lyed again, they had been all ut∣terly lost; for they were in such a disorder, that they killed one another to make way for to fly.


Our Men were possest with so strange a fear and apprehension, that when our Vanguard came near the place, they imagined them to be the Enemy; their joy was no less than their fear, when they perceived their errour. They re∣ceived us as their Protectors. We supplyed them with all things that they wanted, and then Marched 
 back again to our Camp, unto which the other Army soon arri∣ved.


With this recruit it was resol∣ved we should stay no longer there, but beat up the Quarters of the Enemy: Accordingly the next day we Marched out Bag and Baggage, having left a small Guard in the place to keep it, to secure our passage over again, in case we should meet with the Misfortunes of War, which might oblige us to a Retreat.


At two Miles distance from the River, a small Party had the Courage to Charge us, but they would not stand to it long. We Marched up the Hill with a great deal of Courage and Resolution: Our men were so enraged by their former Losses, that they would not pardon any of the Enemy that fell by chance into their hands.


This Mountain is called 
Houlah∣ka;
 it is about ten miles round; it reaches very high; about it se∣veral Cottages are built, that serve for habitation to the Natural In∣habitants of this Country, the 
Moors;
 they are poor and needy for the most part, they feed upon such things as grow wild in the Valley; for although this Moun∣tain appears entire to the Behold∣ers afar off, with a continued As∣cent, there are many Valleys in it, and it is composed of several little Hills: The lower ground is ex∣tream fruitful, watered with ma∣ny pleasant Fountains that poure down their streams towards the River 
Tapna.


This place is adorned with ma∣ny goodly Trees and Woods, which as in most places grow na∣turally without planting, in that ground which hath not been late∣ly 
 employed, whereof there is ve∣ry much in the Land.


The Earth of it self abhors Idle∣ness; when therefore it is neglect∣ed by reason of the small Number of Inhabitants, or when it hath been long without employing its innate productive virtue, it then breaks forth into Trees & Wood, as in the 
West-Indies
 is sufficiently known: Our Plantations have been forc'd to make way for their Habitations with the Axe and the Saw, to hew down the Wood that did cover the Countrey; and in our Island, as some ancient Wri∣ters tell us, 
Cumberland
 and

West∣merland,
 and all the Northern Parts of 
England
 were full of Woods, Trees and Bushes, espe∣cially upon the Mountains, where scarce any Wood is now to be seen.


In this place the 
Arabians
 did 
 think to find a safe Retreat; and the rather, because there were not many Advenues to the Top: Na∣ture had on all sides fenced it, and distinguished it from the other Land by high and steepy Rocks. Five Passages do lead into this Place; the largest is a way about a hundred feet broad, in most places covered on both sides with Sandy Hills, Woods and Rocks that seem to threaten the Passen∣ger.


The Entrance into this Place was somewhat terrible unto us, not only because of the nature of the Situation, but also because the E∣nemy had seized upon all the dif∣ficult places and passages to annoy us.


Our Generals were resolved to beat them from thence, and to fight them in their Nest.


Both sides of the way were li∣ned 
 with Armed men, that did cast upon us Stones, Timber, and whatsoever they could get. We defended our selves with Offensive and Defensive Weapons, and made a way by the Sword, until we came to a very difficult Passage: On both sides were raised two Bushy Woods, in which the Enemy were hid; when our men came near, they let fly against us several Volleys of Shot, which put us all to stand. The 
A∣rabians
 thought us to be amazed at this sudden opposition, of which they intended to make ad∣vantage, in an instant came thun∣dring upon us before and behind, the stoutest of them; so that we were in no little trouble how to oppose them. Our Generals sha∣red amongst themselves the dan∣ger and the honour of the Victo∣ry; they seeing the craft and pow∣er 
 of the

Arabians,
 separated themselves, and turned their se∣veral Companies against the next Troops of the Enemy, and did so handsomly behave themselves, and so wisely manage their business, that the

Arabians
 were forced to leave us the Masters of the Field, with the Victory. One thing did very much contribute to the ob∣taining of it; not far from that place an easie Ascent did lead to the other side of one of the woods, where the 
Arabians
 had secured themselves: By this, one of our Generals steals up, and falls upon the back of the Enemy, that thought next upon nothing but how to save themselves by flight. Our men pursued their advantage, and left not their business half fini∣nished; they seized upon the place, and drove the 
Arabians
 quite out of the Wood with great 
 slaughter. Their Fellows seeing their disorder, and the Resolu∣tion of our Men, that would not retire back, imagined some such thing might happen on their side, therefore they all ran away; so strange a passion is Fear, that when Men are inclinable to it, the least accident causeth them to tremble; all the World would not have been able to have beat them from this place, had they maintained it with resolution; but the sight of an Enemy behind, which they least suspected, frighted them a∣way. They recovered the other side, where their Horses stayed for them, and so saved themselves from the

Turks
 Fury. They lost here a∣bove 1500 Men. in the Valleys we found many hundred Head of Cat∣tel, Sheep, Oxen, Cammels, and all sorts of Beasts, feeding in the Pastures: It was wonderful to us

 to meet with such a fruitful place in the midst of so many Rocks and such barren Hills. For all these Losses the

Arabians
 would not return to their former Obedience, but continued still to resist us: Our Camp did receive several A∣larms, especially in the Night, so that we were all tired out with Watching.


Above three Weeks we were pursuing the Enemy amongst the Hills, from one Hill to another: They did fly continually, and because we were not so strong in Cavalry as they were, we did not dare to adventure against them, only with our Horse; our Foot were not able to pursue them so fast as they did save themselves: The Plunder that we did find in these places, did abundantly satisfie for the yearly Tribute. The great numbers of Cattel that we got 
 into our hands, caused the 
Arabi∣ans
 to fall out amongst themselves; which coming to our Ears, our Generals sent a Flag of Truce, to invite them to submit to the

Turks
 Empire; a part of them accepted the offer of Peace, and came in to us; the others with their Cap∣tain was said to have fled away, so that meeting with none to op∣pose us, we received some Hosta∣ges from the Enemy; and because their Losses had been great, our Generals would not exact from them any other Tribute, than what they had recovered by force of Arms. They had full liberty to return to their former abode, upon condition that they would Manure the Ground, and pay unto them of 
Argiers
 their usual Tribute-money; they promised to be alwaies obedient to the Grand Seignior, and to the City 
 of 
Argeirs;
 afterwards they were dismist: There were about 1600 Families that did return to their Duty with all their Leaders.


Our Army took another way out of these Mountains than we came. No Enemy appear'd all the way, until we came to a nar∣row passage between two high Hills; the way was a difficult As∣cent: Here we found it stopt up in such a manner that no Horse could pass. Before we imagined our business had been done, when we saw so many of the revolted

A∣rabians
 return to their Obedience; it did not therefore a little sur∣prize us, when we found so many left to oppose us at this Passage, it was not possible for us to come near: Several of our Companies did endeavour to storm the place, but the Enemy was so strongly fortified on all sides, and so well 
 furnished with Weapons, that we were forced to sit down and con∣sider what to do: A Council was called of all the Commanders, where it was resolved not to go back or seek any other passage, because if they did leave such a powerful Enemy unpunished, and on foot in the heart of the King∣dom, it might very much en∣danger their interest there; for assoon as they should be gone, they would endeavour to corrupt the rest, and draw them from their Allegiance, either by force or fair means; besides, they did consider that they that had submitted unto them, were forced unto it, and that they were as inclinable to stand out as these, were there any hopes of prospering in their opposition against us; and that it would be no small Disgrace to a victorious Army to be overcome by a van∣quish'd 
 Enemy: the least News of this would be able to encourage the rest of the

Turks
 Subjects to revolt: For these and many other Reasons they thought it necessary to make way through that place and no other. The difficulty was to find out the means of compas∣sing their Design: By plain force they did see it impossible.


We had given several Attempts to no other purpose but to discou∣rage our men with the loss of their Companions. My Master was wounded with a Stone cast from a Sling. It Seems some of these

A∣rabians
 are excellent Marks-men, and very dexterous at this old kind of Weapon.


There was no other way to come to fight with these People but one, which was also so well fortified, that we lost our Labour and Men to attempt it. Our Ge∣nerals 
 were afraid that this small Party that held out against us, would encrease by degrees, if they did once oblige us to a stand, and that they would lessen the re∣putation of our Men in the Coun∣trey, if we could not overcome them.


First they resolved to send a Flag of Truce, to try whether they could win them to a peace∣able complyance without Arms: The

Arabians
 were glad to see this expression of our Weakness, which they might have improved to their advantage, had they ac∣cepted the Offers that would have been made. They had been re∣ceived again at their own terms, but as people that relie upon their own strength, they took this as an open acknowledgment of the im∣possibility of our passage with∣out their leave, and thought them∣selves 
 sufficiently secure against all our Attempts; therefore when our Messenger came with Offers of Peace, they were ready to beat him, and would not read the Let∣ter sent to their General, but con∣temptuously, before him, trod it under feet, telling him, that they knew our Demands without read∣ing the Letter, and that they would speedily return an Answer in the Company of Thirty thou∣sand men. This unexpected Re∣turn to the Civility of our Lead∣ers did not a little trouble them; for they imagined that so proud and confident an Answer did pro∣ceed from some powerful assist∣ance expected by the Enemy from their Brethren of the neighbour∣ing Provinces: Their Conjecture was not in vain; for they had late∣ly received the promises of a spee∣dy supply from them of 
Fez, An∣gad,
 
 and 
Snatta,
 three Provinces, very large, where several of the Tribes of the 
Arabians
 do inhabit with the ancient Natives the 
Af∣fricans,
 the one in Tents, the o∣ther in small Villages. They were upon their March when they heard of the first Defeat that the 
Turks
 had given to their Brethren at the difficult passage. Fame had encreas'd the Number of the slain, and represented the slaughter to them ten times worse than really it was.


Some time before they had dis∣patch'd a Messenger with News of their coming, which Messenger did according to his Orders, give an Account of the Numbers and Resolution of them that sent him to the Besieged. They relied up∣on his words, not knowing of the contrary intentions that the change of Affairs had produced 
 in them; for assoon as they heard of the 
Turks
 Successes, and their own Misfortunes, they returned back again, leaving their Friends and Brethren to our Mercy, and their own Protection.


This we knew not when the Messenger returned with such a resolute Answer: Therefore our Leaders thought it their Interest, to overcome the Enemy before any Supply might come to them.


We lay several days not know∣ing what course to take, until the 
Arabians
 themselves furnished us an occasion to overcome them: They sent out about Fifty Men to steal Cattel, these we trapand & took every one of them: Assoon as news came to our General of their surprisal, he commands 50 choice Men to be pickt out of the Army, some of them spoke the 
Arabian
 Tongue well, so that they

 could not be distinguished, these he causes to be habited as the 
A∣rabians
 were, and to be armed with four Pistols a piece, which were hid in their Bosoms; then he gives them about an hundred Head of Cattel to drive before them towards the 
Arabians:
 Ha∣ving sufficiently instructed them what to do, and informed them of the signal to be given, in case they did succeed, he Commands them to March.


They accordingly ascend up to the narrow Passage, where the Enemy kept a strong Guard, as∣soon as they came within Call, they were ordered to pronounce 
Mahummed i shur,
 the Word that was given the Thieves, to distin∣guish them from others; at that the Passage was opened, and they drove in the Beasts without any opposition; the Purchase did not 
 a little please our Enemies, because they had been put to some straits for want of Victuals; they had some a coming from the other side, but it was not yet arrived; but when the Drivers of these Cattel proved to be none of their Friends, their joy was turned in∣to fear.


Our Men were no sooner enter∣ed but they left the Conduct of the Beasts to some other Body, and fell to their work; they kill'd and surprised all the Guards there∣abouts, and possessed themselves of the Advenue, giving notice thereof by a sudden flash of Gun∣powder to the 
Turks,
 who pre∣sently ascended the Hill and enter∣ed the place; had they not arri∣ved in time, all our Men had been cut to pieces, for they were mightily oppressed with numbers, but we came opportunely to their

 assistance, and forced the 
Ara∣bians
 to seek safety in their heels.


Our Army passed into the Plain Countrey again, in pursuance of their Enemies, who being tired with so many Misfortunes and Losses, and seeing none come to their assistance, they sent some of their chief Men to treat with us about Peace; their Message was acceptable to the whole Army.


That which most perswaded them to submit unto the

Turks,
 was, because many of them had left their Wives and Children in the last Engagement behind them, to the 
Turks
 disposition. Their Captivity did highly concern their near Relations, therefore they sought all means to recover them again by a firm Treaty. They excused unto us the impertinent Answer, and the great Contempt of the 
Turks
 first Offers, upon a 
 certain number of them that were then amongst the dead, assuring us that those that were alive, had been led into this Rebellion a∣gainst their Wills, by meer necessi∣ty, because they had a depen∣cy upon the Chief Men of them that were kill'd: For they have several strong Factions amongst them, the chief Disposers of all the rest, according to his plea∣sure; they swear by

Mahomet
 to maintain and follow him whither soever he goes.


Our Generals received them into Favour again, upon condi∣tion, that every Year they should pay a double Tribute, as a pu∣nishment to their Rebellion. 
Elm∣swar Tapnez
 their Chief Captain fled with all speed towards 
Angad,
 that lies full South of the King∣dom of

Argiers,
 so that he could never come into the 
Turks
 power.

 We dismist those that yielded un∣to us, and returned them their Wives and Children.


Our Generals having so happily made an end of this War, that threatened the 
Turks
 Interest in those Parts, began to separate again, and to proceed in their Journey over the Kingdom, to ga∣ther the Tribute-money.


The People pay by the Head two Dollars, that is nine Shillings a Head, Men, Women and Chil∣dren; those that are very rich in Cattel are forced to part with more, when the Army goes the Rounds; and if any is extraor∣dinary poor in a Family, his Neighbours and near Kinsfolks must supply his wants, and pay for him; so that the total Sum of this Tribute is very great, I have heard some speak of ten Millions of Dollars, besides the Expences

 of the Army. This Money is brought into 
Argiers,
 some part of it is sent to 
Constantinople
 to the Grand Segnior, another part defrays the Expences of the Mi∣litia and Officers of Church and State, and another part is cast into the Publick Treasury.


Our Army proceeded right to 
Chinsan
 or

Tremisen,
 a strong and populous City, kept by the 
Turks
 with a numerous Guard that is re∣lieved every year. Our General was designed Governour of this place, and was sent thither with his Army to Command it.


We had a very pleasant Jour∣ney from this Mountain to that City, thorough a fruitful Coun∣trey that did furnish us both with Money and good Entertainment; some of them had been in the Re∣bellion, but the

Turks
 would not deal with them more severely than

 with the others, to oblige them to a greater Fidelity; for their is no greater tye to Obedience than Love, and the sense of for∣mer Obligations: Our Army might have treated them as Ene∣mies, sold their Goods, taken their Wives and disposed of them as Bond-slaves; but they knew that this dealing would serve to no other purpose, but to exasperate the Spirits of the rest, who might then have reason to seek an occasi∣on of a Revenge. It is never good to deal with Men as with Beasts; the latter are awed into obedience, but the first must be perswaded: The Magistrates sword may scare me, but it shall never win me.


This Practice of the 
Turks
 was very commendable: They thought it unworthy their Courage to tread on the Neck of a vanquish'd

 and yielding Enemy. Our Gene∣ral, to oblige the Chief of the Fa∣milies and Tribes, did invite se∣veral of them to eat with him; he bestowed Gifts upon some of the Arch Rebels, imitating the practise of those Princes that be∣stow their Favours upon those that are suspected, or that have been rebellious, to oblige them to be more faithful to their Interest for the future.


At a small Town, called by the 
Turks, Canatudi,
 and by the 
Moors, Canahaal,
 there was a great Feast kept for the Marriage of one 
Elmswar Bidow Ben hemmed,
 an 
Alcalde
 of one of their Tribes; our General coming to the place at that time, honoured the Solem∣nity with his presence, and caused all his Captains and 
Chouses
 to pay their respects to the Bride and Bridegroom.


I cannot pass further until I take notice of what is observed by this People in such occasions; the young man that hath a mind to marry, demands the Daughter from her Father, or next Kindred; if they grant her, he never trou∣bles himself to win her consent; this is an excellent way to spare a great deal of hypocrisie, and to save the poor men much Court∣ship: The man makes a great Feast according to his Quality; some do treat their Friends seven days; the first day he sends to his future Spouse by some Kinswoman, a Vail, to recommend unto her Modesty; the second day, a Suit of Appa∣rel, such as they wear; the third day, a Mill to grind Corn, and Instruments to spin, to remember she may not be idle; the fourth, an 
Alcoran;
 the fifth, a pair of Slippers handsomly made and 
 guilded; the sixth day he sends a Cock and a Dog, to teach her Diligence and Watchfulness; and the seventh, a Ring of that Coun∣trey Fashion, with a Dish of Meat, and a Staff with this Motto about it, 
I will punish all Offenders.
 All this while the Bridegroom hath not so much as seen his future Spouse, but sends to visit her often with some course Complements, as as is usual amongst

Moors.
 On the eighth day, which is that of the greatest Solemnity, the Bride∣groom comes to the Fathers house, accompanied by all his Friends and Kindred, and there in the pre∣sence of them all, the Father de∣livers all his right, title and inte∣rest in his Daughter, to the man, by giving unto him her hand, and saying some words proper to the business in hand. They go next to the place of Prayer, which in 
 Tents is near the middle; and there a 
Thaloub
 blesseth the marri∣ed Couple, adding several Prayers to God, and 
Mahomet,
 and to the Angel

Zadiel,
 that governs, as they say, the Planet 
Jupiter,
 to favour this Conjunction by some happy influence. Then they all march in order to the Fathers House, where a great Feast is pre∣pared for them: The men by themselves in one Room make merry; the Women in another, are jolly until the Evening: Then the Bride in all her State, with all her Houshold-stuffe, Servants, Gifts and Money, is carried to the mans House; she usually sits mounted on a Camel, glittering in Gold and Silk, and about her are all her Kindred and Friends. When she comes to her Husbands House, she then pulls off her Vail, because Modesty is no longer in 
 season, nor proper to that place. Some do keep several Feast days afterwards, and spend much of their Estate, according to their a∣bilities, or the love they bear to the Spouse.


I was an Eye-witness of several Ceremonies observed in this occa∣sion, which are related in other Travels.


We stayed in this place several days to refresh our selves, and then we continued our Journey towards 
Chinsan,
 where we arrived on the third of 
October.


It is a large and populous City, inhabited by a kind of People called 
Lhebdiah;
 round about are most pleasant Gardens and Or∣chards. The Soil is good, the Climate wants nothing but People worthy to receive and enjoy the good things that it affords.


We found here great store of 
 Fruits, Apples, Pears, Melons of divers kinds, Grapes; for although the

Mahumetan
 drinks not Wine, he loves the Grape, and a kind of Drink that is made of Water and Raisins, called 
Africana;
 it is ve∣ry pleasant, and proper for this Climate.


Here is a strange sort of Tree made up of Leaves, one Leaf grows on the top of another; the Leaves are thick two or three inches in the middle; they are a∣bove a foot large and long; an ex∣cellent Fruit grows upon them, which the 
Arabs
 call 
Asholoch,
 our 
English, Prickle Pear;
 the Substance is cold and refreshing; it is ripe about

Midsummer,
 and of a yel∣lowish colour. Every Garden is furnished with such a Tree: The Rind is full of little Prickles un∣discernable; therefore it is not to be handled with naked hands. I 
 have since seen some in other parts.


Here is also a beautiful Tree of divers Colours, that the Great Men cause to grow in the midst of their Gardens; it serves as an ex∣cellent Ornament to a place: Its Body is of a deep green, the Boughs red, the Leaves yellow as Gold, with a mixture of white. Some told me that this Tree could not grow in any other Climate or Soil, and that some had laboured to transplant it on the Sea-shore, but that Air had rendred all their Labours and Endeavours to little purpose.


Here is great abundance of Dates: That Tree never pro∣duces unless there be a Conjuncti∣on of the Male with the Female; they usually join their Boughs to∣gether.


I had time in this place to take 
 a view of all the Rarities: It ap∣pears to me to be one of the anci∣entest Cities of the World; it stands upon a plain ground, forti∣fied with a strong Wall, beautified with many square Marble Pillars, very white, the rest of the Wall being built of a brown stone; on the top the Bulwarks are adorned with Turrets of divers colours. The City yields a pleasant sight to the Beholder when the Sun shines. The inside is no less beautiful. The Streets are straight and broad. The Heart of the City contains many excellent Buildings. A stately 
Mosque
 supported by a hundred Pillars of white Marble, with se∣veral Arches of very curious work; the Governours Palace, where there are a hundred large Rooms very neatly adorned with several mishapen Figures of divers Colours; for the 
Mahumetans
 ab∣hor 
 Images and Statues; there∣fore they have not the use of Pi∣ctures, nor do not allow them to appear publickly in any place.


Here is also a Town-House, a place appointed for the meeting of the Chief Persons when any urgent Business calls them to con∣sult together: It stands upon an Arch supported by two Rows of Marble Pillars. It hath a Steeple to it built with half Brick and half Stone, very high and large. The top hath a Prospect into all the Countrey as far as our Eye∣sight will reach; and in one side is a large Room full of the anci∣ent Records of the 
Arabians
 since the first Conquest of this Coun∣trey, with many Large Vo∣lumes.


The next Place to it is the Court that belongs to the

Cadir,
 the Chief Justice, where he sits upon 
 a Seat covered with a Canopy of Cloth of Silver, the Seat is eleva∣ted above the rest in the manner of a Table spred with 
Turky
 Car∣pets, upon which he sits as a Tai∣lor. A Fellow stands at his El∣bow with a naked Cymeter; a∣bout him a little lower, sit seve∣ral of his Assistants, whose Coun∣sel he takes in difficult Affairs. O∣ver against stands the Parties to be judged without delay; they usu∣ally receive the Punishments due to their Offence, at the same time that they are judged; for they admit of no Reprieve.


There are many other Houses very well built; they are flat on the Top; some are curiously painted according to the 
Mosaique
 Fashion. The Inhabitants do sleep upon them in the Summer, cover∣ed with an

Alhage,
 to defend them from the venomous Flies, and from

 the 
Musketa's,
 pernicious Crea∣tures that suck their Blood.


In the middle of the City is a large Market-place, and round a∣bout many Cloisters of the Reli∣gious men amongst the 
Moors.
 One is more remarkable than the rest, because of the excellent Work∣manship and ancient Fabrick, and because of a great Library, a cu∣rious thing amongst this rude Peo∣ple: I know not with what man∣ner of Books it is stored; for Christians have never the liberty to handle them; but as I did learn from the Keepers of the Door, they were Books that had been pick'd up in all the parts of 
Afri∣ca
 by one of their Princes, and laid in that place, for the benefit of the Students, whereof there are very few, unless it be of Ma∣gicians, and men that study the Virtues of Simples. Other Arts

 and Sciences, as 
Astrology, Logick,
 the

Mathematicks,
 &c. are almost extinct amongst them.


In the time of my abode among them, I have perceived that they pretend many times the assistance of the Devil to work miraculous Effects, when they do it by the Knowledges that they have of Nature.


They are very superstitious, and listen very much to the Reports and Whimsies of their Soothsay∣ers.


Some never undertake a Voy∣age of any Concern, without con∣sulting these Oracles. Many in these parts make a great advan∣tage of the Peoples Folly.


There is a Society amongst them that profess Fortune-telling. It is not so much discredited as in our Kingdom: They are persons for the most part of Honour and 
 Reputation that are admitted to a familiar acquaintance with the in∣fernal Spirits. They vouchsafe not to appear and discover them∣selves to every idle Rascal. I have seen wonderful Cures performed by their means, not so much by the secret operation of the Spirit, as by the virtue of Herbs and Me∣dicines applied to the Patient, which were directed and reveal∣ed by the Evil Spirit; for the De∣vil is a good Physitian, he may dispute the Palm with

Hypocrates
 and 
Galen.
 I have seen a deaf man, whose Organ was only obstructed, and not incapacitated, cured by the Application of an Herb like unto our Sorrel, called 
Hegn
 by the 
Moors.
 Agues and Fevers are driven away by the touch of some of these Magicians; other Diseases require a longer time, and other Remedies.


This City is full of this sort of People that openly acknowledge themselves to be such, and own a familiarity with several infernal Spirits: Their Names and Ap∣pearance I could never know from them. I was very inquisitive to understand something of their art; but their Grandeur could not suf∣fer them to entertain a Discourse with a poor Slave. I have seen them make Figures & Images of Clay and Wax, which they put up∣on the top of their houses, especial∣ly in the two Solstices, in the Equi∣noctials, and in the full Moon; the reason, as I did conceive, was to make them receive some quality which the Stars do send down at such seasons upon the corporal Bodies.


There are many sorts of Trades in this place; but as in most Ci∣ties of 
Barbary,
 they all live to∣gether 
 in one Street that are of the same Profession.


At one end of the Town hard by the River 
Elouad
 that waters the Fields of 
Climsan,
 is erected a stately Castle, the Seat of the Lieutenant or Governour of the City: It overlooks the Town, and commands it with a hundred Peeces of Ordnance. Nothing is here remarkable but the Antiqui∣ty of the Buildings and Fortifica∣tions.


It was first erected in the time of the 
Vandal
 Kings, to keep this Inland Countrey in subjection, and especially this great and populous City. It hath been since enlarged by the 
Saracens.
 In the middle stands a Pillar full of 
Arabick
 Letters, written in blew Figures upon black Marble, to signifie the memorable actions that have been performed in the time of 
Saracen
 
 or

Arabick
 Kings. They have reigned in these parts many years before

Charles
 the Fifth attempt∣ed to win 
Argiers.
 A small Histo∣ry and Account of their Names and Actions I shall annex in its place.


This City is the largest in the whole Kingdom, which is limited on the North side by the 
Mediter∣ranean,
 on the East by

Tunis,
 on the South by 
Angad,
 another large Kingdom in the Land, and by 
Snatta,
 Province that hath almost nothing but Mountains and Rocks; and on the West it bor∣ders upon the Kingdom of 
Fez.
 It contains 250 Leagues in length, from the Sea in the Land as far as

Angad,
 and about 160 in breadth, from 
Bousema
 to the Cape called by our people 
Cap de Bugaremo.
 It contains several Cities well forti∣fied, the chief are 
Argiers
 and 
Tre∣misen,


 or 
Climsan,
 so called by the Inhabitans; on the Sea-Coast are 
Cercelli, Bougia, Gigiari, Masta∣gan, Bische, Gileto, Guien, Arseni, Oran,
 that belongs to the 
Spaniard;
 where a Marquiss commands the Countrey about ten Miles round, with seven or eight hundred horse; 
Zereni, Arsebiba, Buazia, Corban,
 some of these are Cities, others but small Towns.


In the Land are many good Towns and Places of Note; these are the chief, 
Benibachul, Albori, Tegdeme, Stefe, Canatudi, Medua, Calamou, Lori, Albron, Segmes,
 a large Town that gives name to a Province so called; 
Hagroah, Bi∣broehl,
 and several others, whose Names are hereafter mentioned: I have reckoned up here above a hundred Villages inhabited by the 
Africans,
 that are Servants to the 
Arabians,
 and they are Sub∣ject 
 to the 
Turk:
 Some of them retain the ancient Language. In the Province of 
Snatta
 they have a particular Speech, not under∣stood by any but by themselves: Some told me that it is the old 
Pu∣nick
 Language; for they that in∣habit these Mountains and barren Places, were driven thither by the Wars and Cruelty of the new In∣habitants, who had ground and room enough without troubling that poor sort of People; there∣fore they always left them to en∣joy their own without disturbing them; only they have obliged them to receive the Law of

Ma∣homet:
 That was not difficult to impose upon a People that before had scarce any Religion; or if they had, it was accompanied with so much Ignorance and Superstiti∣on that they knew no reason to op∣pose that Religion that appeared 
 round about them, so successful, and so universally received.


In this City of 
Climsan
 I remain∣ed 3 years with my Master. At our first Arrival our General took pos∣session of the Government, and of the Castle, and the former Go∣vernour took Charge of the Tri∣bute-Money to be conveyed to 
Argiers.
 A week after our com∣ing, he set forwards with his Companies that had been weak∣ned by the Diseases of the last Year: His Commission ordered him to meet the Western Army, and both together to return home with their sums of Money. Our Destiny staid us in this City, in which I met with various and strange Adventures. I was

 times obliged to undertake a

∣ney with my Master in the 
: first was towards

Angad,
 in which Province is a famous and ancient 
 City called 
Bedtua,
 not inferiour to 
Climsan,
 unless it be in the largeness and excellency of the Buildings.


The Countrey round about is full of all sorts of Fruit, and is not so hot as one might imagine. I found several sorts of Commodi∣ties at a very cheap Rate, which we purchase with large Sums, and great labour and hazard. Hides, Hony, Bees-Wax are here in a great abundance.


We past over a Sandy Valley a∣bout half way to 
Bedtua,
 where we found a great deal of glittering Sand, much like to that of Gold. In the middle is a large Lake, unto which the wild Beasts and Serpents resort; above 50 or 60 did threat∣en us when we offered to ap∣proach.


Our Business in these parts was to treat with a great Commander 
 of the 
Arabs,
 the Prince of this Kingdom, about some Business of Importance to our Garrison. My Master was dispatch'd as an Am∣bassador with a considerable Guard to defend him from the At∣tempts of wild Beasts and Lawless Thieves, of which the Mountains are peopled.


It is needless to relate all the Particulars of our Journey, and the manner of our Reception.


We passed through many Com∣panies of Tents. They had cho∣sen for their Situation the most pleasant Valleys, and fruitful Ground. The first day we had a sharp Encounter with about a do∣zen lusty Lions; they hunted af∣ter their prey, and met with death at the end of our Muskets. They could not be kill'd without re∣ceiving some damage: One of our men was wounded with the Paws 
 of one of these Furious Beasts, that leap'd upon him after that he had been struck through the Belly. The danger of our Companion made us dispatch him sooner out of the way. This danger was followed by another more fearful; but we escaped out of it as hap∣pily.


The next day we passed through a large and Sandy Plain of about ten Leagues long, and four broad, called by the 
Moors, Scidduahr;
 in it were raised several little Hills moveable with the Wind, be∣tween which of necessity we were to pass. We were no sooner en∣tred, but a strong Easterly Wind raises the light Sand, and threatens to bury us alive: It was a fearful thing to us to behold so much Earth flying in our faces; the Air was thick with the dusty Sand; in a moment a Hill was removed from 
 one place to another; besides that we had to encounter with the boi∣sterous Wind, our Horses were half buried in a moment, we could not make a stop in this dreadful place for fear of being past hopes of returning.


The rest of our Journey was far more pleasant; for it afforded us variety of Objects, not ungrate∣ful unto us; besides, the way was less dangerous and less trouble∣som.


In eight days we had a sight of the Walls of 
Bedtua:
 We were kindly entertained at the Princes Cost. He was a Person of a mid∣dle Stature, very swarthy, in his Face the Characters of Majesty did appear, and in his Garb and Attendance those of his Dignity. At our arrival 500 Horse were sent out to meet us at some distance from the City; they came in very 
 good Order, and led us to an A∣partment that had been prepared for my Master Reception assoon as they heard of our Approach. We received here the Comple∣ment of many persons of Quali∣ty.


Assoon as the Prince was arri∣ved from the Fields, we were sent to wait upon him. The Ceremo∣nies observed on this Occasion I took exact notice of. The Princes Guards cloathed with a thin Stuff of a Scarlet Die, with red Bon∣nets and white Feathers flying up∣on it, yielded a most pleasant sight on both sides of the way, that were lined with them. At a con∣venient distance stood the officers, whose Garb and Meen did make us take notice of them for Persons more eminent than the rest. They were as full of Civility as Honour, when my Master passed by them;

 paying unto him as much Respect as an Ambassador from the Grand Seignior could expect.


We passed through three large Streets in view of many Thou∣sands that did look upon us from the tops of the Houses and the Windows: Before us matched two grave Fellows very neatly drest; next went my Master, fol∣lowed by two 
Turks
 bearing the Presents designed for the Prince. We were attended by many of his Officers.


When we came to the Palace, the Guards that were at the Gate obliged us to leave our Sandals be∣hind.


It is a very large House, built of Marble and Brick; the white and red Colours do yield a pleasant sight: We entred into three Courts very handsomly adorned with curious work; at the first my 
 Master was complemented by the Princes Secretary, at the second by his Brother, and led into the third, where He Himself was ly∣ing in State. In the middle of it was erected a great Tent of green Silk; at the four Corners, and on the top were Flags of red Silk, ha∣ving the Arms of 
Mahomet,
 and of the Princes Family very neatly wrought: At the Door my Mas∣ter was met by the Prince him∣self, who is bound to pay that re∣spect to any that comes in the Name of the Grand Seignior. Some Discourse and kind Expressions passed between them, which I could not approach to hear; they went next both together, and as∣cended three Steps at the further end of the Tent, and sate upon a large Table, my Master at the left hand of the 
Arabian
 Prince; over their Heads a stately Canopy 
 was hung, and round about Per∣sons of the greatest Quality stood, to honour and encrease the Solemnity. My Master acquain∣ted him with his Business and De∣sign, and received from him a very favourable Answer, with a Promise to endevour his spee∣dy satisfaftion.


I saw here nothing of that rudeness, which our People ima∣gine to be in all the Parts of 
Afri∣ca:
 The Place, and Attendance of the Prince, had as much of State and Glory, as is usual a∣mongst the little Princes of 
Eu∣rope.
 I found nothing barbarous but their Language, which I could not well understand.


The 
Arabs
 all about 
Africa
 are People very polite, and well bred; they have nothing of that baseness and uncivil carriage, which other more remote Nations 
 have: They are imperious a∣mongst the People that they have Conquered, because otherwise they could never retain them in subjection to their Empire; but to Strangers that come amongst them, they are affable, hospita∣ble, courteous, kind, and very liberal: If any harm is commit∣ted to a Forreigner, it is not by them, but by the rascally sort of People, the ancient Inhabi∣tants, that look upon all Stran∣gers for the 
Arabs
 sake as Ene∣mies, by Race of

Black-Mores,
 whereof there are here great Multitudes subject to the

Arabi∣ans.
 My Master was about three hours in Conference with the Prince, and we as long waiting at the Door of the Tent; all the time a rough sort of Musick plaid, five men with several sorts of In∣struments made a Consort of 
 Tunes very harsh to our Englist Ears.


When the Discourse was end∣ed, my Master was led to the Door of the Tent by the Prince, and then by his Grandees he was conduced back to his Apart∣ment with much Pomp and Joy.


Before I proceed, I must give a further Account of the Prince that Commands so far in the Land; his Name is 
Moyses Zim Kush,
 a man of about forty years of Age, of a middle Stature, not so swarthy as the ordinary 
Moors;
 his Body is straight and slender, his Face full of Majesty; never∣theless he hath a very loving As∣pect; his people have a great re∣spect for him: He hath the Command of three great Tribes, that have seated themselves in these innermost Countries, a∣mongst the Sands and Mountains. 
 He had formerly some dependen∣cy upon the King of 
Fez
 and 
Morocco;
 but now by the death of the last Emperour, he became absolute, as I did then understand. And as he commands a great Compass of Ground, and hath no little power in regard of the Number of his Men and good In∣comes, all his Neighbours have sometimes need to seek his Fa∣vour.


My Master went not so much to Court it as to treat with him about the publick Concerns. Se∣veral Commodities do grow in his Countrey in a great abun∣dance, which the Kingdome of 
Argeirs
 do want: My Master had a Commission to procure from him the Liberty of free Trading, and to suffer them to be sent out of his Dominions without such excessive Tribute 
 as he did formerly require, to the great prejudice of the 
Turks,
 that were obliged to buy them for want of others, at any Rate. He had Order also to complain of se∣veral Violences committed by the Princes Subjects upon the Borders; for some few Tents had lately been pitched in the 
Turks
 Confines by these 
Arabs,
 that would not acknowledge their Ju∣risdiction, and had robbed others that were under their Command, of about a hundred Head of Cat∣tel, under pretence that the Own∣ers did suffer them to go out of their Limits, and graze where they should not. There were o∣ther Robberies done of late by them of

Angad;
 for which my Master was to make complaint, and demand restitution of the Goods. His business was also to desire this Prince not to suffer his 
 People again to send any assist∣ance to them of the 
Turks
 Domi∣nions, as they had done of late; and to settle a firm Peace and A∣mity between the two Kingdoms of

Argeirs
 and 
Angad.
 These se∣veral Affairs did require much time and pains to bring to a Con∣clusion; for great difficulties did present themselves, that had al∣most cast my Master into a de∣spair of accomplishing his De∣sign: The Princes Interest did apparently oppose it self, and perswade him not to listen to the Ambassadors Proposals. His Ho∣nour and Word were also enga∣ged not to suffer his Brethren to be crush'd in pieces without as∣sistance; and besides, some of the Rebels were fled out of fear, to his Court, where they had made a strong Party to oblige the Prince to favour them and 
 their Concerns, to the prejudice of the 
Turk.


These Difficulties that did ap∣pear in this Negotiation were not to be overcome by an ordinary Judgment and Courage. Four persons of the

Sultans
 Council were appinted to receive and an∣swer the Ambassadors Proposals. At first they would not listen to them, but returned a Smile and a Jest to his Demands, as if they had been ridiculous: My Ma∣ster did often treat with them, but could not have any satisfacti∣on; They answered, for the Robberies that were done, they could not be prevented, that the persons demanded were not be found in those parts; that if any such had done such violences, it was without the Princes know∣ledge, against his Will; and that the persons were removed far in∣to

 the Countrey, from whence they could not be fetch'd with ease: The truth was, that the Prince himself had received some presents, and a considerable part of the Booty, which he was not willing to let go again. Unto all the other Demands they gave un∣satisfactory Answers, which did oblige my Master to patience, and a resolution: First he laboured within a few days to consider the divers Interests that did rule, and the present Estate of that Court, which did help him on in his bu∣siness; for he made use of those persons that were able to serve him, and did work upon them according to their Inclinations & Interests, to put an end to his Ne∣gotiation. He had by this wise Conduct brought it to a very fair pass; after much labour and perswation he had obliged the

 Prince to a restitution of part of the Plunder, and to promise to maintain Peace, and not to suffer any Injuries to be done by his People to the Subjects of the 
Turk.
 But this did not satisfie my Master; he was resolved to ob∣lige him to consent to the rest of his Demands, and to force him to abate something of the great Cu∣stoms that were raised upon the Commodities of the Countrey, that were transported out of the Limits; but this could never have been obtained, had it not been for an Accident that hap∣pened afterwards; My Master was so discouraged when he came from a Meeting where the Com∣missioners were present, that he gave me order to prepare all things for his speedy departure. I saw that his Melancholy look did discover his Discontent, and 
 his Commands the cause of his Displeasure: I made bold with him to comfort him in this occa∣sion, and did offer him at all ad∣ventures a remedy to his dissatis∣faction, if he would be pleased to tell unto me how his business did stand; he had often tried my ex∣perience in affairs, and had no lit∣tle confidence upon my Fidelity & Wit. This was not the first time that I had been useful unto him to help him out of difficult Af∣fairs; therefore he proposed to me the whole state of his business. Sir, said I to my Master, Trou∣ble not your self, I will cause the Prince to give you full satisfacti∣on. You cannot so easily do what you have promised, replied my Master. I answered to him, that I was much mistaken if I had not found out a way to bring him to consent to things more 
 contrary to his Interest than what he had proposed. He was desi∣rous to know; I told him the Plot, and wish'd him to put it speedily in execution; for diffi∣cult Causes require a stout resolu∣tion, and a great diligence. My Master found my Discourse so reasonable, and the Design so probable, that he began to em∣brace me, and promised my free∣dom his return to 
Argiers,
 in case he should be successful in this business; he proceeded in it as I perswaded him, in this man∣ner: The Prince of 
Angad,
 who is honoured with the Title of 
Sul∣tan,
 had a Nephew Heir to his Estate and Fortune, of a great Courage, and of as great Am∣bition; the People had for him a particular respect, because his Father had sacrificed his Life for the publick Good, and because 
 he had an insinuating presence, that did command both Love and Reverence from all that did be∣hold him; he was besides grown very popular, setting his Genius, his Inclinations and Actions to the temper of every one; which Carriage did wonderfully win unto him the esteem of all the 
Arabs;
 his Name was 
Zidi Hamed Hochbush.
 Since my Masters ar∣rival in these parts, he did often visit him, and delighted much in his Company: I know not whe∣ther he had a design to ingratiate himself by that means with the Garrison of

Climsan,
 or oblige the 
Turks
 to his assistance, in case any thing should be undertaken against him. My Master, accord∣ing to my Advice, bestows upon him at the first Interview, in se∣cret, all the Flatteries & Praises that he was able to express, telling

 him that so noble a Soul was ne∣ver born to be a Subject; that the whole Countrey did love him entirely, as one that was worthy of their homages and re∣spect; that he would do well to look to himself, lest any Diffe∣rence or Jealousie, as is usual in such Occasions, should arise be∣tween him and his Uncle, which might cost him his Head; that it would become the greatness of his Courage and Birth not to stoop to such mean Offices as he was employed about; and that that was done purposely to abase him in the esteem of the People. This Discourse my Master sweet∣ned with strong protestations of his Love and readiness to do him Service, promising to publish his worth among the 
Turks
 his Coun∣treymen.


The young man perceived not 
 my Masters Design, but began to conceive very haughty thoughts of himself and Abilities.


Within a few days after he came to pay my Master a Visit. They both entred into an inner Room, admitting none to enter in to them but my self, and there they fell upon the same di∣scourse: My Master omitted no∣thing, to make him believe that Nature and Providence had de∣signed him for the Throne, as∣soon as he was Born. As we had before determined to give him a 
Regalio,
 my Master sent for three Leathern Bottles of Wine, that I had secretly conveyed a∣mongst his Baggage, and brought to

Bedtua;
 for the 
Turks
 conscience may drink Wine privately with∣out a Dispensation: The Young-Man had never tasted such a Li∣quor in his Daies before, for 
 although they have in that Coun∣try abundance of Grapes, they have lost the use of Wine: How pleasing therefore this reception was to him, may be easily ima∣gined.


My Master continued in his Hypocrisie, and protested, that out of a sincere respect for him, he did offer this rarity to him: The Young-Man was soon hot with a little of this Liquor; it made him reveal unto my Master several Intrigues, that were not unuseful unto him afterwards; but the chiefest Operation of this Wine, was, when he met with the Prince his Uncle, who began to chide him for some un∣decent action that he had done, he then fell into such a Passion, that all imagined him to be Mad; the Prince cast a Lance at him, and had he not declined the 
 Blow, he had there ended his daies, and frustrated our de∣sign.


There grew such hatred im∣mediately between them, that they could not suffer the sight of one another: The Prince did not dare to cast him into Prison, because of the People; and the Nephew would never trust him for the future.


The dissention was increased daily by false Friends, who do advantage and please themselves with the ruin of others: At last, the Young Nephew grew very jealous of his Uncles Designs, and began to meditate an Escape out of his Dominions: My Ma∣ster perswaded him not to delay, but speedily to fly for his Life; for if it were once suspected, his Uncle would not be retained by any consideration from depri∣ving

 him of his Liberty, it may be with his life; for that end he gave him a Horse, an excellent Courser that he had brought with him: He made haste to∣wards the Borders with a few fol∣lowers, where he raised the Coun∣try, that came in to his assistance; so that within a few days he ap∣peared at the head of 10000 men. News came daily of some Parties that did join with them, and at last we heard how the 
Turks
 of

Argeirs
 were resolv'd to assist him were not their Demands granted.


My Master began to take his leave assoon as this was reported in the Town: The Prince to prevent it, offered him his De∣mands, and loaded him with Ci∣vilities; for he foresaw the dread∣ful consequence that would en∣sue if he offered to offend the 
Turks,
 and if they did counte∣nance 
 his Nephew in his Rebelli∣on, it might prove the ruine of Himself and Kingdom; there∣fore to engage them to his Inte∣rest, which was the most just, he courted my Master, their Ambas∣sador, with all expressions of kindness; our Lodgings were al∣ways full of Courtiers, and eve∣ry day we did feel and see some Tokens of the Princes Kindness or Fear.


This part of the Countrey be∣gan to be in no little apprehensi∣on at first; but when my Master had received full satisfaction, he setled their minds with the assu∣rance that the

Turks
 were too honest to approve of the Ne∣phews Rebellion against an Un∣kle: Yet such was my Masters kindness for the young man, that he mediated for him, and obliged the Prince to invite him again to

 his Duty, and pardon his Of∣fences; which he accepted of willingly, when he heard how we had promised to lend our suc∣cours to his Unkle, in case he should remain obstinate in the pursuance of his wicked De∣sign. He quickly return'd to Court, and was there received with a jealous Countenance, that had always an Eye upon him and his Actions: The fond Love the People had conceived for him sa∣ved his Life; for none did dare to attempt to injure him that was so dear to every one.


The young mans confidence upon the Peoples Affection made him more impertinent than o∣therwise he would have been: It made him appear more bold to oppose his Unkle, and more negligent in his Duty towards him.


When we had our Dispatches, we left him to his own Fortune, and return'd again to 
Climsan,
 to the great satisfaction of all the City, who did hope to reap no small advantage from this Nego∣tiation. My Master had the ho∣nour of it, although it was ef∣fected by my Contrivance. He ever after employed me in his difficult Affairs, and admitted me into his private Council; An Ho∣nour that a Slave could never ex∣pect from the 
Turks
 Severi∣ty.


We made some stay in this Ci∣ty of 
Climsan,
 in which time I took notice of many Particulars of the several manners of Execu∣tion, which are these; 
Empasing,
 They thrust a sharp Stake into the Body of the Criminal, which enters in between their Legs, and appears again at their Mouth▪ 
 This is their usual way of treating notable Robbers, and Fellows that have acted against the Go∣vernment: It is cruel and in∣humane; for it puts the Patient to a long Pain when the Stake hath escap'd the Heart, and some of the more sensible Parts: Some I have seen alive near six hours in this manner.


Those that commit Adultery, or that attempt any thing against the Lives of them whom they should defend, are cast headlong down a Precipice, at the bottom whereof sharp Stakes are erected to welcome them, and dispatch them into another World. I have heard sad Groans and Out∣cries from such that have been thus executed.


There is another manner of Execution, not usual in our Cli∣mates; when any have commit∣ted 
 Sacriledge, or done any Acti∣on to the dishonour of 
Mahomet,
 or the Religion professed in this place, they poure scalding Lead into his Mouth, which sinks in with a horrible Smoke, and burns the Throat to the Entrails: I ne∣ver heard any give the least shrick; for the burning Metal consumes all before it, and causes the Wind-pipe to shrink.


Others are exposed to the cru∣elty of the Children, who with sharp Sticks and Canes do prick them to death, that they might accustom these young Spirits to Blood and Wounds, that when they grow to age they might less abhor it. I have seen them take a great delight to thrust their sharp Reeds into the Sides and Back of the poor Criminal, who is not able to defend himself, but with his Tongue; for his Hands

 and Legs are tyed in such a man∣ner as he may only walk. It is a very pitiful Spectacle to see a poor Creature bleed out his Soul through so many Wounds. The sportful Outcries and Voices of the Children do hinder the dying men from being heard. Some of them continue alive many hours, sprinkling their blood wherever they crawl.


There is here another as strange an Execution as the for∣mer; In the great Market place of the City a brazen Lion stands, hollow within, with a grim and threatning Countenance, at his Side a Door opens, which is made to receive those that are to be executed in that manner. They are persons that are guilty of some horrid Crimes, and that have offended the Publick in a grievous manner. To recom∣pense 
 them therefore by their Deaths, they execute them thus, that they that have been useless in their Lives, may give some sport at least at their going out of the world to the People; they are shut into this new Inven∣tion, and a Fire of Wood is kindled under it, which by de∣grees, as it heats the Brass, it puts them to a greater torture: The pain forces them to complain and cry out.


Now at the Mouth, Ears, and under the Tail of the Lion are holes artificially made, out of which the Complaints and Cries of the Patient do burst forth through different Windings and Turnings, in such a manner that several Voices, or rather Tunes, are framed one after another; for the Cry is longer a coming out of the Tail than the Ears, and 
 so of the Mouth: Besides, the vari∣ety of Cries yields a pleasant and a various sound to the Ears of the Spectators. This cruel sport continues many times a whole day, to divert the people; for at the Judges pleasure they kin∣dle a lesser or a greater Fire, which causes the Patient to die accordingly. I could never learn the Author of this inhumane En∣gine which hath been died with so much blood; for during my three years abode in that place, I saw above twenty cast into that Oven. A Woman, a Child and a Man were put in together; for it is very large: Their Crime was that they had attempted to kill our Governour, by the sol∣licitation of a 
Morisco
 Prince that hated him. The Woman was to trapan and ensnare him with her Beauty, and convey secretly some 
 poison by that means into his Drink, when she should be ad∣mitted into his Familiarity, and in case that Plot did not succeed, then the man was to stab or shoot him when he could meet him at an advantage. Our old General was not so aged but he had some Reliques of his youthful Inclina∣tions; when therefore he saw her Beautiful Eyes, large and full of Spirits, he laboured to get into her more intimate Acquaintance, thinking to meet there with a perfect happiness; he employed such means as he quickly compas∣sed his Design, but not to his sa∣tisfaction so much as was expect∣ed; for as they were together, she discovered a Box which she was so desirous to hide from him, that he became suspitious that it might be something that he un∣derstood not: Assoon as he saw 
 it, he judged it to be poison; but to be more assured, he tried it upon a Dog, which suffered the strength of it instead of his Ma∣ster, and died within an hour af∣ter the taking of it. The Wo∣man confessed her design, and that her Husband was one that intended to perform what she had failed to do, in another man∣ner. They were both taken, with an innocent Boy about twelve years of Age, and all three con∣demned together; the Child on∣ly because he had such desperate and wicked Parents, to imprint a greater terror into the minds of such Offenders for the fu∣ture: There was no regard had to Innocency it self: The poor Child was forced to accompany his Parents in Death, as well as in the pursuance of their unlaw∣ful Design. Their different Voices

 and cries did yield a most pleasant although a cruel Harmony, which was not ungrateful to the 
Turks,
 who never pity the

Moors.


They use in this City strang∣ling as well as the

Turks
 in other places, and Drowning with a Stone tied to the neck, executing by Beasts, by the Sword, and such other sorts of Death, common in other places.


Besides, there is another man∣ner of executing Offenders pro∣per to this place, which I never heard to be practised in any o∣ther. It is as cruel as it is strange to us. Out of the Town is planted a high Post in form of a Cross, upon which the Offender is laid; they first strip him na∣ked and cut out his Tongue, then they stretch him on the Post that lies across, and tye him to it both by his hands and feet: thus they

 expose him to the fury of the ravenous Birds, that soon smell him out. The Eagles and Vul∣tures do dispatch him in less than a day: The poor Creature lies at their mercy; he sees them fix their sharp Bills in his flesh, and pluck out his Heart, not being able to resist them; he sees him∣self become a Prey to the Birds of the Air; which cannot but trouble him, to behold such base Creatures feed themselves with his Flesh, and insult over him, without the least respect to his humanity. It is observed, that the Eagles seek first for the Heart; they tear up the Brest till they have found it, without any regard to the rest of the Body, until that be devoured. Sometimes Twenty of these great Birds are seen at one time upon a poor Man, for this part

 of the world is full of them. It is a sight that may move any bo∣dies compassion, but that of the 
Turks,
 to see one of the same na∣ture thus torn and ript up by these cruel Birds: I was never so much concern'd at any thing in my life as I was at it: Had I not feared the Censure of the Law, I had ventured to protect the mi∣serable Body of one poor man from the those ravenous Birds; but it is no less than death to hin∣der the Execution of the Judges Sentence.


The lesser Offences are punish∣ed in a milder manner, but in such, as renders the persons lame, and disables them from all bu∣siness for a long time after; the 
Bastinado
 either upon the Back, the Belly, or the Soles of the Feet, is very common upon any light occasion. The cutting off 
 of the Ears, Nose, and other na∣tural Ornaments of the Body is usual.


Besides, they brand others in the Forehead with a Character signifying the Crime that they have committed.


They imprison some, and de∣tain them long at a short allow∣ance of Bread and Water to tame their spirits. In this City, be∣sides the 
Turkish
 Governour that commands the Castle, there is in the Town a Magistrate called an 
Alcalde,
 an 
Arabian
 born, subject to the 
Turks
 Power, who amongst the Citizens does Justice to eve∣ry one: He is assisted by nine cho∣sen out of the nine parts of the Town; all together do sit upon the publick Business: The plura∣lity of Voices alwaies carries it. They judge of all matters be∣longing to the Towns-people, as 
 


 
 
 the Governour doth of the Mi∣litia.


The Countrey round about is very fruitful of all sorts of Corn; for it is Champaign Ground, wa∣tered with many fresh water Sources and pleasant Rivulets: Here is abundance of Wheat, Barley, Rice, 
&c.
 for Oats, they grow Wild in the places that are not Ploughed; every Spring cau∣seth the Roots to shoot out, and produce again this Grain; for the heat of the Summer renders all things unfruitful, as the humi∣dity of the Winter doth restore unto them their native fertility.


The Commodities of this Place are many; the ordinary, are Oyl, Ginger, Silk, Raisins, a Stuff made of the Barks of Trees, which the Inhabitants cause to be Dyed in all sorts of Colours; Balm, which is here of such an 
 excellent nature, that it is a so∣veraign Remedy to all Wounds, within the space of four and twenty hours it closeth and heals a Cut in the Flesh. Here is also many sorts of Drugs, which our Merchants fetch from the 
Indies,
 with vast Cost and Labour. In some places here is a golden Sand, which, if any industrious People did see and enjoy it, I think they might reduce it to true Gold, by refining all the sandy and drossy part; but the Inha∣bitants make little use of it.


In the Desert Places of this Kingdom, are great quantity of Creatures, whose skin makes the excellent Buff; they are about the bigness of an Ox, without a∣ny Joints at their Feet, therefore they can hardly rise when they fall; they run very swiftly: The Inhabitants take them in this man∣ner; 
 They observe the place where these Beasts do rub them∣selves; if it be a Tree, they cut the Stump, and prop it up in such a manner that it stands up, ready to fall at the least violence; when these Beasts come to their usual place, they rub according to their custome, leaning themselves a∣gainst the broken Tree, which falls, and they after it. Here are other sorts of beasts ordina∣ry in our Climates: Tigers are here of an extraordinary bigness, with Leopards, wild Asses, wild Horses with a tumor in their fore∣head that is hard; which may have occasioned the Fable of the Unicorn; for in some it shoots out in such a manner that it ap∣pears like unto a Horn of a white Colour, of a Cubit long. The Horses are all either white or black: The 
Moors
 name them

Bou∣chicoughs.
 
 I never saw any tam'd. They are so swift in running that no Horse can follow them; some∣times they are surprized when they come near the inhabited Countrey, and are kill'd with Guns, but it is a difficult business to catch them alive; their young ones are very wild and swift, and are of a ruddy colour until they come to be a year old.


There is here a great number of Ostriches; it is a notable bird, that runs and flies very speedily; no Creature is able to keep pace with it. Many extraordinary things are reported of it. The Countrey people say that they do sometimes find their Nests in the Sands: They make them in this manner; they scrape a round Pit as large as their body, where they place their Eggs in order. They lay above a hundred before 
 they cause them to bring forth, not in a heap, but in several ranks; the Sun-beams warm them and cause them to burst forth in∣to birds; the Mother-Ostrich o∣verlooks them, and when the first laid Eggs are become birds, she takes the farthermost Eggs to feed them until they come of age and strength to walk alone. It is a Creature that is careless of her Fruit until they are birds, and then she nourishes them with care, giving equally to all, shew∣ing thereby her Justice. She is a bird very temperate, content with a small quantity of food, and able to digest the hardest sub∣stance, as Iron, Steel, and Stones.


Near the City is a Fountain of a strange nature; it yields a plentiful Stream, when the Moon is in its Full, then the Water is

 boiling hot; but it cools by de∣grees as the Moon decreases, and becomes extream cold when it is the last day; the Stream also be∣coming lesser or greater accor∣dingly. When any are troubled with the Gout or any other Dis∣ease in the Limbs, they repair thither from all parts to be washt in that Water, that is brackish. I have known many that have been cured in the Bath that is joining to it, by washing them∣selves several days in the full Moon.


One thing more renders this Place famous all over the Coun∣trey, and causeth people from all parts to resort to it: Here is the Tomb of a great 
Hage,
 not much inferiour to 
Mahomet
 in the esteem of this People, as much respected by all that fancy to have received any benefit from 
 their Pilgrimages hither. Men or Women that are troubled with Issues of blood, Agues, Tu∣mors, Dropsies, and many other Diseases, do take a great deal of pains to come and pay their Re∣spects to the Coffin of this old Saint, renowned in his Life time for Physick, and after his Death, the 
Moors
 have fancied that his bones and Reliques had some ex∣traordinary virtue contained in them, which they seek to be par∣takers of by their Devotions in this place. So easie a thing it is to perswade the Ignorant Multi∣tude to Superstition: When men are esteemed for some extra∣ordinary qualities, the People fancy that these qualities do yet accompany them in their graves, that they are inseparable from their bodies. The Heathen I∣dols were increased by this means 
 to that vast Army of Gods, and 
Rome
 hath fill'd her Oratories with an innumerable company of petty Saints by this Expedient; for it is ordinary in the Popish Dominions to make them pass for Saints that have excelled in any particular Art or Knowledge, when that Generation is dead that hath been acquainted with the Vices and Weaknesses of the De∣ceased.


Besides, there is at a League distant from the City, towards the East, the Ruines of an old Tower, and about it a large Cave, where, as the People of the Town report, are frequent Appearances of Devils and evil Spirits that disturb the Passen∣gers at certain Seasons of the Year; some told me that there∣abouts was kept the Witches Sab∣baoth, a general Meeting of 
 those desperate Souls that own the Devils Power. It is believ∣ed by the people that this place is dangerous in the night, al∣though I never saw any thing worse than my self when I have past that way, going about my Masters business in all times of the day and night. But when such kind of Reports are im∣printed into the Fancy of the People, the least testimony of a timorous person that hears the shaking of a Leaf is able to con∣firm them in that belief, and no∣thing can remove it out of their minds. I do not doubt but some Appearances have been of Evil Spirits; none but a Phantastick Sadducee is able to deny this Truth that hath all Ages to con∣firm it; but we must not be of so light a belief as to credit all the idle Reports of Appearances 
 of Devils which fly amongst the vulgar sort of people.


In this City of 
Tremisen
 or 
Clim∣san
 we made our abode longer than my Master at first designed; but his good Services to them of 
Argiers
 deserved no less than a grateful acknowledgement, by advancing him to a higher, em∣ployment, such as might reward him.


At the return of the year, when the 
Turks
 Army came to re∣lieve us, my Master had order to be Lieutenant Governour of the City, and to remain still as long as he should judge it convenient for his Interest. This place proved very beneficial to him, because he had the Com∣mand of the Parties that did march out in the Fields to plun∣der upon the Enemy; and when the Governour was pleased to go 
 out himself towards the Borders, my Master had the Governours small Fees, that did amount to a considerable sum in such a large City. During this time that we dwelt in this place several nota∣ble Affairs happened, which may claim a part in this Relation: The unconstant 
Arabians
 did often rise and trouble our peace, by their frequent Incursions; the King of

Fez,
 made an Inroad as far as our City with a con∣siderable Body of Horse, thinking to surprize it unawares. Several other Princes were troublesome to us, obliging our people to un∣usual Tributes and Customes when they passed through their Countrey; for this City enter∣tains a great Trade with the In∣land people, and with the 
Blacks.
 It was therefore the 
Turks
 inte∣rest to entertain it, and remove

 all Obstructions wich might hin∣der a free Intercourse: For that intent we had several troublesom Businesses both Warlike and Po∣litick, which employed my Ma∣ster all the time of his being there. In the mean whiles I was not idle; I had several Affairs that concerned my private Inte∣rest, and that I was to manage with Care and Industry. The 
Sultan
 of 
Argeirs
 gave a judg∣ment of my Ability and Person, which was not contradicted by the Women with whom I was af∣terwards acquainted.


I had as difficult Encounters, and as strange Adventures that happened to me with them, as my Master had in treating with the

Arabs.
 I was no sooner set∣led in 
Climsan,
 but one of that Sex sought a fair occasion to dis∣cover her Affection to me.


I was very wary how I entertain∣ed any such Proposition; for I was affraid of my Masters Cun∣ning, or any other Plot which might be set on foot to drive me to a necessity of turning

Mahu∣metan;
 for I was often impor∣tun'd by my Master, and invited with the promise of my Liberty, in case I would renounce Christi∣anity; but I could never consent to so much weakness, nor to act against so much Light God had discovered to me in his Truth. I was therefore affraid that all addresses that were made to me of that nature were but Designes to ensnare me, and oblige me to Apostacie. I did not accept of so fair opportunities as were of∣fered to me, which created me a great deal of trouble; for those persons became my deadly Ene∣mies, they sought all occasions

 to do me mischief: Angered Love turns into deadly hatred. The first whose Caresses I was to suffer was the Wife of a wealthy Citizen of 
Climsan;
 her Husband was old and decrepit, and she very young, and therefore more pardonable if she sought satisfa∣ction abroad, when she could not find it at home. I was often sent to her House for things that my Master wanted; there she began to be acquainted with me.


The Women in this Countrey keep much at home, but their Minds and Affections are more wandring abroad, because they are so recluse; whereas if they had as much liberty as in other Countries, they would not be so furiously debauch'd: Their Husbands also keep such strict guard over them, that when they can escape their Eyes, they 
 give the reins to their Passion, and labour to satisfie themselves more abundantly; stoln waters are sweet: The more they are forbidden and hindered from variety, the more pleasure and satisfaction they fancy in it.


It is not to be imagined what tricks and invention this Woman had to draw me into her Retire∣ment: She began to declare her kindness by offering unto me some presents when I came to her Dwelling: I never went but she gave me something to carry back for my self, discoursing with me very freely when her Hus∣band was not in the way. I did not know unto what period this growing passion might rise, nor what sad consequences might fol∣low; therefore I did shun her company as much as I could: Still she laboured to win me with her 
 Kindness. At one time her Hus∣band being not at home, assoon as I was entred she discovered her face unto me, and took me by the hand to lead me into a private Room; I followed her, not thinking at that present of her meaning; we were no soon∣er entred, but without fear or shame she began to wooe me with all the Expressions of tenderness imaginable. I was in a little trou∣ble and haste, and not willing to submit: My resistance did yet more enflame her; whiles we were thus disputing, she to per∣swade me, and I to disswade her, in steps her Husband in the other Room next to us; his sudden ar∣rival scared us both; for we had not escaped his jealous Fury, had he seen me in so private a place with his Wife; but there was no time to deliberate, nor way 
 to escape but through the Door; the danger therefore made her ingenious, and find out this Ex∣pedient; she rose from me, and with a chearful Countenance meets her Husband at the Door, taking him by the hand, 
Ziddi, Ziddi,
 saith she, 
I am glad you are come home, in the Back-side of our house is the strangest thing that ever you saw,
 and with that led him to see a Beast that my Master had sent him, whilst I escaped a∣nother way, glad to have saved my life. This danger could not make the Woman wise; she yet continued her Love unto me, for∣cing me many times into the greatest Inconveniences, because of her doting Husband, that did surprize us talking together in a too familiar manner. She did still importune me with her Kindness, and by that means the old Fool 
 began to be so affraid of me that he was ready to stab me. I de∣clared the business to my Master, and made him the Confident of that Love. He began to admire my Continency and good For∣tune, and desired me, if I were so reserved, that I would pleasure him by giving him a favourable Meeting with that Lady; for it seems he was grown amorous of her; but her fair Face, which made her be esteemed the great∣est Beauty of the City, made her Husband to watch over her day and night, for fear she should tast of forbidden Fruit. My Master was glad at this discove∣ry, he grumbled at me that I had not sooner declared it unto him, assuring me that I might have been more confident with him: I excused my self, and told him that had I known his pleasure, he

 should have been already satisfi∣ed. I promised to serve him faithfully in this business, in case he would appease the fury of her jealous Husband, who did threat∣en me with death if I came near his house; he engaged to do it, which accordingly he performed; so that I was admitted again into the Citizens dwelling, and had there the same freedom as before. The Womans passion was not sca∣red with her Husbands Displea∣sure and Jealousie; she still con∣tinued her kindness to me: I began for my Masters sake to be more tractable; I promised her full satisfaction, but told her that I did not dare to venture into her House; she offered me any other Rendezvous; I mentioned my Masters House unto her; she promised to find some Expedient to escape thither within a day or 
 two; I took my leave of her, sealing my Affection in the woot∣ed manner, which she accepted of with those transports of joy that become a passionate Lover. I left her full of hopes and expe∣ctation, meditating upon some Expedient how to procure unto her self a safe escape, free from the suspition of her jealous Hus∣band; a thing very difficult to find, because Jealousie hath a hundred Eyes, and many times where they should not be; the least step abroad would but in∣crease the trouble of the doating Fool, especially if she was seen to come in sight of the Castle.


In the House, besides himself, was an old Woman, and other people apt to tell Tales of one Renowned for that they would willingly have. Envy in such cases is apt to speak and invent 
 more than is agreeable to Truth. The Ladies Love was not fright∣ed with all these difficulties; it found out a way to satisfie its self: As her Husband was at Supper with her, she infused into his Drink the Juice of an Herb that provoketh to sleep. After the repast they went to their rest, sending their Servants also to theirs, she had been careful to take into her custody the Keys of the Door. The poor man was no sooner upon his Quilt with this amorous Woman, but he fell into a dead sleep; in the mean whiles, she rises, and comes with all speed up to the Castle: My Master having been acquain∣ted with all that had passed be∣tween us, had given order to the Sentinel, not to examine too ex∣actly one in a womans habit that should come at such an hour. 
 She found the Guard very fa∣vourable to her, and my Masters Lodging far more; for he was prepared to receive her with as much civillity as she did desire: She quickly returned muffled up, and laid her self down by her drowsie Husband, as if nothing had passed to his prejudice.


When Women once lose their honesty, nothing can keep them from that pleasure which they fancy so sweet. This Woman having found so good entertain∣ment at the first, was resolved to make a second tryal of our Kindness. She continued to vi∣sit us, as often as her industry could find an escape, until the Old Mans furious Jealousie dis∣abled her from walking abroad.


Had my design been to make Conquests in the Empire of Love, I think none could have 
 been more happy. When a Man is got into the esteem of Women, his Fame rests not in one or two Breasts, but speaks as loud, and with as many tongues as these prating Crea∣tures. The old Citizens Wife had whispered some of her se∣crets to her intimate Acquaint∣ance, and they to others, so that this good opinion of my Ability spread & increased wonderfully in the Town; it created me ma∣ny temptations, and no little trou∣ble to avoid them. Had I been unconstant in Religion, I had made great advantage in this place of the Womens Kindness to me; but here I could not fix without Apostacy, which was too big a Morsel for my Consci∣ence to swallow. That which was the most powerful temptati∣on, was offered to me by a rich 
 Heiress, widow to a former Hus∣band, of the most considerable amongst the Citizens; she sent to know from my Master whether he would part with me for any Money; he answered, that he could not sell me because I had deserved my Freedom, and that he had promised it unto me. When Gold (which finds in ma∣ny places but a faint resistance) would not do, another Expedi∣ent was set on foot; a Gentle∣man, or an 
Arabian Zidi
 addrest himself to my Master and me se∣verally, telling us his business in short, That there was a rich Wi∣dow, no less handsom, without Charge of Children, that was desirous to make me her Hus∣band, and to give me all her E∣state if I would become 
Mahume∣tan,
 and remain in that place. My Master hearkened to this 
 Proposition for the Love he had for me, & began to exaggerate my good Fortune, and the happiness that was offered to me, wishing me to accept of it, and not to suffer so great a loss for the Fan∣cy of Religion. My first Reso∣lution was to despise all these Of∣fers, and to prefer the Life of a Slave with Honour, and my Re∣ligion before the greatest Riches and the most pleasant Life: I remained still in it. All my Masters perswasions could not shake me from it, when I consi∣dered within my self such an acti∣on, to deny my Saviour that re∣deemed me, to despise his Bloud, to renounce all interest in him, to abjure his Truth, that I knew to be such, and own an Impostor 
(Mahomet);
 to prefer him and his Diabolical Religion before that which Christ hath establish∣ed,

 this action appeared unto me with such an horrid Aspect that I was frighted from the very thoughts of it: All the Advan∣tages proposed to me, the vast Riches & Revenues could make no Impression upon my spirit; I foresaw also that if I ever did in∣gage my self in that Countrey by espousing so great an interest in it, I should with more difficulty bring to pass my escape, and that instead of purchasing my Liber∣ty at such a dear rate, I should but enslave my self more, and in such a manner, that there would be small hopes left of seeing a∣gain my Native Soil. These Considerations preserved my mind from this powerful temp∣tation, that wanted not Art, In∣dustry and Power to second it; but when my Master saw my dis∣position, and how unpleasing the

 change of Religion was to me, he desired them never to mention unto me such a matter again. He would never after suffer any such Proposition to be made to me, wishing that I might live and die in it. By that I perceived that he was inclined to favour Christi∣an Religion, and that Renegades are never grateful to the 
Turks,
 although they embrace their Pro∣fession; Unconstancy and Infide∣lity are odious to them also that receive a benefit by the Traitors. My refusal did disappoint the

Moorish
 Lady, but did not put a stop to her proceedings; she imagined all the ways possible to enjoy what she so passionately desired. She contrived the means to speak to me her self privately; she laboured to trepan me, and drive me to a necessity of burn∣ing or turning, hoping to obtain 
 more easily her end; but all was in vain: I had constancy enough, and was sufficiently wary, to fru∣strate all her undertakings.


When she saw her self disap∣pointed of all her hopes, which she had conceived from the for∣mer means employed to woe me, she gave not over; her Passion was more enflamed with this stout resistance, she there∣fore resolved to find out some other way, to know the truth of what was reported of me: A Curiosity that cost us both much trouble and hazzard of Life.


The correspondency that she aimed at was dangerous, with∣out something to excuse and hide it from the Eyes of the World; the best Cloak was Marriage, which seeing she could not ob∣tain with me, was resolved to take some other that might be 
 favourable to her Passion, and give it the liberty of satisfying it self; for that intent she addresses her self to a poor man of that place, descended from good Pa∣rentage of the 
Moors,
 but his Fortunes were not answerable to his Nobility; several Misfortunes had reduced him to almost a beg∣ging condition, and he had lately lost by death his Wife, which during her life he was scarce able to maintain. The 
Morisco
 Lady acquaints him by a trusty Friend with her good inclinations for him, and appoints unto him both the place and time to speak with him further about this business; he joyfully accepts of the Assig∣nation, hoping by this means to redeem himself and Children from extream poverty and Bon∣dage: At the time he comes to the place, and there meets with 
 the Lady, who having dismissed all other Company & Witnesses, freely discovers unto him her Af∣fection for me, and my ungrate∣ful Repulse, and her Resolution to bestow her self and Means up∣on such a Husband that would not search too narrowly into her Actions, but that would give her the liberty of receiving the Vi∣sits of those persons that she lo∣ved passionately. The poor man saw that what was proposed to him was offensive to his Ho∣nour, but advantageous to his Purse. In the condition he was in he could not reasonably refuse the Offer, although it was pre∣judicial to his Credit; he was therefore willing to become a Cuckold to enjoy the Riches of this Widow, hoping after Mar∣riage to behave himself with her in such a manner, that he would 
 reclaim her from those idle and unlawful fancies: The Conditi∣on was agreed to, and all things concluded on; the Marriage was performed with as much secrecy and with as little Ceremony as was possible. When it came to the knowledge of her Friends, they laboured to divert her from it, but she was so obstinately resolved, that nothing could hin∣der her from her design; which was no sooner accomplished, but she laboured to find the oppor∣tunity she sought after: Her Husband kept not his word with her; he fell into a fit of Jea∣lousie, that would neither suf∣fer her to see the Air, nor me to come near her Dwelling; so that she was forced to use her wit, to get what she had bar∣gained for. When the Fool grew rich, he forgot his Benefactor,

 and remembred no more his en∣gagement to her, never to di∣sturb and persecute her for Acti∣ons of Gallantry and Pleasure. He seldom met me in the streets, but he sought all occasions to stab and shoot me, daring not to vent his anger upon her, be∣cause of her powerful Friends, that were not pleased with the unequal Match.


Whiles I remained in this place, I have run several other misfortunes; many other per∣sons did desire to be acquainted with me: I was once so troubled with addresses, that I wished my Face had been disfigured, my stature more contemptible, and that all the promising Characters of my person had never appeared in me: At last, I made my Pa∣tron privy to all my Affairs; his favour did wonderfully protect

 me: None did dare to make any attempt upon my person, when he had published the kindness he had for me; otherwise I had ne∣ver returned from this City, but had left my Bones amongst these Heathens. It is true, I did him sometimes the favour to cause him to share with me in my good Fortune, and furthered the sa∣tisfaction of his Inclinations, an Office not ungrateful to an old Lover, that hath scarce any thing acceptable in him, but the desire of well doing.


During this time that we did spend in 
Climsan,
 an accident happened that caused us to make another Journey into the Coun∣trey with about 1500 men. The King of 
Fez, Bembouker
 by name, had sent out a Party to stop a Caravan of 
Turks
 and 
Blacks,
 that brought a considerable 
 quantity of Gold from the In∣land Countrey to our City: There were near about thirty Cammels loaden with Gold, and other Commodities of 
Guiny:
 It seems the Merchants were jea∣lous of the intentions of the 
A∣rabs
 about 
Fez,
 and therefore had divided their Caravan, and sent six Cammels one way, with the most contemptible part of the Goods, carrying the rest by another, that whiles they did seize upon the lesser part, the greater might escape out of their Territories.


We had notice that a Party was upon the Road to wait for this Booty: Our Governour pre∣sently dispatch'd my Master with 1500 men, well armed, to watch them. We could not make such speed, but they had before our arrival taken the six Cammels 
 loaden, and were driving them another way to 
Fez;
 assoon as we heard of this News, we fol∣lowed them, and about ten Leagues on this side of 
Fez,
 in the ascent of a Mountain we o∣vertook them; my Master was obliged in honour not to let them escape out of his hands, but to fight them, although they were far more in number than the 
Turks;
 he therefore thought it his safest course to advance before them by a secret way, and lay an Ambuscado at the Descent of the Mountain, where a large Wood did stretch it self along the sides of the next Plain; we therefore took a small compass about undiscovered; for they marched very secure, not dream∣ing that we had intelligence of all their Designes. We arrived to the place before them; my 
 Master disposed of his Compa∣nies in several convenient places in the Woods, and as the 
Arabs
 came up to the middle of us, we then gave them a Salute with our Shot from both sides of the way, whiles a party of our men that was behind, did rise up from the place by which the 
Arabs
 had passed, and came riding in all speed to them. The Fight was desperate and bloody; for al∣though they were surprized, they held out a longer while than we could imagin, charging us again and again, until there came up two fresh Companies of choice Foot, that met them in the way that they were to pass. They were no sooner perceived by the 
Arabs,
 but they began to faint, and think of a Retreat; for they were afraid to be inclosed; there∣fore they all joined in a close Bo∣dy, 
 resolving to break through those small Numbers that lay in their way; our men divided themselves on both sides, and as they passed, they arrested about a hundred of these lusty Robbers, that fell to the ground half dead with the shot that had wounded them. About 60 of our men lost their Lives, and about 300 
Arabians
 left us their Horses and Cloathing for Legacies, with our own Goods that they had taken. Our Horse pursued the Enemy, but not very far for fear of a like Ambuscado; the Countrey being proper for such Tricks and Sratagems of War. They brought back with them wounded some Prisoners, and a few Horses. We enquired from the 
Blacks
 & two of our Merchants what was be∣come of the rest of the Compa∣ny; for we had heard how they 
 had separated the 
Caravan;
 they informed us of the By-way they had taken, resolved to die rather than to quit their Goods: They were in number about 300 men that came with the Camels. My Master sent all that he had recovered to 
Climsan
 with a small Guard, conducting them part of the way as far as 
Gorselveh,
 a small Town about ten miles di∣stant from 
Climsan.


We then marched back again with all the rest of our men, to meet the other part of our 
Ca∣ravan
 that was come to the Bor∣ders of the Province of 
Segelmes,
 by a secret way unknown to ma∣ny persons. They could never come so secretly but the 
Arabs,
 (some were of those we had beat∣en) did lie in wait for them, ho∣ping to meet with better Fortune 
 than in the former Encounters, and to recompense themselves for their late Losses.


Our men did defend them∣selves desperately; but had we not opportunely appeared to their Assistance, they had been overpowered with the Numbers of 
Arabs
 & 
Moors.
 We no sooner appeared among them, which was in a Valley, watered with some Branches of the River called now by the Inhabitants 
Soubhir.
 Our People were on the other side of the River, and the 
Moors
 and 
A∣rabs
 on this, between both was a little Ford easie to pass. The Dispute had been long when we arrived; for the Enemy did of∣fer to pass, and our men did re∣sist them.


Our coming ended the Con∣tention; for they no sooner saw us appear, but they fled away in 
 all haste. We contented our selves to have preserved our Goods, we did not therefore pur∣sue them, but marched towards 
Climsan,
 where our Arrival was joyfully expected; for here all the chief persons of the Town were interessed. This 
Caravan
 did enrich us, and fill the City with plenty of Gold, Ivory and other Commodities, which were conveyed to 
Argeirs
 and other places on the Sea-Coast, to be transported by Sea to

Constantino∣ple.


My Master and the Chief of the Party that went out, were well rewarded for their pains; the rest did share amongst them the Horses that were taken from the 
Arabs,
 and their Cloaths, which were prized at a great sum of Money. My Master had the honour of the good success; for 
 every one did attribute it to his wise Conduct and Valour. My Company was not unuseful to him; for besides the Service I did render him in the first En∣gagement, I saved him when he was in no little danger of his life; had I not been near to assist him, doubtless he had been sent to convey the dead into the other world. He acknowledged my Care and Love for him by his continual Kindness for me; for he did not treat me as a Slave, but as a Friend, granting me as much Liberty as I could de∣sire.


After this Expedition we re∣mained about a year in

Climsan,
 during which time several Acci∣dents hapned; the great

Mosque
 of the City fell to the ground by a terrible Earthquake, and frighted the rest of the City; a 
 few Houses joining to this Reli∣gious place with their Inhabitants were buried in the Ruines.


Two Stars of a good bigness flew over the City; they were followed by several other little Lights; they met all toge∣ther in one point, and made a great Star, that hung over the City about three days: The Astrologers and Negromancers of the Countrey were consulted about the meaning of these Me∣teors; they all agreed that they were significant and Prophetical. All the little Lights that joined to make a great one, they said were several little Principalities that would unite together to compose a great Monarchy that would not favour the 
Turks
 in those parts.


The Inhabitants are very su∣perstitious when any such Won∣ders 
 do appear in the Firmament; they run to their

Mosquets,
 and fall to their Devotions, neglect∣ing all other business many days; for they never interpret such Signes to their advantage, they look upon them as dreadful fore∣runners of publick Calamities. The people of this place were so much the more concerned, be∣cause these Signes did appear on∣ly to that Region, and did hang over their City in a threatning manner.


Another thing very extraordi∣nary hapned about the same time: A strange Monster was born of a 
Morisco
 Woman; it had the Head of an Ape, the Feet of a Goose, the Body of a Man, the Hands like the Claws of a Lion; many persons went to see it; Several Reports were spread about the Town concern∣ing 
 these unusual Accidents, which terrified the common peo∣ple, susceptible of fear upon the least occasion. Many Dreams also were divulged at the same time by the

Turks
 Enemies con∣cerning the same business, tend∣ing to the destruction of the 
Turks
 Empire in those parts. So that there was likely to be a great Commotion, had not our Governour kept good Orders, and clapt one of these busie Pro∣phets in a deep Dungeon, to ex∣pect his Release from that Pow∣er that was to destroy and drive away the

Turks;
 but the silly Rascal would never expect that Hour; he grew impatient in his Chains, so that he employed se∣veral of his Friends to mediate for him, and procure from our Governour his Liberty, which was granted upon condition that 
 he would be more discreet for the future, and keep his Dreams within the Circumference of his Couch.


Our Governour could not so well order his business, but that the 
Arabs
 (forward enough to catch at all Occasions of ruining the

Turks
) made several Parties in the Territories of this King∣dom, assuring the Inhabitants that now was the time that they should pay no more Taxes to en∣tertain the Pride and Luxury of 
Argiers,
 and that if they would lend their helping hand, it was possible to recover from thence what they had sent from year to year.


Some, as it alwaies happens on such occasions, were so silly to believe them; they formed there∣fore several little Parties up and down; they were inconsiderable 
 separated, but had they been to∣gether, they might have created us much trouble and business. Se∣veral Companies of our Souldiers were sent out to disperse them. The greatest Body was composed of two thousand Horse and Foot met together about six Leagues from 
Climsan,
 at a Town called 
Tezrim,
 which is stony by situati∣on and Art. These had killed some that favoured the 
Turks,
 and were resolved to wait there to see whether any more would hap∣pily join with them.


My Master was sent out with about 1200 men only, but cho∣sen out of the Garrison: We laid siege to this strong place, and at the end of six days it was sur∣rendred to us by Composition. The Conditions imposed were fa∣vourable; the Inhabitants were condemned to deliver up their

 chief Leaders, and part with a Sum of Money. The Leaders were sacrificed to the 
Turks
 ven∣geance, and sent into the other world to raise Tumults there.


One thing I cannot omit very memorable in this place. At some distance from 
Tezrim,
 in a little Meadow where excellent Grass grows, I saw the perfect Stature of a man Buggering his Ass; it was so lively that at a little di∣stance I fancied they had been a∣live, but when I came nearer, I saw they were of a perfect Stone. I enquired wherefore the

Moors
 or 
Arabs,
 that naturally hate all sorts of Representations, should shew their Skill by making such Beastly Figures, odious to Na∣ture. I was informed that this was never made by man, but that some body of former years had been turned into this Representa∣tion

 with the Ass in the very mo∣ment of the Beastly Act. God by his power had changed the fleshly Substances of the Man and of the Ass into a firm Stone, as an eternal reproach to Mankind, and a Justification of his severe Judgments against us.


I did further search into the Appearances of this Report, and found the Stone to represent not only the perfect shape, but also the colour of every part of the Man and of the Beast, with the Sinews, Veins, Eyes, Mouth, in such a lively manner that no Artist with all his Colours could express it better; so that I was convinced of the Truth of this Report. I did labour to move it, but some that were in compa∣ny did forbid me, telling me that some have laboured to transport it from thence, but could never 
 away that Monument of mans shameful Lust: Some have en∣deavoured to their peril; either their Persons or their Cattel, that did attempt it, were struck dead in the place. Gods Justice will not suffer that to be hid or de∣stroyed that he hath placed there for all to example by it. It is necessary that the 
Moors
 should have such signal Tokens of Gods Displeasure always before their Eyes; for they are enraged to commit such filthy Actions more frequently than other Nations.


 I was informed by some of my Acquaintance that have been at 
Tripoly,
 that there is some such Monument of Gods Justice near that Town about five days Jour∣ney from it, towards the South-East 
 amongst the Mountains cal∣led 
Gubel,
 far more notable than this. Many of our

English
 protest they have seen some pieces of it brought by the 
Moors
 to 
Tripoly,
 and heard it confidently reported in Town as an undeniable Truth. Some of our Merchants have had the Curiosity to have gone to that place, and they also protest it to be true, that in the Moun∣tains about five days Journey from 
Tripoly
 there is a whole Town full of these Representa∣tions; stones representing all manner of Creatures belonging to a City, with the Houses, In∣habitants, Beasts, Trees, Walls, and Rooms, very distinctly shap'd. Our people have entered into the Houses, and there they have found a Child in a Cradle, of stone; a Woman in a Bed, of stone; a man at the Door look∣ing 
 Lice, of stone; Camels in several postures, of stone; a man beating a Woman, of stone; two men fighting, of stone; Cats, Dogs, Mice, and all that belong∣ed to the place of such perfect stone, and so well expressing the several Shapes, Postures and Passions in which the Inhabitants were in that time, that no En∣graver could do the like. Some may look upon this Relation as Fabulous, but let them enquire of our Merchants, and Traders that have been in that City of 
Tripoly,
 or in the Land, they shall find them all agree in the Confirmation of this Relation. The Report that runs amongst the 
Moors
 is, that this Town was very populous and fruitful, as may appear by the Trees of stone of several sorts of Fruits planted round about it, and in the places 
 that retain the Forms of Gardens and Orchards, when the Inhabi∣tants gave themselves over to all manner of Vices, to the great scandal of humane Nature, God in a moment stopp'd all their A∣ctions, and turn'd their Bodies into firm Stone, that future Ages might see and learn to dread his power.


At 
Athens
 there is another such like Figure; a stone repre∣senting two men buggering one another. I know no reason where∣fore we should doubt of the possibility of these Relations, if we consider the Almighty power of God that causeth all things to subsist by his Influence, and can easily alter or change them as it seems good to his Divine Wis∣dom. Or if we consider the ne∣cessity that there should be such notable Examples of Gods Ju∣stice 
 perpetuated to posterity, which cannot be but by some such manner that it may express his displeasure in future Ages, especially in this Countrey, where the People are addicted to such like Villanies that Nature it self abhors. From those that travel into these places every one may better satisfie themselves concern∣ing the truth of these wonderful Examples of Gods Justice, much like that of 
Lot's
 Wife turned in∣to a Pillar of Salt, which some very ancient Historians do affirm to have seen remaining in their days.


We returned after that we had retaken all the Countrey that was revolted, with more honour than profit; for we did make war against a needy, poor, mi∣serable people, that had scarce sufficient to subsist; besides they 
 do craftily hide all their best Moveables in difficult and un∣known places when they engage themselves in any Revolt, that they may never lament the loss of the chief part of their substance. Sometimes hazzard brings their Enemies amongst their Treasury, but they are so secret that no vio∣lence can cause them to confess the place where it is laid up; on∣ly their Cattel and other Beasts do become a Prey after the Vi∣ctory. In time of peace they la∣bour to redeem them by stealth and Robbery; for there are no greater Thieves than the Coun∣trey people of this Kingdom: If any should pass single through their Territories, he is sure to lose his Life and all that he hath, by the Peasants that profess the greatest submission to the 
Turks
 power.


At the coming of the Army from

Argiers
 we took our Bag and Baggage, and returned to that Maritine City. My Master was grown very rich and power∣ful, he had got (besides a great esteem which the good Services that he had rendered deserved) much Wealth. According to his Promise he gave me my Liberty, and and a sum of Money to carry me home. I met then with a 
French
 Vessel of

Marseilles
 in the Harbour; in it I embarked, and sailed into

France.








An Observation of the Tide, and how to turn out of the

Streights-Mouth
 the Wind be∣ing Westerly: Communicated by the Industrious and Experienced Seaman, 
Richard Norris.


AT 
Tangier,
 and 
Tariffe,
 a South-west and by South Moon make a full Sea on the shore; but in all parts of the

Streights-mouth
 the Flood runs until a West and by South-Moon, all the West part of the 
Streights-mouth
 hath the Flood out of the West, which runs in from Cape 
Sprat,
 and Cape 
Traffalgar
 on each side a∣long by the shore much stronger than in the middle to the East∣ward, as far as Cape 
Cabrita
 on the 
Spanish
 side, and 
Apes Hill
 on 
 the 
Barbary
 side, and at those two points meets with the Flood, that cometh out of the North∣east, about the point of 
Gibraltar,
 and runs S. W. into the

Streights
 Mouth all the first quarter flood, & the remainder of the Tide the flood setteth from the Point of 
Gibralttar,
 West S. W. towards Cape 
Cabrita,
 at the top of high water there cometh always out of the West between the two Capes a Race of a Current which spreadeth the whole 
Streights-mouth
 from side to side, but con∣tinues on neither side, seldom longer than half an hour; but in the middle of the

Streights-mouth
 the Current runs to East∣ward very strong all the Tide of Ebb, and the Race of a Current falleth always, between 
Apes Hill
 and Cape 
Cabrita
 at a West and by South Moon, and at that

 instant begins the Ebb on the West side of those two Points, to run to the Westward; The Tide of Ebb on the 
Spanish
 side runs from Cape 
Cabrita
 about two miles broad from the shore as far as the Island of 
Tariffe,
 and runs between the Island & the Main. all the Tide of Ebb along by the shore towards Cape

Traffalgar,
 but on the South side of the Island the Ebb runs very narrow except it be in a Set of fair Wea∣ther. The Tide of Ebb on the

Barbary
 side runs from 
Apes Hill,
 but narrow along the shore as far as the point 
Alcasar,
 but on the West side of that point thwart of the Bay, the Tide runs about three miles broad, and at Cape 
Malabata
 which is the Eastmost point of the Bay of

Tangier,
 about two miles broad, and so conti∣nues to the Westward out to 
 Cape 
Sprat,
 and from thence the Ebb runs South West along the shore, towards 
Sally:
 The Ebb to the Eastward of Cape 
Cabrita
 & 
Apes Hill
 is begun by the afore∣said Race of a Current, which spreadeth from one side to the other, between 
Gibraltar
 and 
Seuta
 Point, and runs in East North east in the middle, and from the Point of 
Apes-Hill
 to the Point of

Seuta
 along the shore all the first half Tide; and the remaining half Tide, the Cur∣rent runs from Cape 
Cabrita,
 East South-east, into the 
Streights
 by the Point of 
Seuta;
 and from the Point of 
Gibraltar,
 the first half Ebb runs North-East into the

Streights
 towards Cape 
Fangerola,
 thwart of Cape

Trafflagar,
 about three miles distant from the shore lies a Rock 9 foot under water, between which Rock and the 
 Cape, you may sail through from the Island of 
Tariffa;
 West and by South lies a Ledge of Rocks, 8, 9, and 10 Foot under water, which may be seen in foul Weather by the Breach of the Sea. At the East side of the Island of

Tariffa
 is a good Rode for a Westerly Wind, in which you may Anchor between 20 and 13 fathom Water in clear hard ground, but come not to an An∣chor nearer to the Island than 13 Fathom, because near the South-east Point of the Island is foul ground; the best of this Rode is with the South-west Point of the Island, West South-west from you, and the Sand Hill West-North-west, and there you shall find 14. Fathom water clear ground. Between this Island & Cape 
Cabrita
 there is no danger, but what always lies above Wa∣ter; 
 in the middle of this Bay is a Light-House, thwart of which you may Anchor in 12 Fathom Water, clear ground; a fine di∣stance from the shore, one third part of the distance from this Light-house towards the Cape is 12 Fathom, the ground blew Clay, and that is a good Rode for a North-east Wind, you may borrow on the Cape, the Rocks to the Westward of the Cape to 5 Fathom, and on the East side to 7 Fathom, a little to the Westward of the Western Point of the Bay of

Gibraltar,
 thwart of a little Valley in the fair way between this Point and Cape 
Cabrita
 is a Rock 8 Foot under Water, and by the East side of this Rock is 12 Fathom. At the Point of Cape 
Malabata
 lies a Ledge of Rocks joining to the Land that stretcheth a little

 way into the Sea, but all above Water, and you shall have five fathom water fair by the Rocks: Note the Tide of Ebb runs very strong to the Westward by this Point, round the Bay of 
Tangier;
 To Anchor in the Bay of 
Tangier,
 in clear ground, bring the Castle that stands on the North-west Corner of the Town, over the North Wall of the Town, and Cape 
Malabata
 North-east, and there is between 9 & 10 Fathom water at a full Sea.


To turn through the 
Streights
 Mouth, the Wind being wester∣ly, you must ply to Windward on the 
Spanish
 side from the point of 
Gibraltar,
 to Cape 
Cabrita,
 and from thence to the Island of 
Ta∣reffa,
 but you must turn about the Cape a little before a high Water, that you may have time to make two or three short

 Boards to the Westward of the Cape before the Race of a Cur∣rent comes out of the West, which continues but a very little while; which being past, the Ebb begins to run to the Westward, which runs so strong that you may turn up to the Island in one Tide of Ebb, (but if you can∣not, you may stop the Flood any where betweeen the Cape and the Island in 12, or 14 Fathom water) and there you must An∣chor until so much of the Flood be spent, that you may get over to the 
Barbary
 side, to take the first of the Ebb there; and if you fall a little to the Westward of the Point 
Alcasara,
 you may get into the Bay of 
Tangier
 by a low Water, from whence you may, observing the Tide, turn out at pleasure.


FINIS.












These BooKs are to be sold by 
Moses Pitt
 at the

White Hart in Lit∣tle Britain.




Folio.


CAssandra,
 the fam'd Ro∣mance, 1667.


Briggs's
 Logarithms.


Francisci Saurez
 Metaphysica.






4
o
.


Dr. 
John Pell's
 Introduction to 
Algebra,

1668.


Nich. Mercatoris
 Logarithmo-Technia, sive Methodus con∣struendi Logarithmos, 1668.


Jacobi Gregorii
 Exercitationes Geometricae,
1668.


Dr. 
Joh. Wallis,
 Opera Mechani∣ca, pars 1.
1670.


Ibid.
 pars 2. now in the Press.


Banister's
 Works.


Hugh Broughton's
 Consent of Scripture.


Snellii




Typhis Batavus, 
Lugd. Bat.
 1624.


Observationes Hassiacae.




Petrus Paaw,
 de Ossibus Amstel∣reod. 8.
1633.


A Letter from a Gentleman of the Lord 
Howard
's Retinue to his Friend in 
London,
 Dated at 
Fez,
 Nov.
1669.






8
o
.


Biblia Hebraea,
 Josephi Athias, 1661.


Gualteri Needham,
 Disquisitio A∣natomica De Formato Foetu, 1667.


The 
Fortunate Fool,
 1670.


Pharmacopoeia Londinensis,
 1668.


Buxtorsius
's Epitome of his 
He∣brew
 Grammar, translated into 
English
 by 
John Davis,

1658.


Crow,
 Scriptores in Scripturam. 
Now in the Press.











