The royal progress; or, A diary of the King's journey from His Majesty's setting out from Kensington, till His return. By a person of quality.
Person of quality.
Approx. 15 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 11 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A57795




Wing R2143A



ESTC R218476





99830064




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The royal progress; or, A diary of the King's journey from His Majesty's setting out from Kensington, till His return. By a person of quality.
Person of quality.
10[i.e. 18], [2] p.   


London :


printed, and sold by J. Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall,


1695.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-12
Anne Simpson
Sampled and proofread
2013-12
Anne Simpson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






R2143A


R218476


99830064


34513












THE Royal Progress; OR, A DIARY OF THE King's Journey, From His MAJESTY's setting out from 
Kensington,
 till His return.


By a Person of Quality.


LONDON:
 Printed, and sold by 
J. Whitlock,
 near 
Stationers-Hall.
 1695.














THE Royal Progress, &c.


THE Royal Progress being re∣solv'd on, and Preparations made accordingly, and the Gaurds sent away before to lie on the Road, the King left 
Kensington
 on 
Thursday
 the Seventeenth of 
October,
 1695. and arriv'd at 
Newmarket
 the same Eve∣ning; where the Eighteenth at Night happen'd a 
Fire,
 which began in a Sta∣ble, but was soon extinguish'd, and the Damage it did was very inconsiderable.

Several Gentlemen of these Parts came to wait on his Majesty, and to welcome him Home and to this Place, and then took occasion to Congratulate his Maje∣sty on his taking the City and strong Ca∣stle of 
Namur:
 The next Day was spent in Hunting, with which his Majesty was extreamly diverted. On 
Sunday,
 being the Twentieth, the principal Members of the University of 
Cambridge
 attended his Ma∣jesty here, 
viz.
 at 
Newmarket,
 and the Vice-Chancellor made a short Congratulatory Speech upon his Majesty's happy Success Abroad, and his safe Return: And his Ma∣jesty, in answer to it, was graciously pleas'd to give them great Assurances of his Royal Favour and Protection; after which they all had the honour to kiss his Majesty's Hand.


The next Moning, being the Twen∣ty first, the King parted from hence, and arrived the same Evening at 
Althrop,


in 
Northamptonshire,
 being attended by di∣vers of the Nobility, and the principal Per∣sons of the Country. This is a noble Seat belonging to the Earl of 
Sunderland,
 an ancient Family, the 
Spencers
 having long possest it; here his Majesty staid a whole Week: The concourse of Nobility, and Gen∣try, and chief Inhabitants of 
Northampton
 (which is near this Place) is very great. The King took the Diversion of the Rural Sports two or three of the first Days, and on 
Thursday
 the 24th. his Majesty din'd with the Earl of 
Northampton
 at 
Castle-Ashby,
 a very fine House in the same County; and the next, being the 25th. the King did the Earl of 
Montague
 the Honour to dine with him at 
Boughton,
 a stately and magnificent Pile of Building: Here his Majesty was splendidly Entertain'd, and was attended with a great Number of the Nobility and Gentry of this County, whom his Majesty receiv'd very kindly, and told them, 
Their County was, in his Opinion, the finest in
 Eng∣land,

and, perhaps, in the whole World; that nothing made a Gentleman look like a Gen∣tleman, but living like one.
 His Majesty thank'd them for their good Company; and, indeed, he had a great deal, for there was hardly any Body of Note that did not come upon this Occasion; and as my Lord 
Montague
 was shewing his Majesty his House, Painting, Carving, 
&c.
 the King told my Lord, 
'Twas not good for One to set One's Heart on any of them, for neither He nor his Lordship should be there Forty Years hence to see them.


The 28th. his Majesty left 
Althorp,
 and came in the Evening to 
Stamford;
 but went (tho' out of his way) to see 
Burghly
 House, the Seat and constant Residence of the Earl of 
Exeter,
 who was come away to 
London;
 which his Majesty being inform'd of, was pleas'd to ask, if he had carried his House with him? answer was made no; 
Then,
 says the King, 
I'll go and see it;
 which

his Majesty did twice, that night and the next morning, being extreamly satisfied with it: 'Tis a noble Pile of Stone Build∣ing, built indeed about a hundred Years since by 
William
 Lord 
Burghley,
 but mighti∣ly adorn'd and beautified by the present Earl of 
Exeter,
 who lives very Great and Nobly when there, like himself, and like an 
English
 Noble-Man; for loftiness of Rooms, great variety of Pictures, and fine Painting and Carving, done by the grea∣test Masters of 
Italy,
 brought thence by his Lordship, maintain'd and liberally re∣warded, for Terrasses, Conduits, Fish-Ponds, Fountains, 
&c.
 It may vie with, nay, is thought the best in 
England.
 The Painting and Carving are so curious, that some very great Travellers, and Men of exquisite Judgment, have affirm'd they have met with nothing either in 
Italy
 or in 
France
 that exceeds them. The Park is improv'd, by planting a multitude of Walks of Ash, Elm, Chesnut, and several

other sorts of Trees. Through this Park passeth the old 
Roman
 Way, mention'd by many Authors, and so on to 
Walcote,
 above 
Berneck.
 At 
Wothorpe,
 a little distance from this the Earl of 
Exeter
 has another hand∣some Seat, with a little Park wall'd about: It was built by 
Thomas Cecil,
 Earl of 
Exe∣ter,
 and tho' not very small (for it was large enough to hold the late Duke of 
Buckingham
 and his Family for some Years) yet so mean did it seem, in comparison with the former, that its Pounder plea∣santly said, He 
built it only to retire to out of the Dust, while his great House of
 Burgh∣ley 
was a sweeping.


At 
Stamford
 the Mayor and Aldermen, attended with their two Burgesses, waited on the King, and had the honour to kiss his Majesty's Hand, and of welcoming him into those Parts, with all possible Demonstrations of Joy, by ringing of Bells, making of Bonfires, and setting up

of Illuminations throughout the whole Town.


The 29th. the King din'd at Sir 
John Brownlow
's at 
Bilton
 near 
Grantham,
 and came that Night to 
Lincoln,
 being at∣tended by a mighty concourse of Peo∣ple.


The 30th. in the Morning his 
Majesty
 left this Town, and went to 
Welbeck,
 ha∣ving been met by the Duke of 
Newcastle
 Seven Miles off, at 
Dunham-Ferry,
 the En∣trance into this County. The 31st. being the last Day of 
October,
 the King dined with his Grace the Duke of 
Newcastle
 at 
Welbeck,
 after having receiv'd the Diver∣sion of Hunting in the Forrest of 
Shire∣wood,
 where are an infinite Number of Deer, and Branchy-headed Stags; his 
Ma∣jesty
 gave order for the filling up the Saw-Pits there, which are dangerous to Huntsmen. 
Welbeck-Abbey
 lies on the

North-West side of this County of 
Not∣tingham,
 about a Mile and a half from 
Workensop,
 a Town famous for the abun∣dance of Liquorice planted and cultiva∣ted there. 
Welbeck
 Abbey is a very noble Building, seated in the lowest part of a fine Park, surrounded with Trees of ex∣cellent Timber, and was the Seat of 
Wil∣liam
 and 
Henry,
 late (and also is of the present) Duke of 
Newcastle.


November
 1st. his 
Majesty
 din'd at the Earl of 
Kingston
's, and was nobly enter∣tain'd.


November
 2d. The Lord-Mayor and Al∣dermen of 
York,
 in their Formalities, wai∣ted on the King that Morning at 
Welbeck
 Abbey, being introduced by the Duke of 
Newcastle;
 the Recorder made a Speech to his 
Majesty,
 who was pleas'd to confer the Honour of Knighthood upon the Lord-Mayor, 
Gilbert Metcalf
 Esquire. In

the Evening the Lord-Archbishop of 
York,
 with his Clergy, attended his 
Majesty,
 and congratulated his happy Success and safe Return, express'd their Gratitude for his 
Majesty's Care of the Church,
 who had show'd himself truly the Defender of the Faith; gave his 
Majesty
 great Assurance of their Zeal, and Loyalty to his Interests, and Government; pray'd for all Blessings to attend his Royal Person, and recom∣mended Themselves to his Royal Prote∣ction; which his 
Majesty
 was pleas'd to assure them of, as also of his good Grace, and Favour.


The Corporations of 
Newark
 and 
East-Retford
 attended the King, and kissed his 
Majesty
's Hand: The Recorder of each Place congratulated his 
Majesty
's glorious Success at 
Namur,
 and safe Return to 
Eng∣land,
 and gave the King a most hearty Wel∣come in these Parts; all which his 
Majesty
 took very kindly from them.




November
 3d. The King left 
Welbeck
 in the Afternoon, and came in the Even∣ing to the Earl of 
Stamford
's House at 
Brodgate,
 where his 
Majesty
 lay that Night.


November
 4th. About Nine this Night the King came to 
Warwick
 Castle to my Lord 
Brooks,
 being receiv'd with great Ac∣clamations, ringing of Bells, Illuminations, Fire-works, and other Expressions of Joy and Respect.


The Mayor and Aldermen of 
Warwick
 met his 
Majesty
 at the Towns-end, and at∣tended his Coach to the 
Castle,
 where the King was met Splendidly, and manificent∣ly Entertain'd by my Noble Lord 
Brooks;
 who also provided a Bowl of Punch for the Towns-People, of One hundred and twenty Gallons, made in a Vessel call'd 
Guy
 Earl of 
Warwick
's 
Pot.
 Great were

the Acclamations of the People here; 
God∣save King
 William; and, 
long live King
 Wil∣liam, 
&c.


November
 5th. The King left 
Warwick
 in the morning, being attended by my Lord 
Brook,
 several Gentlemen of the County, and the Magistrates, out of the Town, and some part of the way. The King din'd with my Lord Duke of 
Shrewsbury
 at 
Ey∣fort,
 and in the Evening came to 
Burford,
 where his 
Majesty
 staid till the Eighth; when the King left that Place, and ar∣riv'd in the Evening at 
Woodstock,
 having in his way seen 
Cornbury-House.


And on the 9th. in the Morning his 
Majesty
 came to 
Oxford,
 being met at some distance from thence by his Grace the Duke of 
Ormond,
 Chancellor of the Uni∣versity, and the Vice-Chancellor and the Doctors in their Habits: As also by the Magistrates of the City in their Forma∣lities;

and the Complements of both be∣ing made to his 
Majesty,
 by the Vice-Chancellor for the one, and by the Re∣corder for the other, they proceeded on Horse-back before his 
Majesty
's Coach to the 
Theatre,
 where a splendid Entertain∣ment was provided, with great variety of excellent Musick; The Conduit of the City running all the while with Wine. The Thanks of the University were re∣turn'd to his 
Majesty,
 for this Royal Fa∣vour and Honour, in a very Elegant 
Latin
 Oration; And the Duke of 
Ormond,
 Chancellor of this University, presented the King, on his Knees, a large 
Bible
 in 
English,
 a large 
Common-Prayer Book,
 and the 
Cuts
 of the University, all rich∣ly Bound, and Printed in 
Folio,
 at the 
Theatre;
 with a Pair of Gold-Fringe Gloves.


After Dinner the Vice-Chancellor, No∣ble Men, and Gentlemen present, had the





Honour to kiss his 
Majesty
's Hand, and attended the King to his Coach, who was pleas'd to tell them, That 
this was a Visit of Kindness, not Curiosity;
 And there∣fore He did not go to see the Colleges, having seen the whole University be∣fore.


And so, after a short stay, his Maje∣sty went on, and arriv'd at 
Windsor
 about Seven in the Evening, on the Ninth In∣stant.


The King din'd with my Lord 
Godol∣phin
 at 
Cranborn-House
 on 
Sunday
 the Tenth Instant, and held a Council at 
Windsor
 in the Evening.


His Majesty honour'd Sir 
Stephen Fox
 with his Royal Company at Dinner on the Eleventh, being 
Munday,
 at 
Chiswick,
 and return'd in the Evening to his Royal Residence at 
Kensington.




Having compleated his Royal Progress in Six and twenty Days, to his entire Satisfaction, having been bless'd with extraordinary Weather, with a Continuation beyond what was to be expected from the Season; and was re∣ceiv'd every where, either as his Majesty pass'd, or staid, with hearty 
English
 Demonstrations of Respect, Zeal, Affection, and Fi∣delity.


The Four Elements conspir'd to make the King's Journey Plea∣sant and Prosperous; and never did his Majesty see so much real 
English
 Greatness, visible in the Magnificent Entertainments eve∣ry

where provided for Him, far exceeding what our Neighbour-Nations ever did, when ever their Monarchs vouchsafed them the Honour of a Visit; and, in∣deed, thus much may be said now, and without the the least Tincture of Flattery, That this Progress will have happy and glorious Effects, by engaging the Hearts of all those of His Majesty's Subjects, who before had only heard what great Things the King had done for them, and all 
Europe,
 but now had the Honour and Happiness to see that excellent Prince, that was destin'd by Heaven to make this Renow'd Kingdom of 
En∣gland


flourish, beyond what it ever did in ancient Times; and to retrieve her Reputation, and make her Fame as lasting as Time it self; and, to crown all, to establish Us in an Honourable and Durable Peace.


FINIS.












There is lately Publish'd,


ANgliae Tutamen:
 Or, the Safety 
En∣gand.
 Being an Account of the 
Banks, Lotteries. Mines, Diving, Draining, Lifting,
 and other 
Engines,
 and many per∣nicious 
Projects
 now on foot; tending to the Destruction of 
Trade
 and 
Commerce,
 and the Impoverishing this 
Realm.
 With Reflections thereon.


Solon Secundus:
 Or, some Defects in the 
English
 Laws; with their proper Reme∣dies.


Both sold by
 J. Whitlocck, 
near
 Sationers-Hall.









