The history of the Turkish Empire, from the year 1623, to the year 1677 Containing the reigns of the three last emperors, viz. Sultan Morat, or Amurat IV. Sultan Ibrahim, and Sultan Mahomet IV, his son, the thirteenth emperor, now reigning. By Sir Paul Rycaut, late consul of Smyrna.
Rycaut, Paul, Sir, 1628-1700.
Approx. 2311 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 166 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A57997




Wing R2407



ESTC R8667





99834901




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The history of the Turkish Empire, from the year 1623, to the year 1677 Containing the reigns of the three last emperors, viz. Sultan Morat, or Amurat IV. Sultan Ibrahim, and Sultan Mahomet IV, his son, the thirteenth emperor, now reigning. By Sir Paul Rycaut, late consul of Smyrna.
Rycaut, Paul, Sir, 1628-1700.
Knolles, Richard, 1550?-1610. Generall historie of the Turkes. aut
Manley, Roger, Sir, 1626?-1688. History of the Turkish Empire continued. aut
Rycaut, Paul, Sir, 1628-1700. Memoirs. aut
White, Robert, 1645-1703,
[4], 93, [6], 97-259, 262-262 [i.e. 264], [2], 277-338, [10] p., [2] leaves of plates : ill., port.  


London :


printed by J.D. for Tho. Basset, R. Clavell, J. Robinson, and A. Churchill,


MDCLXXXVII. [1687]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Rycaut, Paul, --  Sir, 1628-1700 --  Early works to 1800.
Mehmed --  IV, --  Sultan of the Turks, 1642-1693 --  Early works to 1800.
Turkey --  History --  1453-1683 --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  Commerce --  Turkey --  Early works to 1800.
Turkey --  Commerce --  England --  Early works to 1800.
2012-03
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-03
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-05
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2012-10
SPi Global
Rekeyed and resubmitted
2012-11
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2012-11
John Pas
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






R2407


R8667


99834901


39539














THE HISTORY OF THE Turkish Empire, From the YEAR 1623, to the YEAR 1677.


CONTAINING THE REIGNS Of the Three last EMPERORS, 
VIZ.
 SULTAN MORAT, OR AMURAT IV. SULTAN IBRAHIM, AND Sultan MAHOMET IV, his Son, The Thirteenth EMPEROR, now Reigning.


By Sir 
PAUL RYCAUT,
 Late CONSUL of 
Smyrna.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
J.D.
 for 
Tho. Basset, R. Clavell, J. Robinson,
 and 
A. Churchill,
 MDCLXXXVII.










The Epistle Dedicatory to the KING.


May it please Your most Excellent Majesty:


I Cannot, without some despondency of Mind, and awful fear of the Greatness of Your Majesty, make an Offering at Your Sacred Feet of so small an Esteem and inconsiderable Value, as these following Histo∣ries. For having travelled long in remote Countries, and resided no less than eighteen Years in 
Turky,
 the World may reasonably expect some rich Returns unto Your Majesty in Persian Silks, and Tyrian Purples, or in the finest Carpets, and other Gayeties, in which the softness and luxury of the Lesser 
Asia
 did anciently abound: and may now judg me a Bankrupt, or ill Husband of my Talent, when they see me at Home trembling in Your Royal Presence, with a Gift no more worthy than a few Sheets of Paper; which being a Sacrifice inferior and beneath the acceptance of so Great a Monarch, I might reasonably fear, that they would take fire at the heat of Your just dis∣pleasure, were they not with all humility and reverence consecrated to the Royal Clemency. For in this glorious Title and Attribute, Your Majesty (as is notorious to the World) exceeding all the most Serene and most Clement Emperors that ever were, expects not from me, either Gold or Jewels, but rather a true Account of my Time, how I have spent it in the Service of God, and of your Majesty: and how I have administred that Publick Trust and In∣terest which was committed to my Management. Accept therefore, 
GREAT SIR,
 these following Discourses, to discharge part of the Account of my Time, with other Treatises which have been the Employment to fill up my vacant Intervals: the remaining account of my Hours are not to be justified by my own Report, but by the Testimony of others, whose Wisdom and Goodness will be as ready to own my Industry and Faithfulness in their Concernments, as they will be to excuse and pardon my Infirmities.


Ever since the time of Your Majesty's happy Restauration, my Lot hath fal∣len to live and act within the Dominions of the Turk, and there to move in a Publick Capacity; which though it was in an Administration of one of the lowest Note and Degree, yet the great Influence which the flourishing Estate of that Trade hath on the common Good of 
England,
 nourished in me a secret Pride and Satisfaction in that Employment, which called and raised up all my Endeavours to acquit my self therein with Prudence, Faithfulness, and In∣dustry; there being the same Regularity required in the Stars of the lower, as in those of higher Magnitude.


This hath been the first, and indeed the only Affair I ever managed for the Publick: for before Your Majesty's blessed Return, the Character noted on my Family of being Loyal, as it made them at first active and zealous in the Service of Your Glorious Father, so afterwards it famed them for their Suffer∣ings, and rendred them and me uncapable of Office. But Your Majesty re∣turning like the Sun, to animate and cherish all living Creatures, with an equa∣lity proportioned to their several Capacities, hath been pleased also to bestow a Ray of Your benign Influence on my self; whereby having received Com∣fort and Refreshment, I do with all sense of my Duty, and with entire Devo∣tion, pray unto the King of Kings for the Happiness, long Life, and immor∣tal Glory of Your Majesty, and with all reverence and humble submission, devote and consecrate my self, for ever to remain,


Your Majesty's most Humble, most Dutiful, and most Obedient Servant, 
PAUL RYCAUT.


















portrait of Murad IV


MORAT AVT AMVRATHES IV TVRCARVM IMPERATOR VNDE CIMVS 1623 ☽






My Brothers folly, and my want of years


Let loose the reignes of Rule to Mutiniers;


But as w
th
 time my strength, and wit improve,


I all reforme w
th
 feare, and not by love.


By mighty force I Babylon subdue,


From whence a peace with Persia doth ensue,


And when gainst Christiā foes, I do designe


To turn my armes, dye with excesse of wine.










THE REIGN OF Sultan MORAT, OR AMURAT IV. The Eleventh EMPEROR; AND Twenty first MONARCH OF THE TURKS.


THE weak Understanding of Sultan 
Mustapha,
 and his inability for Rule, caused the Affairs of State, both at Home and Abroad, to move disorder∣ly and irregular. 
Where Violence and Injustice pre∣vail, there is so little distance between the most emi∣nent Height of Grandure, and the lowest Abyss of Misery, that a Prince may in a moment step from one unto the other.
 The Janisaries and Military Officers commanded more now than the Civil, all things being guided by the Air and Fancy of the Souldiery, who placed and displaced with that wind of Favour and Displeasure, which is agreeable to the Humour of a Multitude, and the Licentiousness of Arms. For at the same time there were three Emperors, seven Great Viziers, two Captain-Pasha's, five Aga's of the Janisaries, three Treasurers, six Pasha's of 
Cai∣ro;
 and in proportion, the Changes and Altera∣tions were as many in all the Provinces of the Empire. All this Confusion evidently proceed∣ing from the weak and almost sensless Under∣standing of 
Mustapha;
 the Ministers and People concurred, as it were, in an universal Consent to dethrone him a second time, and exalt into his Place Sultan 
Morat
 Brother to 
Osman,
 who was murdered the Year before. The Principal Actors in this Contrivance, were 
Kiosem
 the Mother of 
Morat,
 and the Mufti. But in the execution hereof, three Difficulties occurred: The first was 
Chusaein
 Pasha the Great Vizier; who by reason of the Inabilities of 
Mustapha,
 being become absolute Lord and Soveraign of all, would be unwilling to assent unto that Proposi∣tion, which might degrade him of his Dignity, and divest him of his Power. A second Obsta∣stacle was the Fancy and Humour of the Soul∣diery, who having with much Zeal and Passion exalted 
Mustapha
 to the Throne, it might be doubted, that in maintenance of the same Hu∣mour, they would with equal obstinacy perse∣vere in their Election. A third was the Poverty or low Ebb of the Exchequer, which at that time was in no capacity to supply that Dona∣tive to the Souldiery, which was usual and cu∣stomary at the Inauguration of every Sultan. To forward and hasten this Change, and ripen this Plot, the News of the Rebellion of 
Abassa
 did much contribute; who with a Body of fif∣teen thousand Horse, roved over all the Plains of 
Kara-hisar,
 calling himself Avenger of Sul∣tan 
Osman
's Murder, and Enemy of the Jani∣saries; by whose Mutiny and Conspiracy he was put to Death: in satisfaction for which, he not only killed all Janisaries which fell into his hands; but their Wives, Children, and those allied to them, he destroyed with implacable Malice and bloody Rage. Upon this Advice, the Janisaries at 
Constantinople
 being moved with equal Fury and desire of Revenge, applied themselves to their Aga, proposing a speedy Union with the Spahees, for suppressing this Rebellion before Time gave it greater growth, and made the Hu∣mour more stubborn and difficult to be purged. At the same time also came Letters from 
Cicala
 Pasha, (who was dispatched into 
Asia
 with a strong Party, to give a stop to the farther Pro∣gress and Advance of 
Abassa
) advising that up∣on his near approach to the Enemy, so general a Fear possessed his Souldiery, that most of them

disbanded and forsook their Colours; and that at present he had no more than five hundred Ja∣nisaries, and two hundred Spahees under his Command, which he found to be an unequal Match to contend with the increasing Power of 
Abassa.
 This Intelligence served happily the occasion of the Mufti, Vizier, and Aga, to give a turn to the desired Change, and supplied them with an Answer to the Janisaries, that they were ready to yield compliance unto their Address, but that the Incapacity of their Soveraign ob∣structed their Proceedings, and that the Defect in the Principal Wheel disordered all the Mo∣tions of good Government. At which Reply the Janisaries becoming more unquiet, assembled themselves in a tumultuous manner at the Mosch of Sultan 
Solyman;
 where making an
 Ayack Divan, (so called, because they sit not down, but stand on their Legs, to denote the present haste and urgency of their Affair) it was en∣acted, by an unanimous consent of the Civil and Military Power, That young 
Morat,
 or 
Amurat,
 should be promoted to the Throne, and that 
Mustapha
 should be deposed: And because the Exchequer was at its lowest Ebb, and wholly exhausted by miscarriage of the Officers, the Souldiers were contented to dispense with their Donative; which they relinquished in conside∣ration of the Publick Good, reserving still their Title and Claim thereunto at times of a more happy Inauguration. With this News the Vi∣zier immediately mounted on Horse-back to sig∣nify this Universal Decree to 
Mustapha;
 but he found him so stupid, as if he had been insensible of the Message; and his Mother wanting Power to resist this strong Convulsion, gave way to Ne∣cessity, and seemed to embrace what she could not oppose.


Thus 
Mustapha
 falling from the Heaven of his Throne to the Abyss of his Prison, seemed to return unto his Centre; for being only by the Wild-fire of Fortune carried as far aloft, as the force of popular Powder could reach, he after∣wards by the meer weight of his earthly Temper returned with the like quickness of Motion to the place from whence he ascended.


Hereupon Sultan 
Amurat,
 a Youth of about fourteen years of Age, was brought forth to the People, and placed in the Throne with all the Acclamations and Rejoycings of the People. And being taught by his Mother in a feigned man∣ner to refuse acceptance of the Empire, he pre∣tended that the Exchequer was exhausted, and that therefore he was not able to demonstrate the Affection and Esteem he had for them; and that since they had killed their former Sultans, he was fearful lest the tenderness of his Age should be∣tray him to the like Violence: but the Souldiery having not the patience to hearken to his Excuses,
 immediately carried him to the Divan, where ha∣ving cloathed him in White, they seated him on a Safraw, erected with four Pillars, studded with precious Stones; the Covering of which was of Crimson-Velvet, richly embroidered with Gold and Oriental-Pearl. And being so seated, the Mufti with all reverence approached, and kissed his Hand; and then turning to the People, he de∣manded of them, If they were contented with that Prince whom they now beheld in the Seat of the Ottoman Kings? To which they having gi∣ven assent by their loud Acclamations; 
Morat,
 with a becoming gravity, encharged the Mufti to take care that Justice and the Law be executed, and so retired to his Lodgings with general satis∣faction. The next morning he was carried by Water to the Mosch of 
Jub
 in the Suburbs of 
Constantinople,
 where according to the Solemnity of the Ottoman Empire, having performed his
 
Corban,
 or Sacrifice, and having his Cemiter grit to his Side by the Emirsheriff, he mounted on Horse-back, and with a magnificent Train en∣tred by the Gate of 
Adrianople.
 In the mean time 
Mustapha,
 who was more worthy to bear a Fool's Cap than an Imperial Diadem, was con∣ducted to Prison, and more narrowly guarded than formerly; howsoever no Man offered to take away his Life, the Persons of Fools and Idiots being sacred in esteem of the Turks, and the least Injury offered to them accounted Irreligious and Unlucky.


Morat
 was of a lively Countenance, full-fac'd, dark Hair, of a black and lively Eye, ruddy and sanguine Complexion, and in every degree of a promising and hopeful Aspect: but his exteriour appearance did not correspond with the internal Cruelty of his violent Spirit, having some simili∣tude with the Swan, which hath white Feathers and black Flesh.


The Great Vizier who assisted at this Solemnity, was (as we have said) 
Chusaein
 Pasha, a Person of Self-interest, who had wasted and consumed the Treasury, and converted a great part there∣of to his own Benefit; he was a Tyrant, hated of all Men, and supported himself by no other Art than bribing of the Souldiery: And to his other Crimes he added, that of having unjustly persecuted 
Halil
 Pasha, and deprived him of his Office, his Power not reaching to the taking a∣way his Life; which being reserved for better Times, he was again recalled from his Retire∣ment, and by special Command of the Sultan, was unwillingly restored to the Office of Vizier, being best pleased with a quiet and pacifick Life, to which his melancholy Temper had naturally disposed him. In the mean time 
Chusaein
 Pasha being terrified by the sensible touches of his own Conscience, took his flight by way of the Black Sea; and being out of the reach of Justice, a Fine was set of Five thousand Zechins, and of Lands to the Revenue of an hundred thousand Aspers a Year, to be given unto him who should bring his Head. Many of those who had sold him their Friendship and Favour, being affrigh∣ted with this Sentence, voluntarily disgorged the Rewards they had received; and amongst the rest, the last Aga of the Janisaries, who had been his Kahya or Steward for the space of three months, restored 8 hundred thousand Dollars as an Atonement for his Sin, and a Ransom for pur∣chasing his own Life and Office. At length, by force of the foregoing Reward, 
Chusaein
 Pasha was betrayed and taken alive; and being brought to 
Constantinople,
 was immediately strangled be∣fore the Gate of the Divan.


Many were the Difficulties which this young Sultan was to encounter; the greatest of which was the Insolence of the Janisaries, who feeling themselves empty of Mony, began to repent of the prodigal and easy remission of their Dona∣tive, and in a tumultuous manner to redemand it again. There was no Argument or Debate to be used against Men of the Sword, who hearkned to no other Reason than their own Wants, and to satisfy them, there was no other Remedy than Compliance; wherefore all Officers and Persons not employed in Military Affairs were forced to contribute towards a large Tax, and a shame∣ful Demand was made for the Loan of Thirty thousand Zechins from the four Christian Am∣bassadors resident at the Port, that they also as Friends might yield an assisting hand towards the present Urgency of Affairs: so little consi∣deration

and shame have Turks to lay open the Nakedness and distress of their Country even to Strangers and Enemies of it. And indeed such was the Insolence and uncontroulable Power of the Souldiery, that their Desires and Commands were Laws, and their Determinations Rules for their Sultan and his Subjects.


This Humour of Usurpation and unlimited Power, wearied all the Officers of the Empire, and inclined them secretly to approve the Cause of 
Abassa
 Pasha of 
Erzirum,
 who declared and stiled himself Enemy to the Janisaries; and of 
Bechir
 Pasha of 
Babylon,
 who was joined with him. The Vizier also finding his Power abrid∣ged by the Arbitrary Will of the Souldiery, mo∣ved slowly and coldly into 
Asia,
 where all the Force he could make, consisted of no more than fifty thousand new and unexperienced Men, such as were uncapable to contend with a more nume∣rous Army of veterane Souldiers; to which al∣so the Beglerbei of 
Anatolia
 joined himself, as did all other the chief Timar-Spahees, who con∣spired together to confound and destroy the Pride and Government of the Janisaries. The Vizier also was of the same Party, and coldly at first answered the Request of the Janisaries, when they earnestly pressed him to lead them a∣gainst 
Abassa
 their common and mortal Enemy: At length, being fortified with the Force of the Timar-Spahees, he told them plainly, That if they would go and fight, he would be a Specta∣tor of the Success, but would not engage him∣self in a Quarrel wherein the Blood of 
Mussel∣men
 might be spilt on one side and the other: by which means the Rebels in 
Asia
 took Head, in∣creased in Force, and every day rendred them in a more formidable and dangerous posture.


But this was not all the Trouble which ensu∣ed; for the Tartars having refused that King whom the Grand Signior had appointed them to receive, declared for 
Mehmet
 his Brother: who was seconded by the Votes of the Generality, and maintained by the strongest Nerve of that Nation. The Vizier was unwilling to ingage in this Quarrel, alledging, That a Civil War was the worst of Evils, and that it was better to connive at a present Inconvenience, than in this distracted Time of Affairs, to pollute the Empire with the Blood of Tartars, who were their Brethren, and of the same Religion and Alliance with them. Howsoever the Divan was of ano∣ther Opinion, and resolved to dispeed the Cap∣tain-Pasha with a Force sufficient to re-instate 
Gherey
 (for so the Elder Brother was called) in the Government of that Kingdom. But yet the Instructions given, rather directed him to act with Dexterity than with Force, supposing that the Authority of the Turks abetted with the presence of a considerable Force, would create an inclination in the Tartars to Obedience, so soon as they discovered them to appear on their Coast. The Captain-Pasha being arrived at
 
Caffá,
 declared, That he was sent by the Grand Signior, not to exclude either one or other of the Pretenders, but only to be Witness of a free and fair Election; that so all Civil Discord ceasing, that Party might be chosen who was most pleasing to the generality of the Peo∣ple. To which end two Standards were erect∣ed, one for
 
Gherey
 the Elder Brother desired by the Turks, and the other for 
Mehmet
 beloved of the Tartars. The People in multitudes ran to the Standard of 
Mehmet,
 and but few to that of 
Gherey;
 which demonstrated at how mean a rate the Tartars esteemed the Protection and Fa∣vour of the Port. The Captain-Pasha vexed hereat, denied to give his Assent to the Confirma∣tion, on pretence, that he was first to demand the Grand Signior's Pleasure; but at length was perswaded by 
Gherey
 to land a Force of about eight thousand Men to own and maintain his Cause, on hopes, that rather than ingage against the Turks, the People would condescend to Terms in his Admission and Favour. The Tar∣tars not being in the least dismayed hereat, ar∣rayed themselves in a warlike Posture, and feign∣ing Fear and Flight, allured the Turks to a pur∣suit of them, until they had brought them to a place where thirty thousand Horse lay in ambush; which on a sudden arising and encompassing them round, had entirely destroyed them, had not 
Salil
 the Brother of 
Mehmet
 given a stop to the slaughter, on hopes, that such a testimony of Friendship would reconcile the Spirits of the Turks, at least might render his Brother's pre∣ferment more tolerable and grateful to the Turks. In this conflict, 
Ibrahim
 and 
Chusaein
 who were Viziers of the Bench, the kahya and a Capigi∣bashe of the Seraglio were slain, whose Bodies were afterwards transported to 
Constantinople,
 six hundred Janisaries and as many Sea-men were kil∣led, and fifteen hundred Prisoners were taken, whose Liberty was procured at a mean Ransom, for the sake of that Faith and Religion which they jointly professed; they also took thirty Pieces of Cannon, and might also have become Masters of the whole Fleet consisting of thirty six Gallies, had they been desirous to have prose∣cuted their Victory to the utmost advantage: and moreover in that conjuncture of Affairs, when a general consternation had overspread the principal parts of the Ottoman Dominions, when the Councils were feeble and faint, and that a languishing Pulse beat in all the Government, had the Tartar with an Army of fifty thousand Horse then ready to march, made up to the Walls of 
Adrianople,
 it might have proved such an opportunity for dividing and destroying this Empire, as hath not offered at any time since that Occasion. But the two Brothers, 
Mehmet
 and 
Salil,
 stiling their War forced and defensive, used that moderation in their Victory, which might not provoke a desire of Revenge in the Turks. The Captain-Pasha being thus permit∣ted to depart from 
Caffa
 with his Fleet, sailed to 
Varna,
 a Port in the Black Sea, about two hundred miles distant from 
Constantinople;
 where the News of this Defeat being arrived, put all the City into confusion, and raised the Viziers at midnight to consult of those Remedies and Ex∣pedients which were agreeable to the present e∣mergency of Affairs. The Great Vizier 
Ali
 was of opinion, that the Grand Signor ought to condescend to Terms of Accommodation, tho to the disadvantage and disreputation of his Power; and that accordingly a Letter should be wrote to 
Mehmet
 the Tartar, beginning with the usual Complements of Friendship and Saluta∣tion; and afterwards declaring, That it was ne∣ver the intention of the Port to ingage in a War against him, the late conflict having only pro∣ceeded from a mistake and misinterpretation of Orders; and that there was no other design, than to compose the Civil Differences amongst themselves, by advancing that Prince to the Kingly Dignity who was most pleasing and grateful to the People. This Advice was appro∣ved by the rest of the Council, and a Messenger dispatched with the Letter, accompanied with a Cemiter and Vest of Sables, which are the Sig∣nals of the Sultan's Favour. In the mean time the People murmured at the pusillanimity of the

Government, saying, That they had sent an Ambassador to thank the Tartar for not seizing their whole Fleet, and acknowledg their Obliga∣tion to him for the Blows and Wounds he had gi∣ven their Army. The Tartars also gloried in this submission, and took the boldness to vaunt of their Linage and Descent to be more Ancient and Noble than that of the Ottoman Family; and that in this time of decay and degenerate proce∣dure of that Monarchy, it appertained to the Greatness of the Tartars to stir up the Fire and snuff the Lamp, that the Splendor of that Em∣pire might become more bright and shining than in former Ages. And so little respect did they now maintain for the Port, that they surprised two Ambassadors sent from the Moscovite in their way to 
Constantinople,
 robbed and killed them, as also the Turkish Chiaus that was with them, lest his Testimony should be brought in for an evi∣dence against them.


During these Troubles, the Cossacks taking advantage of the Captain-Pasha's absence in 
Tartary,
 entered the 
Bosphorus
 with about an hun∣and fitty Sail of Saicks and Boats;
 these Boats and Vessels which the Cossacks use, are built long and light, with ten Oars of a side, and two Men to an Oar; the Head and Stern are not unlike, so that they hang the Rudder sometimes at one end, and sometimes at the other, being not ob∣liged to turn their Vessel, but without loss of time to proceed with that end which happens to be foremost. Each Boat carries fifty select Men armed with Fire-arms and Cemiter, in the ma∣nagement of which they are very expert; and are a People sober, enduring Labour and hard Diet; and so speedy in their Incursions, that they forestal the Advices, and commonly strike be∣fore they threaten. With these Boats and Peo∣ple (as we have said) they entred the 
Bosphorus,
 where they burnt several Villages and Houses of Pleasure; on the Grecian side they burnt 
Boyuc∣deri
 and 
Yenichioi,
 on the Asian side 
Stenia.
 The appearance of this Enemy so near the Imperial City, caused a general Consternation, not un∣like that at 
London,
 when the Dutch entred the River of 
Chatham.
 To oppose this Force, there was not one Gally in readiness, so that Saicks, Chimbers, and small Boats were armed, to the number of four or five hundred, and man'd with such people as the present haste and expediti∣on offered; the great Chain was then brought forth to cross the 
BOsphorus,
 which the Grecian Emperors used at the Seige of 
Constantinople:
 and Ten thousand Men were issued from the City to defend the Shoar from depredation and far∣ther mischief. The Turkish Fleet faced the Cos∣sacks to give them a stop, whilst they hovered about the middle of the Chanel in form of a Half-Moon, and so continued the whole day until Sun-set; when with the night they returned into the Sea, carrying with them, besides their Booty, Glory sufficient to have entred the Chanel, and without blows or opposition, to have braved the Capital Seat of the Ottoman Monarchy, and the most formidable City of the whole Word. Not many days after they returned again with a grea∣ter Force than before, which put the City into the like consternation; and having hovered a∣bout three or four days at the Mouth of the Black Sea, they burnt the Pharos or Lantern with certain Villages thereabouts, and being laden with Spoils and Glory, they again returned into their own Country. Thus we may observe, how bold Enemies are made with the weakness of a State: a Horse is soon sensible of his Rider, when backed by a faint Hand, and an unaccustomed Lightness, but a stiff Rein and a close Knee makes him obedient to his Ruler. All people having discovered the imbecillity of the Government, made head against it: and the young Sultan had those for his Enemies in the time of his Nonage, which in his strong and fiercer years became the most submissive and Fawning Slaves in the World.


And though at this time the Turkish Ministers were corrupt and rebellious, and the Souldiery mutinous; yet 
Bethlem Gabor
 Prince of 
Transylva∣nia,
 a Christian, was observant to the Port, de∣manding Licence to wage War against the Em∣peror, which was easily granted, and upon pai¦ment of the usual Tribute of Ten thousand Hungars, the Ambassador, with thirteen of his Followers, received Coftans or Vests of Honour, and a promise of Succour and Protection, as the Condition of his Affairs should require. Thus we see, that whilst the Turks themselves endea∣voured to rent in pieces their own Monarchy, to which one would have thought, that the Chri∣stians had most reason to contribute; yet such was the unhappy Fate of Christendom, that 
Ga∣bor
 was the only Person at that time to court the Turks; and that for no other Reason, than that he might be supported and abetted in a War a∣gainst the Emperor and other Christian Princes of 
Germany.


The Army of 
Bethlem Gabor
 consisted of above Thirty thousand Men, with which he marched over all 
Hungary,
 having taken most Towns of consideration, unless 
Presburg,
 alias 
Possonium, Rab,
 and 
Komorra.
 But if we penetrate into the depth and foundation of this War, we shall find that it had a deeper Interest than that of 
Gabor,
 and had its Original from the Discord and Civil War of 
Germany.
 For the House of 
Austria
 be∣ing at that time in a condition to render it self formidable, and in a posture to create a jealousy in all the Princes subjected to it, did under co∣lour of subduing the Palatine of the 
Rhyne,
 op∣press also the Liberty of the Empire, and of the several States which composed it. For after the Emperor, against the Constitutions of the Gol∣den Seal, and the Sense of the Electoral Colledg, had divested the Palatine and his Children of their Estates and Dignity, not so much by Force of Arms, as by Deceit and Breach of Promise; instead of disbanding the Army, which was to have been performed according to Agreement, new Troops were added; and though the Pro∣testant League was dissolved, yet the Catholick Combination, with all its Adherents, remained armed and immoveable to compel the Protestants to a restitution of the Ecclesiastical Revenue, notwithstanding the Articles of Peace to the con∣trary: so that the Princes and Towns of the Lower 
Saxony
 entring into a new League, raised an Army under the Command of 
Christian
 of 
Brunswick
 Bishop of 
Alberstadt. Bethlem Gabor
 having his Interest adjoyned to this Party, enter∣tained the same Desires and Intentions, to sup∣press the Greatness of the Emperor; and ha∣ving the just complaint to alledge of wanting his annual Pension of Fifty thousand Crowns, as was agreed by the Treaty of 
Niclasbourg,
 he re∣solved to force it by Arms, and take part with the Princes of the Protestant Religion which he professed: but because his Srength and Power was not sufficient, without the assistance of the Turks, he not only obtained their permission and approbation of this War, as we have said be∣fore, but by paiment of Fifty thousand Dollars presented to the first Vizier, and of Forty thou∣sand by way of annual Tribute, he procured an

Auxiliary Force of Fifty thousand Turks and Tar∣tars; with part of which, commanded by 
Budi∣ani,
 he made an Irruption into the Lower 
Au∣stria;
 and with the other, 
Bethlem
 himself, a∣bout the beginning of 
October,
 entred into 
Mora∣via,
 defeated the Regiment of 
Tiffenbach,
 re∣took the Town of 
Turnova,
 and routed the Count of 
Montenegro
 General for his Imperial Majesty before the Town of 
Ghoding
 on the Fron∣tier of 
Moravia,
 which he afterwards beleagu∣red and held besieged until the 
20th
 of 
Novem∣ber,
 when 
Stanislaus Turzow
 a Hungarian Palatine became Mediator of the Peace, and at length obtained a Truce: the principal Articles of which were as followeth.




1. That on both parts Arms be laid down for ten months, and all Acts of Hostility cease; that on neither side any attempt should be made ei∣ther by force or fraud to take any Castles, Forts, Cities, or places of Defence during this time; and that both Germans, Hungarians, and Turks should be alike comprehended.


2. That if the Emperor were desirous to treat and conclude a final Peace with the Grand Signi∣or, he should use 
Bethlem Gabor
 as Mediator, and do nothing therein without his privity.


3. That all Places and Forts taken by the Prince of 
Transylvania
 in his late Expedition, and that all Cities and Castles now in possession of either, should so remain without any alteration.


4. That all Passages should be open for free Trade of Merchants, and all other the Subjects and Friends of either side.




A Truce being thus concluded, the Turks in their return made great havock, carrying with them great numbers of poor Christians into Sla∣very, which 
Gabor
 out of compassion seemed wil∣ling to redeem with a low price at his own charge; which the Turks refusing, carried those miserable Wretches into Captivity. The Count 
Esterhasi
 Governour of 
Newhausel
 for the Empe∣ror, being highly incensed at this treacherous Action, contrary to the Truce so lately conclu∣ded, having drawn out a sufficient Force from the neighbouring Garisons, fell on the Rear of the Turks in their March towards 
Buda,
 and charged them so home on the Banks of the River 
Niter,
 that he killed five hundred of them on the place, took all their Baggage, with divers Prisoners, and gave liberty to many Christian Slaves. The next day but one after he charged another Party of them, as they attempted to pass a Bridg, which the night before he had caused to be bro∣ken down; of which having killed a great num∣ber, the rest saved themselves by swimming: howsoever many Christians procured their liberty thereby, and a considerable Booty was made of Horses, Camels, Waggons, and all Provisions. The other Troops consisting of greater numbers, were worse treated than the former; for 
Ester∣hasi
 having received a Recruit of Horse from 
Reiffemberg
 Governor of 
Komorra,
 and 
Breuner
 of 
Jarvarin
 or 
Rab,
 he proceeded boldly to meet the Turks, and joyning Battel with them, he slew twelve hundred on the place, gave liberty to fourteen hundred Christians, took divers of their principal Commanders, with all their Bag and Baggage, besides a considerable quantity of Gold and Silver, in Plate and Mony. Nor were 
Reif∣femberg
 and 
Breuner
 less successful over those who passed through their Quarters to joyn with the Garisons of 
Alba Regalis
 and 
Canisia,
 having killed seven hundred of them, and taken all their Baggage. Moreover Count 
Serini
 in his Jouney towards 
Vienna,
 defeated six hundred of them, and presented their Colours to the Empe∣rour: and 
Esterhasi
 in like manner after his se∣veral Exploits, offered thirty Cornets at his Feet, with six Prisoners of Quality, one o f which was Kins man of 
Bethlem Gabor.


These Rebuffs cooled the courage of the Turks a little, and altered the resolution of the Council for carrying forward the War on the side of 
Ger∣many,
 as was intended, had the Success answered expectation: For these Misfortunes abroad, and intestine Troubles at home, with Pestilence and Famine, which at the same time greatly afflicted the parts of 
Constatinople
 (whereby an hundred thousand People died) abated the Mettle of the Turks, and caused them to take new Measures in all their Determinations: and for that reason Ambassadors were sent both to 
Vienna
 and into 
Poland
 to renew the Articles of Peace, and so to confirm the League, that whilst the Sultan was imployed in his Wars with 
Persia
 and the Eastern Countries, nothing should intervene from the Western Parts to trouble or obstruct his Pro∣gress, or recal him from his Enterprise. For now the Rebellion of 
Abassa,
 joined with 
Bechir
 Pasha of 
Bagdat,
 growing daily more considera∣ble, and his strength increasing to that conditi∣on, that he was able to keep the Field in de∣spight of the Grand Signiors Forces, he adven∣tured to quarter within five days March of 
Con∣stantinople:
 and at the same time Letters coming from 
Hafish
 Pasha General of the Army in the Province of 
Bagdat,
 that the King of 
Persia
 was entred into the Dominions of the Turk with a powerful Army, a general Consternation seized the whole Turkish Court, the wisest and stoutest having occasion to call up for all their Wisdom and Courage to assist at a Time when the Go∣vernment was assailed on all sides, both at home and abroad. Various were the Counsels and Proposals in what manner to proceed in Times of such emergency. First it was resolved to pro∣claim a War both against the King of 
Persia,
 and the Rebels in 
Asia,
 and that whosoever took of the Grand Signior Pay, from one Asper a day to higher value, should be in readiness to serve in the War, upon penalty of losing his Estate, of being accounted a Rebel, and his Wife and Chil∣dren sold for Slaves. But the more sober and moderate sort judged it policy to take off 
A∣bassa,
 by sending him a general Pardon, with a concession of all his Demands, upon condition, that he should turn his Arms upon the King of 
Persia,
 who was the common Enemy of their Country and Religion: but the Janisaries would by no means assent to this Agreement, with a Person to whom they bore a more inveterate ha∣tred, than to the Persian himself, as he did also to the Janisaries. For that he might better justi∣fie his pretence of Revenge, he declared, That being one day in a Mosch at his Prayers, the murdered 
Osman
 appeared to him, and taking him by the hand, said, My faithful 
Mussulman,
 since thou art the most generous of all my Slaves, I command thee to revenge my Death, with the Blood of sixty thousand Janisaries and Spahees; good Forture shall accompany thy Arms, and Victory shall crown thy Labours. During these Intrigues and Difficulties of Reconciliation, 
A∣bassa,
 spoiled the Lesser 
Asia,
 and the Persian King conquered the City and Province of 
Bagdan,
 or 
Babylon,
 took 
Kur Asan
 Pasha, an old Souldier, Prisoner, possessed himself of 
Mosul
 and 
Leska
 on the Persian Sea; and meeting no considerable op∣position, he divided his Army into four parts. The first was dispatched into 
Mesopotamia,
 com∣manded by the King himself. The second made Incursions into 
Palestine.
 The third infested the

Coast of the Black Sea: and the fourth marched towards 
Mecha,
 with hope and design of sharing all the parts of the Eastern Empire.


Ali
 Pasha, who opposed the King in 
Mesopota∣mia,
 was slain, and his Army wholly defeated, so that the Province became a Prey to the Ene∣my: the success in 
Palestine
 was equally fortunate by the revolt of 
Damascus,
 a place of great Riches and Importance; the Coast of the Black Sea was greviously infested, and a Port taken near to 
Trapezond;
 and little opposition being made at 
Balsora,
 the Town was taken by that Army in their March towards 
Mecha
 and the parts of the Red Sea, where they rendered themselves Masters of 
Medina,
 the City of their Prophet 
Ma∣homet.


To repair these losses, and to encounter num∣bers so strong and valiant in all parts, the Vizier was dispeeded with a powerful FOrce to the Town of 
Bagdat;
 but by reason of Mutinies and Tumults amongst the Souldiery, Matters found not the success expected: and the Garison mak∣ing valiant and vigorous Sallies against the im∣becility of the Turkish Souldiery, which were al∣ways most obstinate and stout to oppose their own Commanders, obtained an advantage in e∣very Attempt; by which discouragement many forsaking their Colours,
 the Siege was raised with dishonour, and the Interest of the Turk impai∣red, and almost irreparably lost in those Provin∣ces. This News arrived at 
Constantinople,
 that the Camp was risen and fled by Night, that they were forced to burn their Tents and Provisions, and to break their great Artillery and cast them into the 
Euphrates:
 that the Miseries in the Ar∣my had been such by Famine and Pestilence, and want of all Provisions and Ammunition, that the like was never known: that the Vizier had be∣headed three of his Pasha's, that so he might cast the whole blame upon them; and that now re∣treating with his Army into the Turkish Domini∣ons, the Persians pursued them in the Rear, and for ten days did execution on them making the best use they could of their Victory; which Re∣lation filled the Hearts of all People with sad∣ness, and disordered the Counsels with confusi∣on. The Cause of which will Success, according to custom, being imputed to the General, he was deprived of his Office, and sacrificed to the Fury of the Janisaries.


These Troubles were increased at 
Constantino∣ple,
 by the Addresses which the Prince of 
Tran∣sylvania
 made unto the Port by his Kapi-Kahya or Agent, representing to the Grand Signior, That he wanting Heirs Male to succeed him in his Principality; the States at a Diet had, with common consent, elected his Lady for his Suc∣cessor; and therefore desired confirmation from the Port. In excuse of her Sex, he alledged the urgent Necessity of the present Times, which perswaded rather to admit of the Government of a Woman, than that his Principality should, for want of an Heir, fall into the Hands of the powerful Family of 
Austria.
 To make good this Demand, Duke 
John
 of 
Weymar,
 and Count 
Mansfelt,
 arrived in 
Silistria,
 to whom the Prince of 
Transylvania
 joined his Troops: and 
Morteza
 Pasha of 
Buda
 wrote to the Port, that he was marching towards 
Vatz
 to meet the Prince, and confer with him concerning these Designs. The Emperor's Resident at 
Constantinople
 greatly ex∣claimed against these Proceedings; which some∣thing troubled the Counsels of the Turks, who in that Conjuncture were unwilling to give be∣ginnings to a new War; so that besides fair Words, they promised to write such Letters to the Pasha of 
Buda,
 as should give a stop to the Investiture of the Princes. But, to say truly, the Instructions given were in such ambiguous terms, that they in effect left the whole Matter to the Discretion of 
Morteza
 to act, as he judg∣ed most agreeable to the State of Affairs on the Frontiers, and security of the present Peace.


Thus did the Turkish Court seek to ward off the blow of a War with 
Germany,
 and yet se∣cretly nourished and encouraged it, by giving Orders to the Pasha of 
Buda
 to take up his Win∣ter-quarters with the Prince of 
Transylvania,
 and to follow his Directions; but yet so to go∣vern Matters with Caution, as not to engage too far on uncertain Grounds or doubtful Hazard, but to embrace Propositions of Peace, if offered with Honour and Security. In prosecution of these Rules, 
Morteza
 observing, that 
Weymar
 and 
Mansfelt
 having united their Forces with 
Gabor,
 had formed a considerable Army, and were able to fight with 
Wallestein
 General of the Imperialists; joined also his Forces to theirs, judging it a prudent and politick Design to wage a War at the Blood and Expence of others. With these Encouragements, and with the fa∣vour of a good Opportunity,
 the Confederates fell upon the Army of 
Wallestein
 near the River 
Gran;
 who not being able to withstand their Force and Fury, was put to flight, and pursued in the Rear with great slaughter; and endea∣vouring to pass the River on two Bridges of Boats, were closely followed by the Prince's For∣ces, who gaining the Pass, put the whole Army into great amazement, and resolved to pursue them to the Gates of 
Presburg,
 or 
Vienna.


Notwithstanding this Success, the Prince of 
Transylvania
 observing the backwardness of his Allies to contribute the Succours of Men and Mo∣ny which they had promised; and fearing that the unfortunate Estate of the Turkish Affairs should cause the Sultan to disown the War, dispeeded a Messenger to the Emperor in the Winter-season, to excuse the Constraint upon him of taking up Arms, and to offer Terms of Accommodation and Peace. But the Emperor refused all Treaties, until such time as 
Gabor
 had separated himself from his Allies, and from asso∣ciation with the Turk: Upon which Answer, 
Gabor
 retired to 
Cassovia,
 and 
Morteza
 to 
Pesth.
 This Compliance gave beginning to a Treaty at 
Komara,
 where the Commissioners on part of the Emperor, of the Grand Signior, and Prince of 
Transylvania,
 assembled. All Parties seemed inclinable to War, and yet with occult Intenti∣ons to make Peace, being necessitated thereunto by the urgency of their distinct Interests. The Emperor was urged by his Wars with the Pro∣testants of 
Germany,
 and apprehension of Forces from 
England
 in favour of the Elector Palatine, then King of 
Bohemia.
 The Grand Signior was encumbred by the unfortunate condition of his Wars in 
Asia:
 And 
Bethlem Gabor,
 jealous of being disowned by the Port, deserted by his Al∣lies, and exposed to fight and contend singly with the Emperor. In short, 
Gabor
 concluded a Peace with the Emperor apart,
 which gave some Jealousies and displeasure to the Grand Signior: Howsoever he dissembled his Discontent, and willingly interessed 
Gabor
 with 
Morteza
 as Com∣missioner for him; who being variously dispo∣sed, yet moved with the considerations of their common Advantage, work'd all Differences into a Composition of Peace; the Articles of which being brought to 
Constantinople
 by an Internuncio from the Emperor, and delivered in presence of the two Ambassadors of 
Gabor,
 they were

accepted by the Chimacam, and ratified by the Grand Signior.


Articles of Peace concluded between the Emperor of 
Germany Ferdinand
 the Second, and 
Bethlem Gabor,
 in the Month of 
December
 1626.




I.
 THE Prince of 
Transylvania
 doth promise, by the Faith of a Christian, never to move Arms, or use any Hostility a∣gainst the Majesty of the Emperor, or the House of 
Austria,
 or their Successors, much less to enter into their Dominions with an Army; nor to aid his Enemies, or keep a Correspondence with them: Not to plot any Innovation in the Kingdom of 
Hungary,
 or other Christian Countries: Nor to stir up or provoke the Turks, Tartars, or others, to in∣vade them: Not to entertain or assist in any evil Counsel against his Majesty, nor to give ear to the Request and Desires of his Ene∣mies; but rather to reveal all their Conspira∣cies and Wickednesses, which shall be made known unto him; and by all means to demon∣strate and shew a sincere mind truly desirous of Peace, and sollicitous of the Common Good.


II.
 That the Prince shall instantly depart with his whole Army, out of the Territories and Cities of the Emperor; and that he shall restore as well all Goods belonging to the Im∣perial Treasure, as those of his faithful Sub∣jects.


III.
 That he shall remove from him the Rebel 
Mansfelt,
 and all other his Followers and Adherents, desirous to invade the Domi∣nions of the Emperor: And that he shall not aid any Stranger whatsoever, who at his In∣stance hath entered into the Territories of his Mejesty with Count 
Mansfelt;
 to whom Let∣ters of Publick Safety shall be given, that they may return by twenty or thirty in a Troop, conditionally, that in no place of their Retreat they shall joyn with the Ene∣mies of the Emperor.


IV.
 That seeing it is fit, for Establish∣ment of the Peace, that the Inhabitants of Countries and Cities belonging to the Prince, by consent of the Emperor, should remain, during his Life, in Obedience and Fidelity to him; and that those Inhabitants should do Homage to the Emperor, (saving their corpo∣ral Oath to the Prince) to keep inviolate these Articles, That they should have leave, by Let∣ters of full Authority and Power, granted them by the Prince in their first Assemblies and Conventions, to make such Oath of Ho∣mage.


V.
 That at the same time of performing the Homage and Oath, besides the Oath before the last War, they shall take a new Oath ac∣cording to the Agreement between the Prince and the Commissioners of the Emperor.


VI.
 The Prince shall procure, that all Pla∣ces upon the Confines, which were taken by the Turks in the last War, be restored; and that all Captives, taken Prisoners, shall be set at liberty: And that the Prince shall pro∣cure the freedom of all such the Emperor's Subjects as shall be in the Turkish Capti∣vity.


VII.
 That all the Subjects of the Empe∣ror, lately incited and drawn to the Service of the Prince, shall be free from their Oath: and if the Prince hath any of their Writings Obligatory in his Hands, that he shall restore them: And that these Conditions being con∣firmed, all other things formerly treated, shall remain in their former State and Vigour.


VIII.
 That if any other Difficulties arise, they shall be accommodated with Fidelity and Quietness by Commissioners on both Parts: And that all those who in the last Commotions have served the Prince, shall be absolved ac∣cording to the Treaty and Agreement at 
Vi∣enna.


IX.
 That all the Inhabitants of Cities and Countries, which have served the Prince, shall be absolved; only those excepted, who have voluntarily taken up Arms against the Emperor; for whom the Prince only shall in∣tercede, excusing always private Men, who have done private Wrongs; for they shall, according to Law and Custom, seek their Re∣stitution by Civil Action.


X.
 That all other Articles of Peace con∣cluded at 
Nichilsburg
 and 
Vienna,
 shall re∣main in their former Vigour and Force: And that all Goods of the Emperor's Clergy, possessed by the Prince from the Year 
1619,
 to this present Day, shall be restored; except the Abbies of 
Replana
 belonging to the Se∣minaries of 
Strigonium,
 for which the Prince shall pay yearly to the Emperor five hundred Florens.




These Articles being thus agreed, and sig∣ned, and approved by the Sultan, in the Month of 
September
 following 1627, the Articles between the Emperor and the Grand Signior were also agreed at 
Komara;
 the which are as follow, tran∣slated out of the Turkish, word for word.




THAT seeing the Peace established for∣merly at 
Zitwar, Vienna, Komara,
 and 
Chiarman,
 hath remained in the same State, and in the same Articles, without any alteration, it shall not be violated by any new occasion of Contention.


That the Differences of 
Vatz,
 whereof is made mention at the present, shall rest in the same State that the Commissioners on both sides shall agree.


That the new Forts built upon the Confines of 
Croatia,
 contrary to the Peace, shall be demolished. To which purpose our said De∣puty 
Mehmet,
 and our Visier 
Mortesa
 Pasha, shall meet upon the Frontiers of 
Buda
 with

your Deputies, at the Time appointed by the Treaty; and thereupon the places on both sides shall cause to be demolished the Forts built contrary to the Peace: Wherein if they find any Impediment, they shall chuse able and valiant Men to perform and execute the said Service.


That after the Approbation of this happy Peace, your great Ambassador shall come to 
Komara,
 and ours shall repair with our Im∣perial Letters to 
Strigonium:
 and there one of them advising the other, yours shall set forward to our happy Port, and ours shall advance to you. For so it is agreed by our Imperial Order, both carrying with them the new Imperial Capitulations.


That all Complaints of Villages subject to both parts, shall be laid aside, and no Violences, Taxes, or Contribution, contrary to our for∣mer Convention, shall be exacted. And all Forts built in the common Confines, shall be raised. And reciprocally it shall be made known, according to the ancient Treaty, what great Men do dwell amongst our Tributaries. And for the execution of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Articles of the Peace of 
Zitwa,
 the Tenth of 
Vienna,
 and the Fourth of 
Ko∣mara
 and 
Chiarman
 (for such was then the Agreement) two Capigi-Pasha's of our high Port shall be deputed and dispatched, the one to this side, and the other to that side of the 
Danube.
 And upon your part you shall send two such qualified Persons to the same places: who being met together with the De∣puties of 
Mortesa
 Pasha, and the Palatine of 
Hungary,
 shall rectify all Disorders, and see that good Justice be done on both Parties; for so it is our most High Pleasure.


That the Slaves which have been taken du∣ring this our Treaty, shall be freed and set at liberty without any Ransom: And those who were taken before the said Treaty, shall be exchanged and Redeemed, according to their Qualities and Estates, by the interposition of 
Mortesa
 Pasha, and the Palatine of 
Hunga∣ry
 deputed for that purpose.


For the Good of poor People on both sides, the Commissioners have thought fit to conclude this renewed Peace for Twenty five Years, from 
1627.
 Whereunto we have given our Imperial Assent.


That all Merchants, and other our Subjects on both parts, shall have safe passage and conduct through both our Dominions: And we have given command to our Pasha's, Beg∣lerbeghs, Generals, Beghs, and Captains, upon our Confines, to apprehend, bring into Justice, and punish all such as shall any way disturb or molest them contrary to the Peace. As likewise the Palatine of 
Hungary,
 and other your Ministers shall do on your part, if they find any such Offenders.


That our Beglerbeghs, Sanzacks, Captains, and Governors; and your Generals, Com∣manders, and Captains, shall upon occasion imploy all such Persons as are lovers of the Peace and Common Good.


That there shall be no Damage or Hurt done to any of our Subjects in any of your Kingdoms or Dominions, neither by Sea nor Land; as there shall none be done to yours in our Dominions.


That all by-past Wrongs, Enmities, and Ʋnkindnesses, on both parts, shall be forgot∣ten and laid asleep: and that this happy Peace shall be sincerely and firmly continued and kept inviolate.


Ʋpon Condition that the Emperor perform and observe all the aforesaid Articles, and that there follow no Action from any Mini∣sters, contrary to the said Peace: We pro∣mise and swear, by God our Creator, who made the whole World of Nothing; and by the Honour which we bear to our most high Prophet 
Mahomet Mustapha,
 That there shall not be done, during the whole Term of the said Peace, the least Hurt or Damage to the Subjects, Countries, Kingdoms, Castles, or Forts of the said Emperor, by any of our Ministers or Armies, nor to any Christian Slaves subject to our happy Port.




By these Articles we may observe, that both Parties were desirous of a present Peace, rather than one which was durable; for things are so slubber'd over to serve the present Occasion, that they leave all Disputes undecided, till Time should happen more proper to interpret them with the Sword, than with the Pen: like Sores ob∣ducted by an unskilful Chirurgion, which feste∣ring within, must be again opened before they are cured: howsoever they served the turn of 
Gabor,
 whose Interest it was to maintain an ill Correspondence between the two Emperors.


Peace being thus concluded between 
Ferdinand
 the Second and Sultan 
Morat,
 gave some reputa∣tion to the Affairs of the Turks: so that not∣withstanding the late success of the Persian in their War, by raising the Siege of 
Bagdat,
 and overthrow of the Turkish Army; yet that King finding himself now engaged alone, and singly to contend with the Ottoman Power, feared the Puissance of that Empire, lest being roused and heated with the sensible Pinches of the late Dis∣grace, they should call up and invigorate all their Forces to a Revenge, which might at length tend to a ruin and destruction of 
Persia,
 unless For∣tune, which attended the first auspicious begin∣nings with Success, did also continue constant, and still accompany their Arms, which could hardly be expected.


Wherefore on these Considerations becoming more faint in prosecution of the War, the Per∣sian dispatched an Ambassador to 
Constantinople,
 furnished with various Proposals and Projects for a Peace; but still Mattters driving so as to reserve the City and Province of 
Bagdat,
 or 
Babylon,
 in the hands of the Persian, the Treaty became in∣effectual, in regard the Vizier (who was then called 
Halil
 Pasha) judged it a high and an irre∣coverable disreputation to the Empire, to be dis∣membred of so principal a part of it. Where∣fore the Ambassador being dispatched away with some neglect, the Turks armed with that dili∣gence and heat, that they entred 
Persia
 with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand Men; with which appearance the people being dismay∣ed, suffered 
Tauris
 to be taken without much op∣position. From hence marching to 
Bagdat,
 they

found the City well provided and defended with a numerous Garison, from whence many Sallies were made with variety of Fortune, till at length the Turkish Souldiers being wearied and tired with incessant labour and watchings, many of them fled from their Colours: and with such di∣minutions, the Army being much abated in its Numbers, the Vizier withdrew them from the Persian Dominions.


Some Months after the Turkish Army being reinforced, the Vizier entring again into 
Persia,
 overthrew the Trucmen who opposed him in his March, and destroyed the Gregorians, who were Friends to the Persian, with a very great slaugh∣ter; took 
Moroc
 their General, and cut off his Head: And adding to these Victories, the re∣port of having taken some few inconsiderable Towns, his Expedition ended without other Ad∣vantages, or Progress of their Arms. This ill Success much troubled the Councils at 
Constanti∣nople;
 for they considered that they had now waged an expensive, laborious War, for the space of three Years, without any Effect agree∣able to the Blood and Charge which maintained it, but rather to the Loss and Damage of the Empire. The Souldiers abhorred the length and tediousness of the Way, and the misery of the March, being to pass over vast Countries and Desarts, where there was nothing besides Rocks, Sands, and Barrenness. Many Horses, Camels, and other Beasts of Burden, perished for want of Nourishment; and where Provisi∣ons were to be had, the Price was so excessive, that the Timariots and other Souldiers had not a Purse to defray their Charges. The Enemy likewise was very strong, for the Sofi was at the Head of forty thousand brave Horse, which dai∣ly infested the Ottoman Camp, beat their Con∣voys, and cut off their Provisions, and so ob∣structed them that they could not advance.


The Vizier 
Halil,
 then General, being dis∣couraged by these Disasters, was inclinable to accept of the Proposition made by the Persian, 
viz.
 That 
Babylon
 should remain to his eldest Son in Fee, and to his Heirs and Successors, acknow∣ledging to the Grand Signior a Tribute as great as the yearly Revenue which proceeded from it, at the time when it was in the Hands of the Sul∣tan. But this middle Way seemed an Expedi∣ent dishonourable to the Greatness of this Em∣pire, and that which argued pusillanimity and want of courage in the Government, and there∣fore was rejected by the Council of State, as well as by the Military Men. Howsoever the Persians taking their Measures by the disposition they discovered in the Vizier thereunto, adventured to dispatch an Ambassador to 
Constantinople
 with tender of the same Project; but as he was cold∣ly and faintly received, so he was in a few days dispatched with few words, and little respect, as if he had been sent as a Spy to discover the State and Condition of the City,
 and the Incli∣nation of the Prince, rather than to obtain any Benefit by the Treaty. For now 
Amurat
 grow∣ing into Years, increased in Spirit, and disco∣vered a Martial Courage; he began to leave his Delights, and Walks in Gardens, and the society with his Mother and Women, and to assume thoughts of War and Government: such as en∣tertained him in softness and luxurious Pastimes, were reproved by the Ministers about him, and by them perswaded to buckle on his Armour, and to delight in Martial Exercises: So that now new Measures were taken in all Affairs: And in the first place, 
Halil
 the Great Vizier was recal∣led from being General in 
Persia,
 and the Pasha of 
Darbiquier
 put into his Place; and though he was Brother-in-Law to the Grand Signior, yet being esteemed at Court as a Person who had amassed great Riches in his Employment, he was forced to disgorge five hundred thousand Crowns as an ease of his Burden, and an Atonement to pacify the Sultan for the Fault of his Misfortunes and ill Success.


In these Times of Licentiousness and Revolt, the Pirats of 
Algier
 and 
Tunis,
 began also to cast off their Respect and Reverence to the Ottoman Empire;
 for being become Rich by the Prizes they had taken on Christian Vessels, they resol∣ved to set up for themselves, and to esteem the Peace which Christian Princes had made with the Grand Signior, not to concern them; but as if their Governments had been independent, de∣manded a particular Treaty, and distinct Arti∣cles with themselves: So that now daring to do any thing, six Vessels of 
Tunis
 chased some Chri∣stian Ships into 
Rhodes,
 and there attaqued them, notwithstanding that the Castle shot at them. They afterwards took a Dutch Ship, which had laden at 
Alexandria:
 and entring the Port of 
Salines
 in 
Cyprus,
 they engaged with two Vene∣tians; the lesser Ship made a good resistance, but having no help, she was thrice fired, and at last burnt: the other being a Ship of eight hundred Tuns, was cowardly set on fire by the Mariners, and abandoned, escaping ashore with their Boats. Then they sailed for 
Scanderone,
 where finding a Dutch Ship and a Polaca, they took both, and then landed. The Aga of the Scale, with all the Inhabitants, fled; so that finding no opposition, they ransacked and robbed all the Ware-houses, and afterwards set them on fire: The greatest Loss fell upon the English and Dutch, the first lost about ten thousand Dollars, and the latter about thirty thousand.


Of these Losses, and breach of Peace, the Christian Ambassadors much lamented; and complained, that if some Remedy were not ap∣plied thereto, all Trade must be given over, no Security being to be expected in the Articles and Faith of the Grand Signior: To which, though the Vizier and Great Men did seem to yield a fa∣vourable Ear, and promise Redress: Yet being corrupted with some share of the Spoils, and sweetned with part of the Robbery, they began to reject the Memorials of the Ambassadors, and to allow the Pleas of the Pirats, as grounded on some solid Foundation of Reason and Religion: suffering them to publish Discourses, that the Turks were obliged to maintain a perpetual War with the Christians, as Enemies to their Law and Alchoran; and though Policy may suggest some Conveniencies by Peace with them, yet those Considerations are Matters of Sin rather than of Reason.


To make all this good, the Divan of 
Tunis
 sent two Deputies to remonstrate the great Benefit and Advantage the Port received by the Depre∣dations and hostile Acts which they committed on the Christians: And to inculcate this Argu∣ment the better, they declared, That they had lately taken two Gallies of 
Malta,
 out of the Spoils of which, they presented unto the Sultan two Stirrups of Gold, with divers Slaves; two of which were Cavaliers, one of the Roman, and the other of the French Nation: those which were Youths, and comely in shape and feature, were entred into the Service of the Seraglio; and the more strong and robustous, were com∣mitted to the Service of the Gallies; so that the Turks were inwardly pleased with these Piracies, howsoever gave good words to the Christian

Ambassadors, promised much, and effected no∣thing.


At that time Trade flourished greatly in those Parts, and had done much more, had it not been interrupted by the Piracies of 
Barbary;
 and the Trade was especially so great with 
Venice,
 that a Turkish Merchant called 
Rodul
 Aga, whose whole Negotiation and Dealing was for that place, died worth a Million of Soltanees; of which, for want of Children, the Grand Signior became the sole Heir.


But one Accident happened about this Time on the Seas, worthy to be recounted: The Seas (as we have said) swarming then with Pirats, the General of 
Candia,
 with three Gallies, coast∣ing on the Seas for defence and protection of Merchant-Ships, arrived in the Port of 
Andro;
 from whence espying a Gally plying close under the Shore, and believing her to be a Corsaire, or Pirat, made up to her; and because it was a about the glimpse of the Evening, so that she could not be well known or distinguished, the General rashly charged her; and meeting a stout resistance, many were killed before it was known that the Gally belonged to the 
Archipelago,
 com∣manded by 
Dervis Bei,
 one of the Grand Sig∣nior's Captains: but so soon as the Mistake was discovered, the Candiot General demanded of the Turk a thousand Excuses, returned him his Gally and Slaves again, and whatsoever was ta∣ken from him, bestowing with them an infinity of Complements, supposing that thereby the Spirit of the Turk being somewhat appeased and mollified, he would represent this Encounter with the more favourable Terms and Advantage at the Port. Notwithstanding which Offices of Kindness, 
Dervis Bei,
 without farther loss of time passed up to 
Constantinople,
 bringing his Gally in without Lantern, shot thorough, ill treated, and shattered, feigning himself also to be wounded; related, that he had lost forty four Levents, and seventy seven Slaves which were killed; and that all the Haratch or Tribute-Mony, which was collected for the Grand Signi∣or's Service from the several Islands, was rob∣bed and embezled by these Candiots. His Com∣plaints were aggravated by many Circumstan∣ces, and being assisted with the Clamours of other Beys or Captains of Gallies; the Noise and Dispute was exceeding high in the Divan, urg∣ing, that the Venetians were obliged to make good a Loss, which they had caused rather out of Malice than Mistake.


At that time 
Georgio Giustiniano
 resided at 
Con∣stantinople
 for the most Serene Republick; who to oppose the high Clamours of these Complai∣nants, shewed Courage, and accompanied his Answers with Prudence and Resolution, which are often very convincing in the Turkish Court. They alledged, that the Peace was broken. He answered, That it would not be the first time; and that they ought not to yield entire Credit to the Relation of Persons passionate and partial in their own Cause: that such Accidents as these, were as ordinary and common in the World as Cold and Heat, as fair and foul Weather; and that so soon as the Error was discovered, and the Gally known not to belong to 
Barbary,
 but to the Grand Signior, it was punctually and en∣tirely, restored, with all the Excuses imagina∣ble.


In short, this Business which had so bad an Aspect at the first, by the dexterity of this Mi∣nister, and giving something to 
Dervis Bei,
 where∣by to stop his Mouth, the Complaint ceased, and all farther Proceedings were superseded.


The Wars in 
Persia
 being unsuccessful, it was proposed in Council, that a Peace should be made, if possible, with 
Abassa
 Pasha; that his Demands,
 whatsoever they were, should be granted, and promises given him of Honours and Preferment: But the inveterate Enmity and Hate which the Janisaries bore him, and the difficulty there was to perswade 
Abassa,
 that the Overtures made him were free and candid, and not mixed with Treachery and Design, were Obstructions not to be obviated or overcome. Wherefore 
Abassa
 keeping mutual Intelligence with the Persians, and receiving assistance and succours from them, was become very formidable and strong, and the Town of 
Erzirum
 well fortified with Works and a numerous Garrison. Howsoever the Jani∣saries, his mortal Enemies, pressing the Vizier to proceed against him, at length obliged him to besiege the Place; which having done, and closely begirt it,
 the most forward and brave a∣mongst the Janisaries, were the first to scale the Walls, but were repulsed by the valour of stout and resolute Souldiers; for they knowing that there was no other safety but in their Arms, and no other Mercy than an ignominious Death, be∣ing the just Reward of their Rebellion, refused to give or receive Quarter: Wherefore they made frequent Sallies on the Enemy, and as ma∣ny Janisaries of them as they took Prisoners, they immediately hanged about the Walls, as a spectacle of Horror to their Associates. This Resolution and Cruelty, deterred the Turks from their frequent Assaults and Storms made upon the Town; and the many Batteries and Fortifi∣cations, rendred the Place almost impregnable; so that there seemed no other hopes to remain, but to overcome them by a long Siege and Fa∣mine: But 
Abassa
 had so well provided against this Danger, with such plenty of Provisions, that the Turkish Army began to be more strait∣ned for want of Sustenance than the Besieged: so that becoming weary and discouraged amidst so many Difficulties, they raised the Siege with such disorder and haste,
 that they left several Pieces of Cannon behind them; and retiring with some confusion, were charged in the Rear, so that many Janisaries fell a Sacrifice to the hate and revenge of the Enemy.


The News of this Success coming to 
Constan∣tinople,
 was ill received; but the Disaster there∣of, according to the usual Custom, was attribu∣ted to the Vizier who was General; for which Cause he was deprived of his Office, and the Se∣lictar Aga (who carries the Sword before the Grand Signior) was put into his place, a Per∣son of a fierce, bloody, and cruel Disposi∣tion.


To these,
 new troubles were added out of 
Tartary.
 For 
Mahomet
 the King of that Coun∣try, exalted to the Princely Dignity (as we have already declared) by the Favour and Election of that People, though contrary to the sense and pleasure of the Port, was now fallen from the good esteem which they conceived for him, be∣cause he gave some hindrance to their usual In∣cursions on the Polonians and Cossacks, out of memory and gratitude to the assistance they had contributed towards his Election; for which rea∣son being, as it were, famished for want of their usual Depredations, they refused to obey his Commands; and then openly threw off their Obedience to him as their Prince. The Turks, who always envied this Dignity to 
Mahomet,
 rejoiced to see this Discord between him and his People, and therefore thought it time to make use of this occasion to re-instate 
Gherey
 the elder

Brother into the possession of his Kingdom; whom the Turks, for his better security, having placed at 
Rhodes,
 the usual Retirement of the Tartarian Princes, dispatched a Squadron of Gallies to fetch him from thence to 
Constantinople;
 where being arrived, he was received with a magnificent and Princely Entertainment by the Sultan: that so the Fame thereof forerunning his arrival in 
Tartary,
 the people might be better prepared to concur with the Port in their ac∣ceptance of him for their King. He was after∣wards conducted to 
Caffa,
 the Grand Signior's Town in 
Tartary,
 with a strong Fleet of fifty Gallies, where at his first landing he was received by 
Cant-Emir,
 a rich and powerful Tartar, and Chief of the Turkish Faction, and by many o∣thers with great honour and solemnity, with whom also a considerable Party most willingly en∣gaged. But the Cossacks of 
Poland
 and Circas∣sians, Friends to 
Mahomet
 the Brother, joyning their Troops to his Forces, became too Strong for the Turks; for giving them Battel near the Inclosures of the 
Danube,
 at a place called 
Ban∣det,
 they defeated them, and killed three or four thousand of their Men, putting all to Fire and Sword round about; and entring on the Seas with their Fleet of Boats, took five of the Tur∣kish Gallies: with which ill Success, the Tar∣tars, which took part with 
Cant-Emir,
 being discouraged, abandoned their Colours and fled; so that 
Cant-Emir
 was forced to take Sanctu∣ary in 
Caffa,
 which being a Town belonging to the Grand Signior, it was hoped, that the re∣verence they owed to that Name, would cause them to refrain all Violence thereunto. But the Tartars, provoked by this late effusion of Blood, lost all respect to that Government; so that be∣sieging the Town, they assaulted and took it, and therein the Son of 
Cant-Emir
 whom they cut in pieces, the Father escaping in a disguise from the City.


The News hereof arriving at 
Constantinople
 was greatly displeasing, and caused many serious Debates and Consultations thereupon; the wisest and most sober of the Council was for dissem∣bling the Matter, and with their usual dexterity to suffer what they could not remedy: for that it was by no means advisable in the present con∣juncture of Affairs, to proceed unto an open Rupture with the Tartars, fearing lest the Chri∣stians, Persians, and other Enemies should make a benefit of this Occasion, and joyning with a Nation so strong in Horse, should dangerously press upon the Empire, and force them to the ultimate extremity of Affairs. Wherefore an Envoy Extraordinary was sent to the Tartars, who covering the inward sentiments of Regret and Anger, which the Sultan conceived for the late Disgrace, seemed to wonder at the Cause and Reason of the last Engagement, as if it had been acted without the knowledg or order of the Grand Signior; and thus with gentle Terms in∣sinuating, that the Surrender of 
Caffa
 would be very acceptable to the Port, and that which would atone for all miscarriages, and be such an offering of Pacification, as would reconcile all past Differences, and restore a perfect Correspon∣dence between the Sultan and them: the Tartars readily assented to the Demand, upon condition, that the Turks should impose no other King upon them than him, whom by general consent they had elected for their Prince.


Though Differences were thus concluded with the Tartars, yet the Cossacks continued still their Enmities, entring the Black Sea with eighty Saicks, which they so infested, that the Turks could for that Year avail themselves little of their Navigation in those Seas: so that the Turks, to curb these Insolencies, gave Orders to build two Forts at the Mouth of the Black Sea: the Polish Ambassador made Complaint hereof, and protested against it, as an Act contrary to the Capitulations of Peace; but the Turks esteem little of the Air of Bravadoes, whilst they are not accompanied with something else more solid than their own Levity.


But the grand Concernments which busied the Thoughts of the Turks, was the Rebellion of 
Abassa,
 and the War in 
Persia,
 the management of which was the charge and care of the Selictar Aga lately made Vizier, called 
Serches
 Pasha. His Head-quarters were at the beginning of this Year taken up at 
Iconium,
 called by the Turks 
Conie;
 and 
Abassa
 was encamped at 
Kaisaria,
 a∣gainst whom the Vizier marched; and being nearly approached, the Janisaries earnestly ur∣ged, that Battel might be given the Enemy; but the Vizier having received Instructions not to en∣gage, if possible, but rather to enter into a Trea∣ty, and to propose Terms of Accommodation, delayed the Time, and with various Excuses, eluded the present premures of the Janisaries; at which they became so angry, that they flew into an open Mutiny,
 cutting the Cords of his Tents, stoning him, and wounding him in the Head: by which open Violence, the Vizier being compelled to make known his Orders, he assem∣bled the chief Commanders of the Spahees and Janisaries, giving them to understand, that the Grand Signior's Pleasure was, to make up the Difference with 
Abassa,
 as the only means to con∣clude an intestine and unnatural War, and to be able to withstand the Persians, and regain the Country and Reputation which the Turks had lost. This Proposition seemed plausible to the Commanders at the General Assembly, and more especially, because it was the Pleasure and In∣junction of the Grand Signior; but more difficult it was to incline the rough and obstinate minds of the Janisaries to a resolutian so different to their Natures, and so contrary to that Revenge which they had deeply rooted in their Hearts, and sworn to execute: howsoever the perswasions which the Officers used to their inferiour Souldiers, put∣ting them in memory of the Blood of their Com∣panions, and how destructive the continuance of such a War must necessarily prove for the future by those large effusions of Blood which they must expect farther to make, were so prevalent upon them, that at length they condescended to a Treaty,
 and to receive 
Abassa
 for a Friend and a Fellow-Souldier. 
Abassa
 at first suspecting some Treachery, refused to give a private meeting to the Vizier; but the Vizier giving his Brother the Beglerbegh of 
Caramania,
 and the Pasha of 
Anatolia
 for Hostages, the Day and Place for a Conference was appointed; where both Parties meeting, Articles were agreed, That 
Abassa
 should still continue to be Pasha of 
Erzirum,
 his Son Pasha of 
Bosra,
 his Cahya, or Lieutenant, to be Pasha of 
Marasch,
 (all which were Places on the Confines of 
Persia
) a general Act of Par∣don and Amnestie was to be given to 
Abassa
 and his whole Army, and the Articles sworn unto in the most solemn manner by the Vizier, and confirmed in the publick Camp of the Janisaries, who also promised to maintain this Word and Promise of the Vizier; to all which the Grand Signior gave his Hand, and affixed his Royal Sig∣nature.


A Reconciliation being in this manner, com∣pleated, the City of 
Erzirum
 resigned it self to

the Obedience of the Grand Signior, and the Army of 
Abassa
 was employed on the Confines of 
Persia,
 and converted against the Enemy. The Vizier also was appointed to proceed on the same Enterprise; but his Army was so ill provided of all Necessaries, that he made his Ex∣cuse, and refused to march forward: But on the contrary, he returned to 
Constantinople
 in company with 
Abassa;
 where, with many demon∣strations of Friendship and Respect, he was conducted to the presence of the Grand Signior to receive Honour, and the Reward of his Peni∣tence, and return to Obedience. The approach of these two great Personages near to 
Constanti∣nople,
 made much noise and rumor in the City; some blamed the weakness of the Government for accepting an Enemy unto Favour, and that the crowning of his Rebellion with Rewards, was to encourage others in the like Practi∣ces.


The Vizier was also murmured against for leaving the Army and the War,
 contrary to the Royal Command, by such as were emulous of his Greatness: But as Envy is converted into Veneration, and ceases as Smoke doth, when it is blown up by the Flame of Success and Glory; so those who were emulous of these Persons, sub∣mitted to all obsequious Offices towards them; and dissembling their Malice, went to meet them as far as 
Scutari,
 that they might add to their Train and Equipage, and help at the Solemnity of their Entrance. All People now cast their Eyes on the Vizier and 
Abassa,
 as the two great Men of this Age; the first was esteemed for his dexterous and successful management in bring∣ing over 
Abassa
 to his Submission and Obedience; for though he was not famed much for his great Feats of Arms, yet this Reconciliation of 
Abassa
 was accounted a Master-piece of Policy, and better Service than a Victory. 
Abassa
 also drew the Eyes of the People, who crowded to see so great a Captain, that could contend with the Port, and put all 
Asia
 into Disturbance, and in conclusion could make the same Arms serve his Master, which had lately before given a check and stop to all the Ottoman Force. The Vizier was the first introduced to the Royal Presence, where being graciously received, he was presen∣ted with a Vest of Sables and a Cemiter set with Jewels. 
Abassa
 was afterwards admitted, and having performed his Obeisance by touching the Ground with his Forehead after their fashion; he declared, That he never was other than a faithful Vassal to the Sultan, and that he had ta∣ken up Arms for his sake, that he might subju∣gate the insolence of the Janisaries, and with their Blood revenge the Death, and sacrifice to the Ghost of his murdered Brother 
Osman,
 that they might learn to reverence their Princes for the future, & learn to know how sacred the Blood is of their Soveraign. The Grand Signior seemed kindly to accept this Apology, and as a Token thereof, bestowed three Vests upon him; which was a treble Honour of that kind, and made him Pasha of 
Bosna;
 on which employ∣ment he immediately entred: And though when such offices are bestowed, it is commonly the cu∣stom for that Person, who is invested in the Em∣ployment given, to kiss the Sleeve of the Grand Signior publickly by way of Thanks: Yet, lest such Demonstration of Honour should ill affect the Eyes of the Janisaries, and cause murmuring and repinings amongst the most envious of the Souldiery, his last Audience was designed pri∣vately, and his Dispatch procured in more se∣cret and familiar manner, and therefore more obliging than was usual.


To yield some assistance to the present grow∣ing Charges of the Empire, the Vizier imposed a heavy Tax on the Christians and Jews; on the first it was levied with all severity;
 but the Jews found more favour by their Arts, and secret ma∣nagement of Affairs, for they are a People of some Authority and Power in 
Turkie:
 they are cursed by particular Persons, but caressed by the generality: they are Slaves in all Countries, and yet acquire somewhat of Mastership and Pro∣priety: they are Vagabonds, and yet every Country is their own: they cannot buy lands, and yet daily increase their Fortunes: they mul∣tiply in abundance, because they all marry, and are not destroyed by Wars: they are great Con∣fidents of the Turks, and Enemies to the Chri∣stians. In short, Covetousness in 
Constantinople
 is like a publick Courtisan, to whom the Jews are the Panders and Ruffians.


The Grand Signior passing one day through the Streets, unhappily met with the Ambassador of the Prince of 
Transylvania;
 who because he did not immediately descend from his Horse in token of Reverence, he caused him and his whole Family to be imprisoned; but being afterwards excused by the Chimacam, to have only been a matter of inadvertency, his Omission was par∣doned, and so released from his Restraint.


The Souldiery having for a long time been go∣verned by a loose and gentle hand, continued their licentious way of living, committing ma∣ny outrages on the Merchants and Inhabitants of 
Constantinople;
 against which many Decrees having been published, and Proclamations made, without any effect or notice of the Souldiery, the Vizier was unwilling to dally longer; and therefore taking a Spahee and a Janisary, hanged them up, and cut off their Heads: and with such course and method of Severity, he so aba∣ted the haughty Stomachs of the Souldiers al∣ready mortified by the assumption of 
Abassa
 into favour, that they began to yield unto Command, and to behold their Rulers with an eye of Respect, as those which were seated in some degree above themselves; for till now there was scarce a com∣mon Janisary, but who thought himself to be the Creator or Elector of his General, and therefore to be little inferior to him in Power and Dignity.


And as this Vizier was severe towards the Souldiery, so he demeaned himself with equal rigour towards the Pasha's and Grandees of the Court; which though it was an Humor in the Vizier at that conjuncture, laudable and necessa∣ry, yet it procured him such enmity, as removed him at a distance, and caused him to be sent into 
Persia
 to command the Army, and by that means to expose him to the hazard and difficulties of doubtful Success in a dangerous War.


The Vizier being departed, the Grand Sig∣nior appeared in publick on Horse-back, toge∣ther with his Brother by his side, an unusual sight amongst the Turks: But the Queen-Mother, who in absence of the Vizier ruled much, commanded that it should be so. The Grand Signior had this Year a Son born, which caused great rejoy∣cing at 
Constantinople,
 because there were few Males at that time surviving of the Ottoman Line; but scarce was the Festival ended before the Child died.


But let us now for a while withdraw our Discourse from the Wars of 
Persia,
 and look to the Actions in 
Poland
 and 
Transylvania. Meh∣met
 the late King of 
Tartary,
 who was so dis∣pleasing to the Port (as we have already related) was now dead; to whom succeeded a Kinsman

of his called 
Jembeg Gheray,
 universally pleasing and acceptable to that People.


This new King, to demonstrate his Prowess, and to act something acceptable to the Port, dis∣patched forty thousand Horse into 
Podolia
 and 
Russia
 to sack and ravage the Country; which dividing themselves into several Parties, made their Incursions as far as 
Socal.
 But in the mean time the Polonians and Cossacks having formed a strong Body of Horse under the Command of 
Stephen Chmieleskie,
 met them at their return near to 
Burstinow,
 where they gave them a total overthrow. And in like manner 
Stanislaus Lu∣bomiskie,
 encountred another Party, and over∣threw them, leaving thirty thousand slain on the plaee, and taking two thousand Prisoners, amongst which was the younger Brother of the Tartar King.


This Defeat, as it was the greatest that ever was given to the Tartars, so it is probable, that had it been well prosecuted at that time by the Polonians, they might have entred the 
Chersone∣sus Tauricus,
 and without much opposition have put an end to that Kingdom: But 
Sigismond
 King of 
Poland
 had other Designs in hand; such mixed Monarchies as that, being better able to defend their own Dominions, than to acquire or conquer others.


To this News ill received at 
Constantinople,
 su∣pervened the unexpected Death of 
Bethlem Ga∣bor;
 unexpected, I say, because that though he had been long labouring under the Diseases of Dropsy and Asthma, yet the greatness of his Soul, and activeness of his Spirit, mastered for a long time his Indisposition, so that he seldom or never omitted his Counsels and Business; and to the very time of his Death, was meditating and contriving Designs, whereby to preserve his Dominions, and enlarge them. And in∣deed the Government of 
Transylvania
 required no less than such a stirring Spirit: for being seated between two such powerful Monarchs, as the Emperor and the Turk, there was need of dexterity and courage to steer between the Rocks of such opposite Interests: Sometimes it was necessary to join with one, and anon with the other. So 
Sigismond Battori
 Prince of 
Tran∣sylvania,
 uniting his Forces with the Emperor's, in several Conflicts overthrew the Turk, and kept the Scale in an equal Ballance. 
Gabor
 on the contrary inclined to the Turks, and suppor∣ted his Interest with the Ottoman Power, fol∣lowing such Maxims as had been more ruinous to Christendom, had he transferred them to a Son to imitate and pursue; but dying without Issue, the Government devolved to his Princess, by Vote of the States of the Country, and by Confirmation of the Turk, as we have already intimated.


Gabor
 knew so well how to deal and treat with the Turks, that he gained an abatement of ten thousand Dollars of the annual Tribute; he managed his Affairs so subtilly with the Empe∣ror, that he was always invited to a Peace, and accordingly made his Advantage by the Treaty.


The other Princes of Christendom in like man∣ner courted him, and particularly the Cardinal 
Richelieu
 employed one 
Bornemis,
 a Gentleman of 
Transylvania,
 a Lover of the French Interest, to be always about him; by whose means, and with the assistance of twenty thousand Crowns of yearly Pension, he obliged him to make War on the Emperor, at such Seasons as it should be in∣timated unto him to be most conducing to the advantage of 
France.


At length, as we have said, giving way to mor∣tality, he died on the 
15th
 of 
November,
 after he had reigned eighteen Years: he was a Prince of great Abilities, but exercised them ill to the dam∣mage of Christendom; howsoever he was a Soul∣dier of extraordinary Courage and Conduct, ha∣ving begun to manage his Sword at seventeen Years of Age; and as it is said, had been enga∣ged in forty two several Fights. His Widow 
Ka∣therine,
 Sister of the Elector of 
Brandenburgh,
 rendred an account to the Port of this Accident, and the Grand Signior immediately returned An∣swer by 
Sulficar
 Aga, condoling the Misfortune, and encouraging her to a dependence on the Port: which she accepting with due Resentment, pro∣mised Obedience to the Grand Signior, and beg∣ged his Protection. But the weather was too boi∣sterous and rude for a Vessel to be navigated well under the Pilotage of a Woman; for the situati∣on of the Country, between two mighty and po∣tent Monarchs, required more than a Feminine Mind and Courage to free and defend it from the Plots, Snares, and Violence with which it was, as with a toile, encompassed by those two great 
Nimrods
 of the East and West. And though the Sultan undertook to defend his Female Ally, yet the diversion of the Ottoman Arms in 
Persia,
 the intestine Distractions, and the Minority of the Emperor were such burdens on the Foundation of Empire, and obstructions to great and Hero∣ick Atchievements in behalf of the distressed Prin∣cess, that all the Promises made to her were un∣available and ineffectual. For 
Stephen Bethlem,
 a Kinsman of the deceased Prince, a Man conspi∣cuous in his own Person and Estate, as well as for the several Governments divided amongst his Sons, and the interest he had gained in his Coun∣try, procured means to convoke the States at 
Claudiopolis;
 and insinuating the foregoing Incon∣veniences of a Female Government, so prevailed with the Assembly, that they perswaded the Prin∣cess to yield up her Soveraignty to 
Stephen Gabor,
 as one better capacitated for Rule and Soveraignty than her self. 
Stephen
 having thus obtained his intent, entred into a serious Consultation with his Friends and Relations, whether he should la∣bour to confirm the Government to himself, and entail it to the Family, or renounce it to some other. The first seemed a Matter very dubious and difficult; for that 
Bethlem Gabor
 his Prede∣cessor, had disobliged the principal Boyards or Barons of the Country, and thereby derived an envy and hatred to all his Family: His long and violent Government annexed to the Interest of the Turk, had not only rendred his Memory odious to his own People, but likewise to the House of 
Austria,
 which would be ready to continue the like prejudice and aversion to any of the same Family, as it did to the last there∣of.


For which Reasons, after due and mature consideration, it was resolved to offer the Go∣vernment to 
George Ragotskie,
 a Person rich in Mony, and of great Interest, by reason of the Jurisdiction and Castles which he possessed in 
Hungary,
 belonging to his own paternal Inheri∣tance; and in pursuance thereof, they sent 
Ste∣phen
 the second Son, and 
Solomon
 a Kinsman of that Family, for Ambassadors to 
Ragotski,
 re∣presenting to him, that they had preferred his Merit before the Interest of their own Family;
 and therefore desired him, that he would be pleased to take upon himself the Regency of the Principality.


The offer of Government was a savoury Bait to the Palate of 
Rogotski;
 which he embraced

with singular affectation and contentment, and was easily perswaded on this occasion, to take a Journey to 
Waradin,
 one of the principal For∣tresses and Places of consideration in that whole Province, and was there received by 
Stephen
 the Ambassador, Governor of the Citadel, with firing all the Cannon, and with the common Joy and Festivity of the whole City. But in the midst of this Mirth, an unexpected Messenger arrived with News, that the States had with com∣mon consent elected another Prince, which was 
Stephen Bethlem,
 Father of the Ambassador, and Author of this Counsel.


Ragotski
 was strangely surprised with this In∣telligence, and the Ambassadors were put to the blush to see their Negotiations under such a shameful defeat: Howsoever resolving to con∣tinue constant to their first Election, and to re∣nounce the Interest of their own Family, they still maintained the same obsequious Offices of Honour and Reverence towards 
Ragotski
 as for∣merly.


And notwithstanding the Orders received from the States to abstain from any other demonstra∣tions of Honour to 
Ragotski,
 than what were or∣dinary towards a private Person of his Quality and Riches; and that he should retire from the Confines of 
Transylvania
 to the Precincts of his own Castles: yet they still persisted to execute their first Commission, and so to attract People to his Party; that the number thereof daily in∣creasing, it was at length agreed, that the first Election not being fair, the Point in Controversy should be determined at 
Sazburg,
 a City of 
Saxony.


The States General being assembled, 
Ragotski
 accompanied his Pretensions with a large effusion of Gold, the most powerful and most convincing Argument imaginable: to which he added, That he had no design to affect the Principality, had not the same been first offered to him from 
Ste∣phen Gabor
 the Father by the Hand of his Son: That it was very improper for that Person to offer a Dignity to another, which he affected for himself: that it was in the power of the Tran∣sylvanians, not to have offered him the Princi∣pality; but having once chosen him to it, they could not, without his disparagement and preju∣dice, retract from their Election.


In short, these Considerations, assisted by the Interest of the Princess Dowager, so far pre∣vailed, that 
Stephen Bethlem
 was put aside, and 
Ragotski,
 who attended the success of this Mat∣ter at 
Waradin,
 was with common consent elected Prince; from whence being with great Accla∣mations, and a general concourse of the People, conducted to 
Alba Julia;
 he there took the usual Oath with much Solemnity and Magnificence: and with Princely Magnificence, entertained and treated the two Ambassadors, 
Stephen
 and 
Solo∣mon,
 and dispensed freely his Mony unto divers, who before being Enemies, were now reconci∣led, and become his Friends and Admirers. Li∣berality in a Prince, is the most resplendent Gemm in all his Crown, and is a Light so forcible, that it dazles Envy it self, and puts out all the Eyes of Suspicion and Jealousy.


By this time the Great Vizier was far advan∣ced with his Army into 
Persia,
 having been en∣couraged to proceed by the feigned Flight, or rather Retreat of the Enemy, who burned, de∣stroyed, and laid waste all round them, as they retired; which put the Turks to such inextrica∣ble Difficulties, that in two months March, they had all the Inconveniencies and Miseries to con∣tend with, which commonly attend Armies in strange Countries; the Plains through which they travelled were abandoned by the Inhabi∣tants, and void of Provisions; the Mountains were covered with Snow and comfortless: and what was worst, the Persians kept all the narrow Passages so strongly guarded, that the Vizier was now more in danger of Famine than of the Sword: but being a Person of great Sense and Experience in Military Affairs, he prudently dis∣ingaged himself from the intricacy of these Dan∣gers; and encamping his Army in the Plain of 
Amedan,
 he so provoked the hot Spirits of the Persians, that they resolve to assault him on that side of his Camp, which they judged to be the most weakly defended: of which having some advertisement, he secretly laid an Ambuscado in the way; which so happily succeeded, that he killed eight thousand Persians on the place:
 but howsoever the Victory cost so dear, and was so bloody, by the loss of the stoutest Janisaries, and the bravest of the Souldiery, that the News thereof made little noise or rejoycing at 
Con∣stantinople.


With this Intelligence the Vizier demanded new Recruits; for that besides the abatement of his Numbers by the last Engagement, the Mul∣titudes of the Enemy increased, and his own Souldiers fled from their Colours; of which ma∣ny being observed to enter 
Constantinople,
 not∣withstanding the severe Decrees of Martial Law published against them, put the Grand Signior into a high Cholor and Indignation.
 And be∣ing desirous to reinforce the Vizier's Army with all the Recruits that he was able, Proclamations were made, that all the Militia at 
Constantinople
 should immediately pass over unto 
Scutari
 under their respective Commanders; and that whoso∣ver received one Asper of Pay from the Grand Signior in quality of a Souldier, should imme∣diately pass the Chanel into 
Asia,
 and follow their Leaders to the War. But so great was the abhorrency which the Souldiers had to this March into 
Persia,
 calling it the Sepulchre and Cemetery of the Turks, that few or none would obey, every one flying, hiding, and shifting for himself as well as he could: During which Fears and Troubles, the Ways from 
Persia
 were so ob∣structed by the 
Curdes,
 that in the space of three or four Months, no News arrived at 
Constantino∣ple
 from the Army; which caused as great appre∣hensions and affrightments there, as if the Em∣pire had been reduced to the utmost extremity. Nor did the Sultan want Jealousses and Fears of receiving Affronts from the Emperor, and King of 
Poland;
 the first of which had a fair oppor∣tunity presented of regaining all 
Transylvania,
 especially at a time when that Country was di∣vided by two several Factions: but more pres∣sing and troublesom were the Cossacks,
 who dai∣ly infested the Black sea; and to the great re∣proach of the Imperial City, perpetually di∣sturbed it with Alarms, passing up almost in sight of 
constantinople.
 Of which Complaints being made to the Polonian Ambassador, he an∣swered with some indignation, That the Cos∣sacks had reason for what they acted; for that since the Tartars had, by Orders from the Grand Signior, made their late irruption into that Country, as they could well prove from the Commission taken amongst the Baggage of the Prince of 
Tartary
 in the last Defeat, the Cossacks might with all justice assume to themselves a me∣thod of Revenge.


But the Grand Signior not being able to sup∣port this Affront, or to see himself braved on the very Banks of his Imperial Seat, and his

Villages and Towns round about burnt and pil∣laged by a crew of Free-booters and Pirats, cast all the blame on the Chimacham; to whom, in his rage, he gave such a blow with his Fist on the Face, that Blood issued from his Nose; and had not the Queen-Mother interceded for him, he had been delivered into the Hand of the Executio∣ner to take away his Life. Nor was the Cap∣tain-Pasha in less danger at his return; because, that upon his assurance, that the Cossaks would not for that Year make any attempt in the Chanel of 
Constantinople,
 the Grand Signior had assented, that the Fleet of Gallies should that Summer make a Voyage into the 
Archipelago:
 Which Mistake having been the cause of all this Affront, the Captain-Pasha was to share in the blame, and had likewise in the punishment, had not good Friends interposed between him and Danger.


Nor were the Cossacks satisfied with their late Plunder, but speedily made another return with two hundred Boats; and though the whole Fleet of Gallies were then in Port, yet they had the boldness to proceed as far as 
Pompey
's Pillar, and thereby to hinder all Provisions from passing to 
Constantinople
 by way of the Black-Sea. And what gave greater fear than all this, was the News which came at the same time, that the Poles were on the Frontiers with thirty thousand Horse; to whom immediatly a Chaous, or Envoy was dis∣patched with Propositions very advantagious to the Crown of 
Poland,
 conditionally, that the con∣tinual Irruptions made by the Cossacks should be stopped, and they restrained within the due Terms of Peace and Moderation.


The Chaous found a civil Reception from the 
Poles,
 and promises of Compliance, in regard that the King had some Intentions of making War upon the Muscovite.


But whilst these things were in agitation, and that the Chaous was ready to return, behold, on a sudden News came, that ten thousand Tar∣tars were broken into 
Podolia;
 which put all things back again, and so changed the stile of Affairs, that instead of Articles of Peace, the Chaous was again returned with the Menaces of War, and with Reproaches for the last perfidi∣ous Action.


Notwithstanding all these Troubles abroad, the puissance of the Ottoman Empire might have been able to have struggled with greater Difficul∣ties, had not its own Intestine Distractions ren∣dred all things dangerous, and of a malevolent Aspect.


The Government was at that time chiefly in the hands of the four Brothers-in-Law,
 who had married four Sisters of the Grand Signior's; and for that reason were powerful, and employ∣ed in the principal Offices of State, and com∣monly drew contrary to the Opinions of the Mufti and Chimacham; which two last were not well accorded between themselves, for that the latter encroached on the Office of the Mufti, to the great scandal and discontent of all the Reli∣gious and Literate Men in the whole City; how∣soever they both joined in consultation by what means they might best secure themselves and the Government from the Lusts and evil Designs of this quadruple Fraternity; but their Wisdom and Interests were too weak to contrive Reme∣dies against such high Oppressions; for besides the Violences daily practised by the Brothers, the extravagant Humors in the Sultan himself, ad∣ded to the Disorders of State, and increased the Discontent and Dissatisfactions of the People: For though 
Morat
 was naturally endowed with a good Wit and Parts, was stout, and of a good Courage: yet as his perpetual Debauchery in Wine rendred him in appearance but of a weak Understanding, mixed with much Levity, so it caused his Accessions of the Falling-sickness (to which he was subject) to return often, whereby the strength of his Brain was daily 
akened and impaired. He was negligent also in the performance of those Ceremonies which his An∣cestors were accustomed to observe; nor did he live with that gravity and regular Course which is agreeable to the Grandeur of so great a Prince: for sometimes he would go out of his Seraglio with no other Attendance than of three or four Men, which were for the most part Buf∣foons, players upon the Gittern, and Eunuchs; and with no better an Equipage would he some∣times be seen on Horse-back, or in his Boat rowed on the 
Bosphorus
 with six Oars only: by which Actions, and other sallies of Youth, he created such a contempt towards his Person, that evil Men grew factious and weary, and en∣tred into Conspiracies against his Life, whilst the good Men feared and presaged the ruin and downfal of the Empire: for neither Justice, nor Order, nor Obedience, prevailed; no Of∣fices were conferred for Merit, but by Mony, or some other unlawful Means; there remained no Counsellors of true Faith and Integrity, nor Souldiers almost, either of experience for Sea or Land-adventures. The People, being bur∣dened by double Taxes and Imposts, were muti∣nous, and ready to take the least Fire of Rebel∣lion; the Souldiery were disorderly for want of Discipline and their constant Pay: the Pasha's of remote Provinces grew insolent, taking upon themselves rather an absolute than a depending Soveraignty.


In short, all things looked with that black ap∣pearance, that nothing seemed to keep the Frame of Empire together, but only the expectation of good Success to the Army in 
Persia;
 the which, as it depended on uncertain Events, so the Ot∣toman Monarchy was then shaking, and stood tottering on its deepest Foundation.


Wherefore all People being intent to hear of good News from 
Persia,
 were much pleased to understand, that the Vizier having, by advan∣tage in the last Engagement, laden his Army with Plunder and Spoils,
 was now preparing to besiege 
Bagdat;
 for whose good Success, Pray∣ers were daily made in the Moschs; and the Schoolmasters surrounded the Streets with their young Scholars, singing out Prayers with the 
Amen
 at every Period, according to the Custom of that Country.


The Vizier marched towards 
Bagdat,
 and be∣gan to besiege it about the 
10th
 of 
September:
 In order whereunto, he amassed great abundance of all sorts of Provisions, and made his Maga∣zine of them at 
Mosul,
 two thousand Camels, each laden with two Sacks of Cotton, every Sack being of about ten foot long, were carried to the Siege, for shelter of the Souldiery, and to fill the Ditches.


The Vizier having passed part of his Army over the River 
Tigris,
 the rest with the Cannon remaining on the hither side, he dispatched 
Na∣suf
 Pasha of 
Aleppo,
 with six thousand Spahees, to take a view of the Place, and to discover the Avenues unto it. In his way thither, he met with eight thousand Persian Horse sent to rein∣force the Garison, which he valiantly engaged; but being dangerously wounded, was forced to retreat, with the loss of almost half of his Men, part killed, and part taken: those which

were carried Prisoners to 
Bagdat,
 were treated with all civility by the Governor, who gave them a view of the Garison, which consisted of twenty thousand effective Men; shewed them their Stores and Provisions, and that there was scarce an unuseful Mouth in all the City to de∣vour them.


Notwithstanding this Disaster at the begin∣ning,
 the Vizier nothing dismayed, proceeded on his Design, spending the whole Month of 
September
 in making his Approaches. In the Mouth of 
October,
 he mounted eighteen Pieces of great Cannon, which for the space of twenty five days bettered continually the Curtain be∣tween the two Bastions, on which were four Pieces of Cannon not perceived by the Turks; there was also a deep and large Ditch not disco∣vered by them, for that it was planked over with Boards, and covered with a green Turf, so that it appeared like plain and firm Ground: the Breach being made, and seemingly undefended, the Turks resolved to make an Assault; where∣fore the Vizier, on the 
20th
 of 
November,
 com∣manded, the Spahees, under the Conduct of the Beglerbei of 
Anatolia,
 accompanied with Pa∣sha's, Sangiacks, and other Persons of Note; as also with Janisaries, to the number of thirty thousand, to enter the Breach: which being performed, and great numbers crowding on the Turf, the weight of them pressed down the Planks; and therewith the whole Engine giving way, five or six thousand were in a moment ta∣ken, as it were, in a Pit-fall, and swallowed up without any possibility of Succour to be yielded from their Companions. After which on an in∣stant there appeared fifteen thousand Men on the Breach and on the Bastions; which with their Cannon, and continual Vollies of Musket shot, so galled the Spahees, that they broke their main Body, and killed the Beglerbei of 
Anatolia,
 with other Peasons of Note and Quality, and made the whole Army to retreat.


Two days after this Disgrace,
 the Vizier rai∣sed the Siege, and marched towards 
Mosul;
 and the Persians encouraged with this Success, pursued the Turks with eight thousand Horse, assailed the Rear-guard of the Enemy; and though the Conduct and Care thereof was com∣mitted to the charge of the Pasha's of 
Aleppo
 and 
Damascus,
 yet the Persians killed three thousand Turks, and had defeated the whole Rear of the Army, had not the Spahees turned their Horses, and withstood the shock with great Valour.


Notwithstanding this dishonourable Retreat, the Vizier lost not his Courage, or hopes of taking the Town; in order unto which, he ap∣pointed all things necessary to renew the Siege again in the Months of 
September
 and 
October
 following, for that the foregoing Months are either too rainy, or too hot in those Countries, to undertake a Design or Enterprize of that Na∣ture: He fortified all the small Places in those parts round, and quartered his Souldiers in them; so that having all conveniencies of living, they might be induced to continue, and not abandon their Colours: especially he took care to fortify 
Illay,
 a place of about two days journey from 
Bagdat,
 reinforcing the Garison with six thou∣sand Men, under the command of three Begler∣begs, in regard that it was a very considerable Pass, and the principal Magazine and Granary of Corn and other Provision.


At the same time he sent Letters to 
Constanti∣nople,
 representing the state of his Affairs to be in a hopeful condition; and desiring Recruits both of Men and Mony, gave great assurances of conquering the City at the next Attempt.


In this perrilous Condition of the Ottoman State, one would have imagined that Christian Princes would have seen their own Interest, and made use of their advantage; but God not having as yet fixed a Period to the Bounds of this Empire, was pleased, by his secret Providence, to divert both the Emperor and King of 
Poland
 from making War with the Turk, inclining them to employ their Arms on their Christian Neigh∣bours. For though the Chaous (as we have said before) was returned from 
Poland
 with disdain, and an angry Message, yet the Chimacam, when he made 
Moses
 Vayvod of 
Moldavia,
 encharged him to perform all Offices of Mediation between the Grand Signior and the Poles, perswading them to restrain the Incursions of the Cossacks, and to send an Ambassador to the Port. In which affair 
Moses
 so well performed his Nego∣tiation, that applying Lenitives to the Anger of the Poles, he reduced them to Articles of Peace, and to promises of restraining the Cossacks, on condition, that the Turks reciprocally forbid and withhold the Tartars from joining or af∣fording assistance to his Enemies the Musco∣vites.


These Conditions being agreed, the Ambas∣sador was sent from 
Poland
 to 
Constantinople,
 where he was received with as much Joy, as he was expected with Impatience.
 The Cossacks and Tartars were two sorts of people which lived equally on Spoils and Booty; the first as offenfive to the Turk, as the latter to the Pole; and therefore as it was an equal Benefit, so it was an Agreement of even Terms, to counter∣change the Caution given reciprocally for one and the other.


But the Engagement for such wild People, was more easily given than performed; which because it was a Point agreeable to both Par∣ties, it was expressed with the most clear Words and strict Terms possible.


The Poles were weary and grieved to see their Provinces depopulated by the Tartars, who yearly carried away some thousands of Souls. The Turks on the other side were not less infe∣sted with the Cossacks, who captivated their People, burnt their Towns and Villages, and kept them in continual Alarms.


But because these People are hardly restrained from their Robberies and Pillaging, the Poles, as a Remedy, resolved to carry the Cossacks to the War against the Muscovite; and better to secure the Tartar, the Polish Ambassador was obli∣ged to pay them twenty thousand Florins yearly, and six thousand pair of Boots, according to the ancient Articles of Peace. On which Conside∣rations the Tartars were engaged never to en∣ter 
Poland
 in a hostile manner, but to serve that King in his Wars against all Nations whatsoever, the Turks only excepted.


In this manner were the Turks this Year freed from all apprehensions of Alarm from the Cos∣sacks, and of War with 
Poland.
 And the Em∣peror was so busied concerning the surprize of 
Mantoua,
 and engaged in the Quarrel about that Dutchy, and with some ambitious thoughts relating to 
Italy,
 that the Turks hoped to have prosecuted their Wars in 
Persia
 without fear of Diversion from the Western Parts. But yet the Affairs towards the parts of 
Germany
 were not so well secured, but that the turbulent Spirit of 
Ragotski
 administred subject for Dissention; for being lately seated (as we have said) in his Principality, he was doubtful whether it were

most for his Interest to incline unto the Empe∣ror, or to the Turk; and whist both Parties courted his Friendship, and cheapned his ac∣knowledgments, (for of necessity he must be a Vassal to one or the other) the Heyducks who were Tenants to the Lands of 
Gabor,
 refused to return to the Obedience of the Emperor, de∣manding protection from the Grand Signior. The jealousy of those ill Consequences which this Commotion might produce, alarmed all the Country: and the Emperor and 
Ragotski
 being hereby raised to a mutual Defiance, advanced their Troops one against the other upon the Frontiers: But all 
Hungary
 trembling with fear of those Calamities which ensue from War, se∣veral of those concerned, interposed so far to∣wards an Accommodation, that Deputies were ap∣pointed to meet at 
Cassovia
 to treat of Peace. But in the mean time the Palatine of 
Hungary
 passing eight thousand Men over the River 
Tibis∣cus,
 to make seisure of a certain Fort built by 
George Basta,
 so alarmed and awakened 
Ragotski,
 that he dispatched a Gentleman to him to de∣mand the Cause of this Motion; and not re∣ceiving an answer agreeable to his expectation, he advanced upon him with an Army of ten thousand Men, and engaging him with great re∣solution, killed four thousand on the place, and so caused him to retire: from these beginnings all the mischiefs of a bloody War had certainly ensu∣ed, had not 
Ragotski
 refused to receive Succours from the Turk; but he depending on his own strength (having fifteen thousand Men in Arms for defence of his Hereditary Lands in 
Hungary
 con∣temned all external Assistances, as savouring too much of vassalage and dependance: howsoever the Pasha's of the Frontiers assembled their Forces, and yet acted with such caution, as not to proceed to an open Rupture; for the Wars in 
Persia
 be∣ing unsuccessful and pressing, required moderati∣on and Lenitives on this side, that so the differen∣ces now on the Frontiers might be transferred to an opportunity more seasonable for dispute.


In the month of 
September
 Sultan 
Morat
 being at his small Seraglio called 
Daout
 Pasha, and sleep∣ing there one night in his Bed,
 he was on a sud∣den awakned by a terrible Lightning; which en∣tring his Chamber, surrounded his Bed, leaving se∣veral Marks on his Sheets and Quilts; and whilst he sought some place to hide himself in, it pas∣sed under his Arm, and burnt part of his Shirt; the afrightment of which so astonished him, that he remained for some time in a swound, which for ever after did much impair the strength of his Brain: He now began to be sensible that there were other Thunder-bolts than those that proceeded from his own Throne; and, like 
Tiberius,
 learned to tremble at the Voice of God, whilst he heard him speak in the Clouds: 
Nec Deum unquam nisi iratum pertinuit, & turba∣tiori Coelo fulminantem.
 And so affected was the Sultan with this Accident, that afterwards he dismissed divers of his Buffoons from the Court; and particularly a Mute, whose ridiculous Ge∣stures were his common Divertisement, and for some time caused him to abstain from Wine; and as a farther token of his Conversion and Thankfulness to god for this eseape, he ordered five thousand Dollars to be given in Alms to the Poor, and Korban to be made of three hundred Sheep; and the Friday following, he solemnly went to the Mosch, to render Thanks unto God for having so prodigiously preserved him from the Executioner of his Vengeance.


During all this time the Great Vizier wanting Succours and Supplies of Men and Mony, had great difficulty to contain his People in their due Obedience, or within the Bounds of their Quar∣ters; for they were apt to leave their Colours, and would really have disbanded, had not their Spirits been daily held up with the hopes and a∣musements of Pay and Recruits.


The four Brethren-in-Law, which greatly ap∣prehended lest their Power and Authority should be abated by the return of the Vizier, exercised all the diligence they were able to make new Levie
, the reinforcement of which might instil new Courage into the Souldiery, and be a means to continue the Vizier in those parts; but the Mufti obstructed all Levies on the side of 
Greece,
 and the Frontiers of Christendom, alledging, That the best Souldiers being sent from those parts, would hazard the Empire, by exposing and laying it open to the Incursions of the Chri∣stians: by which contrary Opinions and Delays, the Vizier wanting the Assistance expected, the 
Persians
 recovered all the little Fortresses which they had lost the Year before, with the conside∣rable place of 
Illay;
 which being taken by As∣sault, and by an absolute force of Sword and Arms, the greatest part of the Garrision consist∣ing of eight thousand Men, commanded by the three Pasha's before-mentioned, where cut off; which was an important loss to the Turks; not only for the slaughter of so many brave Soul∣diers, but also for the quantities of Provisions, being the Granary and Magazine for the whole Army. Therein were likewise taken forty Field-pieces carrying eight pounds Bullet; with a great Chain of Iron, which usually encompasses the Treasury which is carried into the Field. With this ill success the Vizier retreated from 
Mosul
 as far as 
Mirdin,
 from whence he re∣doubled his Instances for Supplies for Men and Mony.


At length it was agreed, that an Army of thirty thousand Tartars should be sent thither; but 
Ragotskie
 advising, that he was upon the point of breaking with the Emperor, it was or∣dered, that their number should be reduced to ten thousand: the which taking their Journey into 
Persia,
 by the way of 
Circassia,
 were there encountred by 
Han Gherey,
 the Prince of 
Tarta∣ry,
 (whom we formerly mentioned to have been deposed by that People) and by him ob∣structed in their passage, the Van-guard of their Army being cut off by him; so that they were forced again to retreat and to embark their Men and Horse at 
Caffa,
 to be transported by Sea to 
Trapezond;
 which as it was a matter of great trouble, so it was a course unpractised by the Tartars. The Grand Signior being unable to render a more considerable Succour than this un∣to his Army, which was now reduced to the weak number of two thousand Janisaries, and three thousand Spahees, he resolved to conde∣scend to Terms and Articles, as the only means to save his Honour, and the remainder of his Forces.


In order unto which, he released a Persian Lord from his Imprisonment in the Seven Towers, and qualified him with the Title of Ambassador, bestowing upon him an Equipage of Men and Horse agreeable to his Character, with four thosand Dollars to defray his Expence. And that the King of 
Persia
 might be assured of the Sultan's real Intentions and desires of Peace, he recalled his Army in the Spring, whereby all Acts of Hostility ceased: And thus the Vizier being returned to 
Constantinople,
 that Pride and Rigour which he exercised towards all in the time of his prosperity, laid him low by Misfor∣tunes

tunes in the esteem of his Enemies; who gladly embracing the opportunity to disgrace him, with all the terms of Obloquy and Detraction,
 deprived him at length of his Office. One of the four Brothers-in-law married to one of the Grand Signior's Sisters, and Prime of the Cabal, being constituted Vizier in his stead. Nor did the late Vizier easily escape with his Life, until he had repreived it with an Atonement of an hundred thousand Zechius of Gold, and some choice Horse, which he presented to the Sultan; the like Example other Pasha's his Compainions followed in proportion to their Estates and Em∣ployments; by which Presents the empty Trea∣sury was in a manner recruited, and the present Necessities of the Sultan relieved.


But this new Vizier enjoyed not long either his Honours, or his Life; for the first Act he per∣formed, was to mitigate the 
Valedé Sultana,
 or Queen-Mother, to obtain a Hattesheriff, or Writing, under the Grand Signior's Hand for cutting off the Head of 
Casref
 Pasha, the 
Spa∣heeler Agasi;
 or General of the Spahees, which being executed by 
Mortesa
 the Commander in Chief in 
Persia,
 his Head was brought and thrown at the Gates of the Divan.


The Spahees astonished at this Spectacle, and enraged to see that Head on the Ground which they so much esteemed and loved, forgot all the Terms of Duty and Obedience to their Superiors; and without regard to the Place wherein they were, even within the Walls of the Grand Sig∣nior's Court,
 they threw Stones at the Vizier, and beat him from his Horse; which though the Grand Signior, and all the Viziers highly resen∣ted, as the most scandalous Indignity that could be offered to the Majesty of a Supreme Ruler, and to all Government, yet their Counsels ra∣ther sought Remedies to suppress the Mutiny, than to make Proposals of executing Justice on the Offenders; for the Spahees seconded by the Janisaries, (who were glad of any cause to make a Commotion) assembled in the 
Hippodromo,
 from whence they sent an Arz to the Sultan, requiring the Heads of the Great Vizer, and of divers others, as well within as without the Seraglio. The Grand Signior denying positively to assent hereunto, the Souldiery as plainly threatned to depose him, and place his Brother in the Throne; at which barbarous Resolution the Grand Signior being affrighted, his youthful constancy was so shaken, that he wrote to his Mother to desire her excuse, in case he assented to the death of her Son-in-law the Great Vizier; for that the Storm of the Military Fury was so great, that he could not endeavour to protect him without the loss of his Life and Crown: wherefore the Vizier being turned out of the Gates of the Seraglio, he was immediately butchered in the presence of the Sultan.


Nor did the impetuous Rage of the Souldiery end here, but they proceeded farther to demand the Head of the Janisar-Aga, or General of the Janisaries, who was reputed the chief Instrument of the Death of 
Casref,
 because he was a prin∣cipal Favourite to the Grand Signior; but he wisely taking divers off with Mony and Presents, sowed division between the Janisaries and Spa∣hees; so that some Difficulty arising hereupon, the determination of his Death was deferred for a while; howsoever they proceeded to demand, that the Mufti should be discharged of his Office, and that the Tefterd
, or Treasurer, should be delivered into their hands.


To the first the Grand Signior assented; but being willing to save the other, he pretended, that he was escaped and fled; but when he was found, he should run the same Fate with the Vi∣zier. But the military Sedition not being ap∣peased with this Answer, they roved through the whole City, and 
Galata,
 and other parts of the Suburbs: the Spahees persisting to require the Head of the Janisar-Age, and not finding him in his House, they plundered it, and depar∣ted; and meeting with a Youth, a Favourite of the Grand Signior's, they killed him; and so re∣turning with the like Fury to the Seraglio, they required admission to the New Vizier and Mufti. 
Regep
 Pasha, another of the Brothers-in-law, was then made Vizier, who with the new Mufit trembling at these Tumults, were careful to treat the Souldiery with all lenity and condescen∣sion imaginable, desiring them to declare their Grievances, and whatsoever might give them Satisfaction should be granted. The seditious Souldiers replied, That they were resolved to see the Grand Signior's Brother, for that when the present Sultan did not govern well, they might know from whence to produce another of better Abilities, and more agreeable to the De∣signs of the Empire.


That necessity which caused the late easiness of condescension to former demands, made way also for compliance with this; so that the young Prince being brought forth, they obliged the Sul∣tan not to attempt any thing against his Life, and caused the Vizier and Mufti to become Cauti∣on and Security for it.


Nor did these Concessions contribute towards a Pacification; but rather their Insolence increa∣sed thereby, renewing their Exclamations at the Gates of the Seraglio for the Heads of the Jani∣sar-Aga and the Testerdar; not would they be satisfied with answer, that these Men were not found in the Seraglio, but still persisted in their rude Out-cryes and Menaces, losing all respect and reverence to the Sultan and the Superiors; so that the Grand Signior resolved once to sally out upon them with his own Guard; but trying their Temper and Resolution, he discovered most of them to be poisoned with the like Spirit of Sedition, and combining with the others as As∣sociates in the Treason.


The Viziers, and other principal Officers, perceiving the Mutiny to increase daily, and not knowing to what degree it might arise, made it their business to search out for those proscribed by the Souldiery: at length the Aga was happily discovered by a certain Person, to whom a Re∣ward was given of a thousand Zechins, with the Office of Zorbasi or Captain; and the Aga con∣fessing that he had counselled the Death of 
Cas∣ref,
 he was immediately strangled, and his Body hanged upon a Tree to publick view. The like Fate befel the Teftardar, who being also taken, was killed and hanged up together with the Body of the Aga.


All which Persons thus inhumanely murdered by the Souldiery, were the Enemies of the pre∣sent Great Vizier 
Regep;
 for which cause the Grand Signior suspecting that he secretly contri∣ved and nourished these Rebellions, never after looked on him with a gracious eye. Of which the Vizier being sensible, combined with the Souldiery; and judging it almost impossible to set himself right in the Affection of his Master, he courted the Favour of the Militia, as the on∣ly means to protect his Life, and maintain his Power. But as the revenge of Princes is not like a Thunder-bolt, which wounds on a sudden, but rather like a Mine which requires time to form, and is then sprang, when it may do the

best execution: so in the same manner, the Grand Signior dissembled his hate towards the Vizier,
 until one Night being present with him in the Seraglio to see certain Fire-works, he called him aside, and whispered to him, that he should go into his private Lodgings; where being entred, the Door was shut upon him, and he strangled by certain Eunuchs, who were appoin∣ted to attend him for that purpose. But little benefit or riches did the Grand Signior. reap by his death; for the Vizier having for some time expected this Blow, had concealed his Treasure, and conveyed it away for the use of his Poste∣rity.


The like hatred did the Sultan conceive against the Souldiery, resolving in his mind to execute his Revenge, especially on the Janisaries, as the most turbulent Fomenters of Rebellion and Trea∣son, and to vent his Anger, either by the Cord or Sword, or some other more expedite way, as opportunity presented: and to prevent or op∣pose the like Seditions for the future, he fortified the Seraglio, and brought Arms in thither by night, chusing into his Guard select Men of Cou∣rage and Faithfulness: and being sensible, that the being of his Brother attempered his Sove∣raignty, and drew away the Hearts and Eyes of his Souldiers and People from fixing entirely on his own Person; he therefore intended to cut him off; but the Caution and Security given by him∣self, and chief Ministers, to preserve his Life, diverted him from this Resolution.


In place of the deceased Vizier, 
Mehmet
 late Pasha of 
Cairo
 was constituted, and the Seal consigned to him; with whom the Grand Signi∣or consulting to him; which whom the Grand Signi∣or consulting of the present Emergency of Af∣fairs, often uttered his displeasure against the late Seditions, and signified his Intention to re∣dress them for the future; in order unto which, he caused the Heads of the most mutinous Spa∣hees to be cut off, and on various Pretences sepa∣rated the Souldiery each from other into divers Parts; some numbers of Janisaries he com∣manded to march to the Confines of 
Persia,
 and caused many others of them to be killed by Night; and by various other Means greatly weakned the Chambers, both by diminishing the Numbers, and taking off such who were the Men of best Courage and Conduct: many Bodies were found swimming in the 
Bosphorus,
 and known to be Spahees; great part of the Lands the Pay of the Spahees was abated; and divers Offices of Profit and Honour were taken from the Militia, that so Men might be made sensible of the Indignation of their Prince, and that there is no Sport or Jesting with the Anger of a pro∣voked King, who knows no other mean of his Passion, than the total evaporation of his Choler and Vengeance.


To maintain and make good these several Acts of Just Punishment, young 
Morat
 growing in Courage with his Years, mounted on Horse-back, well Armed, and like a Souldier, attended with a select Party of Cavalry, passed through the most publick Streets of the City in a huffing man∣ner, and casting a stern Eye upon the Souldiery and People as he went, and making a hundred Passes through the midst of them, struck them with an awe of his Majesty, and admiration of his Warlike and Martial appearance; with which Severity and Gallantry the Souldiery being af∣frighted, began to consider, that they were not longer to be governed by a Woman, or a Child, but by the most brave Prince that ever swayed the Ottoman Scepter; and thereupon for the fu∣ture resolved upon an impartial Submission and Obedience unto him. To encourage them in which, and to reconcile their Spirits and Affecti∣ons to him, 
Morat
 oftentimes assembled his Soul∣diery at 
Ackmeidan,
 where he exercised with them, shooting with the Bow at Marks and at Rovers, rewarding those who shot best, with ad∣ding an Asper a day to their Pay; besides which, he distributed six thousand Hungars amongst them, to demonstrate that wise Princes are used to mix Lenitives with their Rigour.


These Mutinies and Seditions in the Captial City, encouraged Rebellious Spirits in divers o∣ther places: so that a certain Bold and Audacious Fellow, drawing a number of Miscreants after him, possessed himself of the City of 
Prusa:
 a∣nother of the same Temper, called 
Elia
 Pasha, made himself Master of 
Magnesia,
 where he committed all the Outrages which Enemies inflict on a Conquered People; and being about twenty four miles distant from 
Smyrna,
 so afrighted the People of that Place, who were Merchants, and such as lived by Trade, that they fled with their Wealth, and such Things as were portable, lest they should be exposed to the Robbery and Spoil of Thieves and Rebels. But the Beglerbey of 
Anatolia
 suffered not 
Elia
 to reign long in his lust, but giving him Battel in those Plains, whol∣ly defeated him, and sent twenty of the Heads of the chief Commanders to the Sultan for a Present; and pursuing 
Elia
 and the rest of his Army to 
Magnesia,
 besieged him in that City. The Grand Signior being advised hereof, and fearing lest the Siege should take up too much time, and move other ill Humors in that Coun∣try, dispatched Orders to offer Terms and Con∣ditions of Accommodation with 
Elia,
 which were secretly treated, and great Promises made him of Favour and Rewards from the Grand Signior. The easie Fool accepted the Conditions, and embraced the Promises; and leaving his City of 
Magnesia,
 proceeded confidently to 
Con∣stantinople
 to receive the gracious Rewards of the Sultan for his past Services. At his Entry into the Seraglio in place of the 
Kapislar-Kahyasee,
 or Master of the Ceremonies, he was received by Officers with a Cord in their Hands, who be∣stowed on him the gracious Reward of his Ma∣sters ultimate Favour.


These Rebellions were no sooner suppressed in 
Asia,
 but that other Mutinies of the Janisaries,
 for want of Pay, began at 
Buda
 in 
Hungary,
 where they threw Stones at their Age, and pur∣sued him to the very Palace of the Pasha, elect∣ing another into his place. They also cut in pieces the Governour of 
Pest,
 and bestowed his Office upon his Lieutenant.


To remedy these Disorders, and extinguish the Mutiny, the Grand Signior sent Commissio∣ners to examine the Matter, and to render him an account of the Grieveances and Demands of the Souldiers: but they fearing to be surprised with some severe Acts of Justice, prevented or forestalled the Inquiries of the Commissioners, by acknowledging their Fault, and demanding Par∣don, with surrender of four of the Ring-leaders to Punishment; declaring, That by their se∣ducement and evil perswasions, they were de∣bauched into that disorderly course of Proceed∣ings: the Sultan accepted the Sumission, and all things were quieted in 
Hungary.


Howsoever new Troubles arose in 
Moldavia:
 for that People being oppressed over-much by their Prince 
Alexander,
 made an Insurrection a∣gainst him, and drove him out of the Country, who for refuge fled to 
Constantinople.
 And the

People desirous that one 
Bernoschi,
 a Polonian by Nation, might be put into his Place: To obtain his Confirmation, he came to the Port, and of∣fered himself before the Grand Signior; but 
Morat
 suspecting, that to obtain the Principality for himself, he had secretly instigated and nou∣rished the late popular Commotions, caused his Head to be cut off in the Publick Divan.


Amurat
 had now born to him a seventh Daugh∣ter, by his Slave called the 
Shining Star;
 and though he was much troubled that she had not brought him forth a Son and Heir, yet so much was she beloved by him, that he resolved to cre∣ate her Queen, had not his Mother declared a∣gainst it, as a thing not usual for any Woman to be honoured with that Title before she had sup∣plied the Inheritance by the Birth of a Male Child.


And that he might now totally extinguish the Fire of Sedition amongst the Souldiery, he cau∣sed 
Ferdum Efendi
 and 
Saluc
 Age, two prime Chiefs of the Spahees, with eight principal Jani∣saries, to be put to Death; after which severity, fearing another Insurrection, he passed the Wa∣ter, and retired to his Seraglio at 
Scutari,
 where he fortified himself.


It happened about that time, that a Turkish Wo∣man, a Slave, was found aboard a French Ship, ready to sail from 
Constantinople;
 which the Turks highly resented, and aggravated the Crime so much against the French Ambassadour, that they imprisoned his Son then embarqued, and would have confiscated the Vessel and her Lading. In those days the Christian Ambassadors resident at that Court, kept better Union and Correspon∣dence among themselves than they do at present; so that all of them, as concerned, joined toge∣ther to represent before the chief Ministers, that such a Fault merited not so grand a Forfei∣ture, for that it was most probable to have been committed without the privacy either of the Ambassador, or Commander of the Ship. The Am∣bassadors then resident were Sir 
Peter Wych
 for 
England,
 the Sieur 
Marcheville
 for 
France,
 and 
Pietro Foscarini
 for 
Venice;
 at whose warm and urgent Instances the Turks condescended to re∣lease the Vessel, and the Goods laden upon her, with free liberty to depart. Howsoever it be∣ing represented to the Grand Signior by the Cap∣tain-Pasha (who is Admiral of the Seas) that one 
Baldasar,
 an Armenian by Nation, but Dra∣goman or Interpreter to the French Ambassa∣dor, was a principal Instrument to move the Ambassadors to unite in this Pretence; and be∣ing observed to manage the Interest of his Ma∣ster with warm and earnest Sollicitations, the surly Sultan grew so angry, that one of his own Slaves should presume to manage a Dispute with him,
 in Fury and Rage, commanded that he should be immediately empaled; and that he might be assured that his Sentence took effect, he would see him with his own Eyes on the Stake before he would pass the Water to his Seraglio at 
Scutari.
 The resolution was so sudden, and the Execution so speedy, that there was neither Ear lent to hear, nor Time given to mediate in his behalf; and the Act being performed, com∣plaints would not serve to redress a tyrannous Action now past Remedy, and not to be recalled: Wherefore as the Ambassadors were forced to acquiesce, and patiently endure the Affront; so if they would have resented it, they could scarce have found one amongst their Interpreters of so bold a Spirit, who durst have opened his Mouth after so terrifying an Example. The truth is, the Dragomen, or Interpreters to Ambassadors at 
Constantinople,
 are required to be Men of Learning, Courage, and Courtship; their studies ought to endue them perfectly with the Turkish, Greek, and Arabick Languages, with some know∣ledg also of the Persian, and with good Elocu∣tion, and readiness of Tongue: their constancy and presence of Mind is always necessary at their appearance before those Grandees or Great Men, who are ever proud, haughty, and arrogant in all their Expressions and ways of Treaty, the which they commonly manage towards Christian Ministers with the same respect which we use to∣wards our Servants, or our Slaves. And there∣fore by reason of this and other Presidents of like nature, Dragomen have been always timo∣rous in representing the true sence of the Ambas∣sadors and Consuls; at least have so minced and tempered their words, that they have lost much of that Vigour and Accent which is necessary to inculcate perfectly a Business into the Understan∣ding of a Turk, especially if you intend to in∣cline him to Reason and Justice. Wherefore it would be an excellent Qualification for an Am∣bassadour himself to understand and speak the Turkish Language, or at least to have a young Man by his side of the English Nation, educated in the Turkish Court, who should be ready to ex∣plicate those Matters which are too thorny and prickly for Subjects of that Country to han∣dle.


Had all the foregoing Troubles, Mutinies, and Misfortunes encountred the Spirit of an easie and a gentle Sultan, certainly the Fate of this 
Amu∣rat
 had been the same with that of 
Osman,
 who retiring within his Seraglio, could never have appeased the Seditious Humor with all the Con∣cessions he could give an unreasonable multitude: but being a resolved and busling Prince, he at first gave some few steps backwards, as if he would yield somewhat to the impetuosity of that Torrent which he could not resist; yet it was only like a Ram, who retires, that he may butt with the greater force. Howsoever the Politici∣ans and sober Men attributed the true cause of all these Commotions in the Souldiery, to have no other Foundation than the ill success and miseries which attended the War in 
Persia;
 for the way being long, and the Countries hot, barren, and for the most part void of all comfort, the Soul∣diers abhorred the Fatigues and March thither; and hated to consider, that they should be made a Sacrifice to the lust of voluptuous Ministers, who, to gain Estates and Riches out of those Monies which were designed to carry on the War, did not care, whilst they lived at Ease and in Delights, what Labours, Wants, and Dangers attended the Militia.


These Considerations made likewise some im∣pression in the Sultan, who therefore inclined to hearken unto those Propositions of Peace which were brought him by an Ambassador from 
Persia;
 and being accompanied with very great Presents,
 the Peace was clapt up and concluded on a sud∣den. But as Things quick in their Birth and Production, are not long-liv'd, nor long durable; so this Peace was broken the same Year with an inconstancy equal to that inconsideration with which it was agreed and signed. For no sooner was the News hereof flown into the Eastern World, than the Great 
Mogol
 dispatched his Ambassador with Letters to the Grand Signior, perswading him to make War again with the Persian, promising to assist him therein, by stop∣ping up the Passage of 
Nachivan,
 which is a City in the Lesser 
Armenia,
 built upon the Ri∣ver 
Aranes,
 and is the common Road into the

Indies.
 The which Motion, as it was pleasing to 
Morat,
 so being accompanied with Indian Curi∣osities and Presents of an inestimable Value, the Ambassador was graciously received, and treated with such Feasts and Entertainments as are not usually known amongst the Turks; and returned again with Letters, giving hopes, that he would speedily take an occasion to break with the Per∣sian. But those who had experienced the Dif∣ficulties of a War with 
Persia,
 and observed, that in the present Conjuncture of Affairs it might be more easily and with advantage waged on the side of 
Hungary,
 endeavoured, with ma∣ny pregnant Arguments, to perswade the Grand Signior thereunto, giving him to understand, that 
Gustavus Adolphus,
 King of 
Sweden,
 being victorious over the Emperor in 
Germany,
 had taken many Towns and Cities of great strength; and having overthrown him in divers Battels; had slain or taken his best Captains and most Martial Men of Valour; and that other Chri∣stians, who were desirous to abate the pride of the Austrian Family, were ready to embrace the same Conjuncture, whereby they might entirely shake off the Yoke and Servitude to the Imperial Tyranny.


These Advantages being well represented, took place easily in the mind of 
Morat,
 so that he dispatched express Orders to the Pasha of 
Buda
 to assemble his Forces, and put all things in a readiness on the Frontiers: in compliance with which, though the Pasha set forth his Tents, and made great appearance of a March, yet some se∣cret Designs caused him to move slowly, and to affect a Peace rather than a War; so that receiv∣ing an Ambassador from the Emperor at 
Pest,
 he readily Admitted him, and gave him safe Conduct and Convoy unto 
Constantinople:
 at which time Advices coming, that the Great 
Gustavus Adol∣phus
 was slain, and that the Affairs of the Swedes went backwards and unsuccesfully in 
Germany,
 altered all the Measures of the Ottoman Coun∣sels; and though 
Ragotski
 endeavoured all he was able to foment the Differences, and encou∣rage the Turks to a War, having besides other specious Pretences, an Army of thirty thousand Men in a readiness to joyn with the Turks a∣gainst the Emperor; howsoever the Turks look∣ing on the Condition of the Swedes as desperate, and the Proffers of 
Ragotski
 to be uncertain, and of no true Foundation,
 and the State of Affairs amongst themselves to be turbulent and unset∣led, gave a kind Reception to the Emperor's Ambassador, and signed the Agreement for con∣tinuance of the Truce.


By this, and other Actions of like Nature, 
Ra∣gotski
 lost much of his Esteem with the Emperor and the Grand Signior; the first always looked on him as an Ambitious Prince, exciting the Turk against him, and ready on the least Occa∣sion to enter his Country with Fire and Sword: The other looked on him as a False Friends, who never made Proffers, but those which squared with his own Designs and Interest; and parti∣cularly he had disgusted the Port, by presuming to instate one 
Matthias
 in the Principality of 
Walachia,
 and to eject another constituted there by Authority of the Grand Signior, called 
Stri∣dia Bei,
 or Lord 
Oysters,
 because his Father was a Fisher-man, and gained a good Estate by the Trade of Oysters; howsoever it being the Grand Signior'd Pleasure to ordain such a Person to that Office, it was a Presumption, and a bold Piece of Usurpation in 
Ragotski,
 to dispose of that Government, by virtue of his own single Power: Howsoever the Grand Signior, to avoid Contention with the resolved Spirit of 
Ragotski,
 confirmed 
Matthias
 upon Condition of a double Tribute paid for the Investment to the Principa∣lity.


But besides these Reasons for a Peace with the Emperor, the Designs the Grand Signior enter∣tained of making War upon 
Poland,
 with the Assistance of the Musco 
 and Tartars, and of dispossessing 
Emir Facardin
 
 his Government, were strong Inducements 
 
ake fair Weather on all other sides of the N
, abouring Princes. The Envy which the Riches and Greatness of 
Emir Facardian
 (who was a Prince inhabiting in the Parts of 
Arabia,
 to whom a large Tract of Land, with several Fortresses did belong) had contracted to him from the Pasha's of 
Damascus, Tripoli,
 and 
Gaza,
 caused them to accuse him before the Grand Signior of Rebellion, and other enormous Crimes: The Plea against him was managed especially by the Pasha of 
Tripoli,
 who alledged, That he was an Enemy to the Maho∣metan Law, destroyed the Moschs, kept corre∣spondence with the Malteses and the Corsairs of 
Ligorn,
 permitting them freely to take Water in his Country; that he openly favoured the Chri∣stians, suffering them freely to build Churches in his Country. That he continually fortified his Castles, and encroached on the Lands and Ter∣ritories of the 
Emirs
 his Neighbours. In short, his Riches were so great, that every one feared and envied him, and therefore represented his Case in that Manner,
 that the Grand Signior re∣solving to destroy him, sent great Forces into those Countries, under the Command of the Pa∣sha of 
Tripoli,
 to whom he commanded the Pa∣sha's of 
Damascus, Gaza, Aleppo,
 and 
Cairo
 to join their Forces: and for better expedition, the Captain-Pasha was appointed to equip his Fleet, to transport Men and Ammunition into those parts.


The Captain-Pasha in his Passage by Sea,
 en∣countred two English Ships lading Corn in the Gulph of 
Vola,
 called the 
William
 and 
Ralph,
 and 
Hector:
 this being a prohibited Commodity, not to be transported under penalty of forfeiting Ships, Goods, and Liberty of the Men, moved the Pasha, with the sight of such a Booty, to command his Gallies to seize the Vessels; which being only two, it was imagined that they would immediately yield and surrender without contest. But these bold Brittons knowing the Consequen∣ces of such a Surrender, resolved not tamely to yield themselves, at least to sell their Liberties, Lives, Ships and Goods to the Turks at the dearest Rate they were able: wherefore cutting their Cables, put themselves under Sail, and got into the main Sea, fighting with the whole Fleet above three hours; sometimes they were boarded by one Gally, sometimes by two at once; but plying their Quarter-deck Guns with small Shot, and defending themselves manfully with their half-Pikes, they often cleared their Decks, and put off the Enemy with great slaughter: the Captain-Pasha being ashamed to see such Resistance made by two such Vessels a∣gainst his whole Force, resolved to enter his Men at the Gun-room Port of one of the Ships, and running the Prow of the Gally into the Stern-port, the valiant Crew of the Gun-room clapt an Iron Spike into the Trunnel-hole of the Prow, whereby the Gally being wedged fast to the Timbers of the Ship, they brought their Stern-chase laden with cross Bars, pieces of Iron, and Parteridge-shot to bear upon them; which raking them fore and aft,
 killed the Captain-Pasha himself, with near three hundred out of

the Bastard Gally. At length having spent all their shot, they charged their Guns with pieces of Eight, and being over-powered by numbers of their Enemies, and not able farther to resist, they set fire to their Ships, which blowing up, de∣stroyed two or three of the Gallies which laid by their sides, together with those Men which were then fighting aboard at handy-blows on the Deck with the Defendants; so that none of the English were taken, unless three or four fished out of the Water.


An end being in this manner put to the Fight, the Turks gained the Victory, with the loss of twelve hundred Slaves killed and wounded, be∣sides Turks, and were forced into Port, where they remained a full Month to repair their Gal∣lies; the which Fight affected all Turks with an astonishment of the English Bravery, or Obsti∣nacy, (as they call it) and is a Matter remem∣bred and talked of to this Day, especially by the Son of the Captain-Pasha who was slain, called 
Omem,
 Pasha 
Ogli,
 who is Pasha of 
Rhodes
 at present, (as I remember) and commands three or four Gallies; for which reason he is so inve∣terate Enemy to the English, that to satisfie his Revenge, he buys what English Slaves he can get into his Gallies, and sells none out under a dou∣ble Price or Ransom.


The News of this Fight coming to 
Constanti∣nople,
 provoked the Grand Signior to the height of Indignation; howsoever the Officers either being ashamed of their Loss, or entertaining some secret admiration of the English Bravery, suffered the Matter to be compounded for the Sum of forty thousand Dollars, of which the English paid only their share with the French and Venetians, whom (for I know not what Rea∣son) the Turks equally concerned in the Occa∣sion.


Whilst the Turks were appointing a new Cap∣tain-Pasha, and again refitting their Fleet, the Pasha of 
Damascus
 dispatched a Summons to 
Fa∣cardin
 to surrender 
Seida
 up to him, with other Castles and Places of Strength. The Old Man resided then a 
Barut,
 where pretending to be retired from all Business, answered, that he had resigned the whole Government into the Hands of his Son 
Ali,
 as he had already testified by Publick Acts: that he was but a Subject, and a Souldier under his Son, and therefore to him they ought to make their Applications. 
Facar∣din
 had at that time an Army of twenty five thousand Men, the which he divided into two Bodies, commanded by his two Sons. 
Ali
 his eldest he ordered with twelve thousand Men (a thousand of which were Maronites, and two thousand Druzes) to march to 
Saphet
 for hinde∣ring the conjunction of the Emirs of 
Feruc
 and 
Therabith,
 and the Pasha's of 
Gaza
 and 
Damas∣cus,
 whose Forces being joined together, did not compose a greater Number than that of 
Facar∣din.


Ali
 entercountring with them, and being a brisk and hot-metled Prince, engaged and charg∣ed them so whom, that he defeated them, and killed eight thousand of their Men; but such a Victory as this not costing him less than seven thousand of his Men, was in effect his own Overthrow; for being the next day charged a∣gain by the Enemy, both sides fought with that obstinacy,
 that (as is reproted) there remained not above an hundred forty six of all the Soul∣diers which followed 
Ali;
 and he himself ha∣ving his Horse mortally wounded under him, and being out of Breath, Weary, and Faint, yield∣ed himself to a common Souldier, who promised him Quarter; but afterwards having him in his power, he strangled him with his Match, and cut off his Head and his little Finger on which he wore his Seal-Ring,
 and so presented both to the Pasha. But this proud Conquerour refused to accept this Present without Ceremony, until first the head had been perfumed with Sweet Waters, the Beard combed out, and covered with a rich Turbant, and having kept this Tro∣phy for some days by him, he sent it afterwards to 
Constantinople.


But before the News of this Defeat reached the Ears of old 
Facardin,
 the Captain-Pasha with his Fleet of Gallies arrived at the Port of 
Tripoli;
 to whom 
Facardin
 being desirous to shew all Friendship, and profess Loyalty to the Grand Signior, he caused his Army to retire into the Parts of Mount 
Libanus,
 whilst he himself, with about three thousand Men, between Domestick Servants and his Guards, went to 
Seida,
 from whence he sent two
 
Caramosauis
 laden with Provisions and Refreshment to the Captain-Pasha for a Present, assuring him, that he was an hum∣ble Vassal to the Grand Signior, and was ready to obey all his Commands; and because the Sultan may probably have received sinister Reports rela∣ting to the Arms he had taken up, he assured him, that they were no otherwise designed, than to suppress the Robberies of the Arabs, and the Incursions of their Kings; and that he was rea∣dy to conduct his Army to any Place, where his Master the Grand Signior should think fit to em∣ploy them. But these fair words could not di∣vert the Captain-Pasha from his Resolution to enter the Port of 
Seida,
 nor from his Instructions of demanding, and upon refusal of forcing pos∣session of the Castle; which as it was the most considerable Fortress, and the most pleasant Seat of all his Dominions, so he could not, without much regret and sorrow, hearken to such a Pro∣position: wherefore that the Pasha might not persist in this Demand, he secretly proffered him an hundred thousand Zechins as a Bribe to him∣self, and his Son 
Mansour
 to be carried for a Ho∣stage and Earnest of his Faithfulness to the Grand Signior. The Captain-Pasha liked well the hun∣dred thousand Zechins and the Hostages, but still required the Surrender of the Castle with them; on which whilst 
Facardin
 deliberated, News came of the Death of his Son 
Ali,
 and the De∣struction of his Army, with which, losing all Cou∣rage, he yielded his Castle of 
Seida
 to the Cap∣tain-Pasha, retiring himself to his City of 
Ba∣rut:
 nor could he rest quietly at that Place; for being pursued, he was forced to quit it, and re∣tire with his Maronites and Druzes into the Mountains, lest being inclosed within the Walls of a City, he should fall alive into the Hands of his Enemies.


And now all good Fortune forsaking unhappy 
Facardin,
 the Maronites and Druzes his Subjects revolt to the Pasha of 
Damascus,
 his Palaces of Gardens of Pleasure were all ruined, his Friends forsook him, his two remaining Sons were lost, one carried to 
Constantinople
 for a Hostage, and the other slain in Fight; his Towns of 
Gazir, Saphet,
 St. 
John d' Acria,
 and others were sur∣rendred to the Pasha of 
Damascus:
 only some few strong Places in the Mountains remained to him, where living in League with 
Reba
 a King of the Arabs, he committed all the Spoils he was able on the Lands belonging to the Pasha of 
Da∣mascus.
 But being hunted from one Mountain to another, and from one Cave to another, he was at length forced to surrender upon Conditi∣ons, that he should have liberty to proceed unto

the Grand Signior with his own Equipage of three hundred Men, and Trumpets sounding, and that he might carry with him all his Trea∣sure consisting of a Million of Zechins all in Gold, together with other Riches, which were carried by fourteen Camels; and that he should not be conducted as a Prisoner in Triumph, but that he should with freedom approach the Pre∣sence of the Sultan, like other Pasha's, who are in Grace and Favour.


These Proposals being granted, 
Facardin
 with his two young Sons began his Journey to 
Con∣stantinople,
 and being about two days journey from thence, he dispatched eight Chests of Gold before him, to prepare and make his way to the Grand Signior; who being pleased with the Gold, and greatly rejoyced to receive the Submission and Homage of one who had so long stood out in Rebellion, he went out in a Disguise and Habit of a Pasha to see and discourse with that Person, of whom there had been so general a Rumor: and having accordingly encountred with the E∣mir, he sate down in his Tent with him, de∣siring him to relate the Story of his Life, with the several Particulars of his late Misfortunes. Emir 
Facardin
 well knew the Person of the Grand Signior; but feigning as if he was unac∣quainted with whom he discoursed, and that he took him for some Pasha, began to recount the Course of his Life, the Reasons why his Ene∣mies falsely suggested evil Reports of him to the Grand Signior; how he was forced, for defence of his Life, to take up Arms, and what ill Suc∣cess accompanied his Affairs; all which he repre∣sented with such Quickness and Eloquence, that the Grand Signior pitying his Misfortunes, pro∣mised to be his Advocate, and mediate with the Grand Signior in his behalf.


The day following 
Facardin
 made his Entry in a Triumphant manner, and received a most favourable Audience from the Grand Signior; and all the Pasha's and great Men in conformity to their Master, and in hopes of sharing some part of his Gold, shewed him a like kind favou∣rable Countenance and Aspect.


But finding afterwards that 
Facardin
 increased daily in the esteem of the Grand Signior, and that the old Rebel was become a new Favourite, and that he was likely to over-top and out them, they generally conspired together, taking the Mufti on their side, to accuse him of many Crimes, and more particularly that he was a Christian, and an Apostate from the Mahome∣tan Faith. This Point of Religion so sensibly touched the Grand Signior, that he resolved to condemn him in a manner Solemn and Extraor∣dinary; for mounting one Day on his Throne, he commanded 
Facardin
 to be brought in, and placed on a low Chair; where ordering his Crimes whereof he was accused to be recited, he passed a formal Sentence of Death upon him: but 
Facardin
 arising to justifie himself, was not permitted to speak, only he obtained a quarter of an hours reprieve to make his Prayers, and af∣terwards was strangled by the hands of two Mutes.


Morat
 growing now into Years, took into his own Hands the Reins of Government, re∣solving to rule Singly and Absolutely, and to make himself rather Feared than Beloved: He degraded four Viziers at once, and banished them into 
Cyprus,
 confiscating their Estates, for no other Reason, than because they had denied him the use of their Mules and Camels on occa∣sion of his Service.


He became extremely severe against the Soul∣diery, crushing them with all imaginable Ri∣gour on the least appearance of Reluctancy to his Commands; declaring,
 That he expected Blind and Silent Obedience from all, but especi∣ally from his Souldiery.


He imposed a great Tax upon Copper; and because he had several Warthouses filled with that Mettal, which had for many Years lain by, he forced the People to buy it at his own Rates. At which Aggrievance the Commonalty grow∣ing desperate, began to Mutiny and Rebel; but 
Morat
 put a speedy stop thereunto, by cutting off the Heads of fifty of the most Seditious, and so passed to 
Prusa,
 with the Attendance of six Gallies.


He caused a Kadi to be hanged, to the great Displeasure and universal Resentment of the Ulemah, who are Students in the Law; who to make known their Aggrievance, and Consult a a Remedy, assembled in great Numbers at the House of the Mufti.


The Queen-Mother being acquainted with this Meeting, and fearing the ill Consequences thereof, gave immediate Advice to the Sultan; who with like Expedition dispatched a Boat to bring over the Mufti and his Son to 
Prusa;
 who were no sooner arrived, than they were strang∣led, not being permitted to speak for them∣selves, or to alledge any Plea or Excuse for their Lives. This Act of Cruelty, beyond the Example of former Ages, and never practised by the most tyrannical of his Predecessors, struck a Terror on the whole Empire; for Men ob∣serving the unjust Rigour which was executed on the Head and Chief of their Law, the Ora∣cle and Mo
th which resolved their difficult Problems, and whom the World so reverenced and honoured, that few Examples have been of Capital Punishment executed on his reverend Head, feared, that Innocence was not sufficient to secure their own less considerable Estates from his Fury and Violence.


There is a particular Death allotted for Muf∣ties which is, by braying them in a Mortar, which is kept in the seven Towers at 
Constantinople,
 and there shewed to Strangers; which Instrument hath been seldom made use of.


Morat
 being greatly addicted to Wine,
 was sensible of the ill Effects of it in himself, and that the heat of debauchery inclined him to Vio∣lence and Cruelty, and from hence collecting how dangerous this Humour of Drunkenness was in his People, especially in his Souldiery, for that much of the late Seditions might be attribu∣ted thereunto, he published a most severe Edict against Wine, commanding all Taverns to be demolished, the Butts to be broken, and the Wine spilt. It was the common Custom of the Grand Signior to walk the Streets in disguise; when meeting with any drunken Person, he would imprison him, and almost drub him to Death. It was his fortune to meet a Deaf Man one day in the Streets; who not hearing the Noise of the People, nor the Rumor of his Ap∣proach, did not so readily shift out of the way, as was consistent with the fear and dread of so aw∣ful an Emperor, for which default he was strang∣led immediately, and his Body thrown into the Streets.


All People feared and trembled at these Pra∣ctices, and were as careful to look out abroad for the Grand Signior, lest they should be surprised with the bluster of his presence, as Mariners are of being taken unprovided by some sudden Gust or Hurricane; for there was scarce a Day, that one Innocent or other was not sacrificed to his Fury and tyrannical Fancy.




One 
Thomas Zanetti,
 a Venetian Merchant, who had built a lofty Jardac, or a high Room of Prospective on the top of his House, was accused to the Grand Signior to have designed that Place for no other end, than that he might with a long Glass oversee the Chambers of the Ladies, and the Gardens,
 and Walks of the Seraglio: For which Reason, without farther inquiry, he was hanged in his Shirt on the top of his Jar∣dac, with a red Streamer in his Hand, that so the Grand Signior might be sure that the Sen∣tence was executed. The Estate of 
Zanetti,
 whe∣ther belonging to himself or Principals, was con∣fiscated; but in regard the Goods, for security, were privately conveyed to the Ware-houses of several Frank Merchants, strict search was made for them; but in regard the Marks and Num∣bers were altered, they could not be distinguish∣ed: wherefore the Graud Signior concluding, that all the Frank Merchants had combined to∣gether to deceive him, he Imprisoned every Man of them; nor would he release them, until they had paid forty thousand Dollars for their Ran∣som and Liberty.


After which, upon pretence of a Plot, or A∣greement of the Franks to defend themselves from the leviation of this Tax, the Turks searched their Houses for Arms; in taking of which they were so rigorous, that they spared not so much as a Birding-piece; nor yet the Sword of Sir 
Peter Wych,
 then Ambassador for 
England,
 though he alledged, that it was the ve∣ry Sword with which his Majesty and conferred the Honour of Knighthood upon him.


But from these Transactions at Home, let us pass to the Wars in 
Poland
 and 
Persia.
 That In∣vincible Princes, 
Ʋladislaus
 King of 
Poland,
 had gained such good Success against the Czar of 
Muscovy,
 that the Czar was forced to demand Assistance from the Turks. The Grand Signior, though he had lately made a Peace with 
Poland,
 and sworn to maintain the Articles of 
Chocin,
 concluded by his Predecessor Sultan 
Osman;
 yet the continual Depredations which the Cossacks made, did always administer reasonable Preten∣ces for a War: To which 
Abassa,
 one of his chief Counsellors, a valiant and presumptuous Captain, did much incite him; for promising to himself the Conduct of that Army designed a∣gainst 
Poland,
 did much flatter the Sultan and himself with the Fancy of mighty Success.


The War being thus resolved upon,
 the Turk, who commonly strikes before he Quarrels, gave Orders to 
Abassa
 to make Levies of Men in 
Mol∣davia
 and 
Valachia;
 and to put the Tartars in Arms, and the Militia of 
Buda,
 and of the Parts along the 
Danube
 into a warlike Posture, and with all Expedition to enter 
Poland.


Abassa
 who had with wonderful diligence put his Troops in readiness, ordered the Tartars, with a Body of fifteen thousand Men to enter 
Po∣land;
 which they performed with such celerity, that passing the River of 
Tyre
 above 
Chocin
 and 
Rinczug,
 they in a few hours laid waste for the space of ten Leagues round 
Kemenitz,
 and so retired with their Booty into 
Moldavia:
 how∣soever their haste was not attended with such good speed, but that they were overtaken on the 
4th
 of 
July
 by 
Stanislaus Konispolzki,
 General of the Polish Army, with no greater Force than two thousand five hundred Horse; howsoever surprising them whilst they were feeding their Horses, he put them into such Confusion and Disorder, that he easily recovered all their Boo∣ty, and took five of their chief Men Prisoners; of which the Son-in-Law of the 
Cantemir
 was one. But this was a faint Refreshment in respect to that terrible Storm of sixty thousand Men, composed of Turks, Tartars, Moldavians and Valachians; which under the Command of 
A∣bassa
 had already passed the 
Danube.


Konispolzki
 the Polish General, having not suf∣ficient Force to oppose them in open Field, nor time to assemble a greater Army, gathered what Supplies he could from the Cossacks and Lords of that Country, and therewith encamped him∣self upon a Hill between the River 
Tyr
 and the Town of 
Chocin,
 that he might be the better able to succour 
Kemenitz,
 which the Enemy de∣signed to assault.


Abassa
 who contemned this weak Force of the Poles, resolved, without farther consideration,
 to attack them in their own Camp, and force them to fight; of which the Poles being well advised, placed several Pieces of Artillery, and lined all the Hedges and Ditches with Musque∣tiers, where the Turks were necessarily to pass, drawing out their whole Army into Batalia; the Turks who hastened the nearest way to charge the Enemy, fell into the Ambush, where having lost about five hundred Men, they began to make a stand, and to consider of some more advantageous way to their Design. Wherefore 
Abassa
 taking another Course, which he judged to be free from all concealed Dangers, ordered the Tartars to charge the Right Wing, and the Moldavians and Valachians the left of the Ene∣my, and he with his Turks would fight the main Body. The Tartars with great Resolution per∣formed their part, and had wholly defeated that Wing, had not 
Wisnovitzki,
 with some Troops and a Train of small Artillery, come in seasonably to their Succour: The Moldavians and Valachians fought to faintly against the Enemy, whom they considered to be Christians, Brothers, and Neighbours, that they soon turned their Backs and fled, but were not far pursued by the Poles.


Abassa
 receiving this Repulse, sounded a Re∣treat, and immediately repassed the River 
Tyr,
 and marched with all the haste he was able, stop∣ping no where, until he arrived at 
Rinzur,
 about thirty English miles from the place of the Fight; and arriving at length on the Banks of the 
Da∣nube,
 he gave License to his Souldiers to disperse into their Winter-Quarters; in the mean time 
Abassa
 dispatched Advice to the Grand Signior of the Particulars of the Fight, and of his great Victory, by an entire defeat of the Polish Army. The Grand Signior believed the Report, which none durst to contradict, and which was con∣firmed by the Rumour of an Ambassador com∣ing from 
Poland.
 For the Poles being at that time engaged in a War with 
Muscovy,
 and ap∣prehensive of another with 
Sweden,
 judged it not seasonable to provoke the Turk, but rather, by way of Accommodation, dispatched an Ambas∣sador with a Train of three hundred Men, to make Complaints against the late Acts of Ho∣stility committed by 
Abassa,
 as if he had moved his Arms without the Orders or Knowledg of the Sultan.


About that time that the Ambassador ap∣proached near to 
Constantinople,
 the Grand Sig∣nior had another Son born, but of a weakly and sickly Temperament, howsoever great Joy was expressed, and all the City was enlightned with Torches, Bonefires, and Fire-works; and that the Grand-Signior might evidence his Greatness and Magnificence to the Ambassador, he took this Occasion of the Birth of a Son, to make a solemn Entrance into the City, and to make

the greater Show, he armed all the Citizens and Inhabitans.


Before the Grand Signior would grant Au∣dience to the Ambassador, he ordered that 
Abassa
 should treat with him, and understand his Busi∣ness and Desires. 
Abassa
 carried himself high in the Negotiation, he pretended the Damages and Charges of the War, the Demolishment of certain Palancas, which were the Places of Re∣fuge for the Cossacks; and the Tribute of ten Years past, with Security of paiment for the Time to come. The Ambassador positively re∣fused to hearken unto any Terms about Tribute; and that for other Matters, the Presents which he had brought to the Grand Signior, would reasonably answer.


His Presents were,




A Coach lined with Velvet, with six very fine Horses.


A Bason, and Candlesticks of Silver richly gilt.


Four Clocks, ten Vests of Sables, six Qui∣vers of Arrows, with some Hunting-Dogs.




Being at length admitted to Audience, and thereunto conducted by the Aga of the Spahees, and the Chaous Bashee: The Grand Signior asked the Ambassador, which was not usual, 
For what Reason he was come thither?


To which he answered; 
That he was come to bring his Majesty Advice of the Coronation of his King; and to establish a Peace, is his Majesty should judg fit to accept thereof.


To which the Sultan replied; 
That all Chri∣stian Kings ought either to receive the Ottoman Laws, or pay him Tribute, or try the sharpness of his Sword.
 And taking a Cemiter in his hand which hung by him, he drew it half out, and said; 
With this I will subdue my Enemies; and though take another in
 Poland.


To which the Ambassador returning a modest Answer, was dismissed of the Royal Presence.


And now the Grand Signior, to put a good face on the Business, and to make the World be∣lieve, that he designed what he spake, he pro∣claimed a War with 
Poland,
 and ordered his Tents to be carried abroad, supposing hereby to draw the Poles to his own Terms of Agreement. And in pursuance hereof he mounted on Horse∣back, and rode in state through the City, his upper Vest was made after the Hungarian Fashi∣on lined with Sables; in his right hand he car∣ried a Quiver of Arrows, in his left two drawn Swords, on his Turbant he wore a large Plume of Feathers, encompassed with a Circle of Dia∣monds; and in this manner entring his Tents, he proceeded to 
Adrianople.
 But before his de∣parture, the Count 
Puchen,
 Ambassador from the Emperor, arrived with other sumptuous Pre∣sents, offering Incense and Gifts of Peace at the Throne of this Greatness.


But before we relate the Transactions at 
Adrianople,
 and the Success of Affairs at that Place, let us recount several dismal Accidents at 
Constantinople.


The Grand Signior returning by Sea from a place called 
Stravosta
 in the Bay of 
Ismit,
 an∣ciently the Bay of 
Nicomedia,
 where he had for some time held his Court and great Divan, he was followed by several Vessels appointed to transport the People;
 in one whereof were nine∣ty five Persons embarked, all of them Pasha's, Aga's, and chief Officers of the Court; the Vessel was over-set by a sudden gust of Wind, and all the People drowned excepting three Sea-men which saved themselves by swimming. More considerable were the Mischiefs by Fire; For on occasion of some Fire-works made in one of the Grand Siguior's Chiosks, or Houses of Pleasure, the Fire took so fiercely on the Tavan,
 or wooden Works of the Sieling, that it endan∣gered the whole Palace, and had consumed all, but that many Hands and active Men gave a stop to the farther Progress.


This Fire was but a fore-ruuner of a greater, which began the 
16th
 of 
September
 in that part of the City of 
Constantinople,
 which is called 
Aia∣cab,
 being between the Wall and the Port, where live Taverners, Butchers, Fishmongers, and others who sell Provisions. The Fire took first in one of those Houses which had been a Ta∣vern, and are Buildings only made of Deal∣boards and Timber; which combustible Matter the Houses round, and was so quick in its Mo∣tion, as if it had taken by a Train, or that some wicked People with Fire-balls had em∣ployed themselves in the Mischief; the Fire took its Course against the Wind, burning on one side and the other to the Historical Pillar, and to the Moschs of Sultan 
Mahomet,
 and Sultan 
Selim;
 so that in a short time one third of the City was reduced to Ashes.


It is difficult to express the lamentable De∣struction was made hereby, what Riches, what Palaces, and Moveables were consumed in it, there being twenty thousand Houses reported to be burnt; which Misery is best represented by the remembrance of our calamitous Incendiation at 
London;
 the greatest difference between one and the other was, that that at 
Constantinople
 was more quick in its Motion; for it burnt a larger compass of Ground in one third of the Time, than ours did at 
London;
 for that City for the most part consisting of slight Buildings of Wood, met not the resistance which ours some∣times did against the Walls of Brick and Stones.


The Fire being extinguished, and Men having time to lament and think, bagan to impute the Cause and Fault to those whom they most su∣spected; sometimes they accused the Persians for having fired the City, for which Crime one of them the next Year suffered Death. Some at∣tributed the Cause of all to the Janisaries; and that they, out of hatred to the Inhabitants, or for the sake of Plunder, if they did not begin, yet at least increased the Fire; which they the more suspected, because the Janisaries refused not only to work themselves, alledging, that they expected Orders from their Aga, but like∣wise hindered and discouraged others. Howso∣ever the Grand Signior not wanting on his own part to contribute all Assistance possible, sent four thousand Men out of his Seraglio to work about the Fire, not excusing the very Officers of his Royal Chamber from contributing their Authori∣ty and personal Aid; some of which ventured far into the Fire, to demonstrate their Courage, Activeness, and Obedience to the Commands of their Emperor: but all this was too little against an obstinate and an invincible Enemy, for the Fire flamed, and proceeded, until it wanted Nourishment and Food to consume.


In fine, twenty thousand Houses were burnt, two hundred Moschs, and the Library of the Mufti, which for the Number of the Arabick and Persian Books, was curious, and of high esteem. The Albengs, or Habitation of the

Janisaries containing three hundred Chambers, of which each Chamber was capable to receive four hundred Men, were all burnt and reduced to Ashes.


The which fatal and miserable Spectacle, did a little touch the Heart of Sultan 
Morat;
 so that he gave out considerable Sums to comfort the Distressed, who had most suffered by this Cala∣mity, and to raise from its Ashes his consumed and languishing 
Constantinople;
 which being re∣vived and flourishing, was again miserably con∣sumed by Flames, in the Month of 
April
 1660. But such is the beneficial and commodious situa∣tion of that Place, and the Riches thereof by Trade, and the Presence of the Ottoman Court, that the Inhabitants again rebuilt it in fewer Years than could be imagined.


But now to return to the Grand Signior at 
Adrianople,
 we find him resolutely designed to make a War upon 
Poland,
 to whcih he was in∣duced by the Perswasions of 
Abassa,
 and the present conjuncture of Advantage to join with the Moscovite, it seeming great Policy not to suffer the Countries of 
Moscovy
 to be over-run; or the Poles, who is a warlike and dangerous Nation, to grow Puissant and Powerful by his Success and Conquest over his Neighbours: Wherefore Preparations were made on all sides for the War; great Quantities of Provisions and Ammunition were sent into 
Moldavia
 by way of the Black Sea and the 
Danube.


The Tartar 
Han
 sent word that all his Forces were in readiness, and expected nothing but their Orders to march. The Beglerbey of 
Greece
 made his Rendezvous at 
Philippolis
 with an Army of thirty thousand Men, where he attend∣ed to join with the Forces of 
Bosna, Silistria,
 and other parts of 
Europe. Moldavia
 and 
Walachia
 made an appearance of Levying Men, and join∣ing with the Turk; but thier Hearts were to∣wards the Poles, with whom they kept a sceret correspondence, and would be ready to adhere on the least on the least Opportunity.


In short, the Army of the Turks was so great, and all his Affairs in that readiness, that he scorned to incline an Ear to Propositions of Peace; in which Opinion 
Abassa
 humoured and perswaded him, that the Poles were so fearful of his Forces, that they had already yielded to Terms of compounding for a yearly Tribute. All which proved false; for in the mean time 
Ʋladislaus
 King of 
Poland,
 remitting nothing of the Heat and Vigour of his War against the Moscovites, he was so succesful therein, that he foced an Army of eighty thousand Men, which he had besieged in their Camp,
 to lay down their Arms, and surrender themselves; which was an Action scarce to be credited, at least to be parallel'd in any History; and with this Con∣quest he might have proceeded to the Capital City of 
Mosco,
 and concluded the War and that Empire: But God's Provdence, which governs all things, altered this Counsel, and diverted those victorious Arms to the Siege of 
Bial;
 which Town being well fortified and garisoned, with∣stood many Assaults of the Enemy, and blunted the Spirits and Swords of the Conqueror; for losing much time in this Siege, other Towns made use of the Opportunity to provide and fortify themselves; whilst the Poles growing weary, and wanting Pay, raised divers Mutinies and Seditions in the Camp. These Difficulties and Inconveniences inclined the King 
Ʋladislaus
 to bend a favourable Ear to the many Supplications and Instances which the Moscovites made for Peace: So that the Plenipotentiaries being as∣sembled, it was agreed, that the Dutchy of 
Smolesco
 and 
Czernieschou,
 which two hundred Years past had been taken from 
Poland
 and 
Litua∣nia,
 with many other Towns and Countries, to the extent of two hundred Leagues, should be restored to the Kingdom of 
Poland.


The News of this sudden Peace coming unex∣pectedly to Sultan 
Morat,
 caused his Bravadoes against 
Poland
 to cease, and to turn the stile of his Fury and Indignation against the Moscovites, whom he vilified with all imaginable Terms of Persidiousness and Cowardise, and abused and imprisoned their Ambassadors. He considered that he had provoked an Enemy who was Victo∣rious, Valiant, and Powerful, and one who at any time was able to contend with his united Force, much more whilst it was separated and disjoined by his War in 
Persia:
 wherefore in all haste he dispatched an Ambassador into 
Poland,
 called 
Shahin
 Aga, desiring to renew the ancient League and Articles of Peace. This Ambassa∣dor found the King at the Diet in 
Wasaw,
 where he publickly endeavoured to excuse his Master for the late Acts of Hostility; assuring them, that they were not performed according to his Master's Desires, and Original Intentions, but as they were moved and guided by the evil Sug∣gestions and Artifices of 
Abassa,
 who being sole∣ly culpable of this Fault, by giving ill Counsels to his Master, he assured them, in the Name of the Sultan, that he should receive such Punish∣ment as they should think fit to inflict upon him. Hereupon the King 
Ʋladislaus
 gave this Answer, That since the Grand Signior could so easily in∣fringe the Articles of that Peace which had been solemnly and sacredly established, it was now his Part, and the Wisdom of that grave Assem∣bly, to contrive such Conditions and Bonds wherewith to oblige his Master, as could not ea∣sily and at his Pleasure be broken or avoided. And at the same time the Polish Ambassador be∣ing returned from 
Constantinople,
 and discoursing in the Diet of the Pride and Perfidiousness of the Turks, and the Scorn wherewith they recei∣ved Christian Ambassadors, so incensed the Spi∣rit of the whole Assembly, that with a genersl Consent they approved the words of the King, adding, That they would, no longer be subject to the Insults and Falsities of that Tyrant, whom they would make to know, that they wore as well Offensive as Defensive Arms; and were not of that abject Spirit, or mean Condition, to permit the Sultan to violate the most Sacred Articles of Peace, and then at his pleasure to salve them with a fawning Acknowledgment, or a flattering Speech. In this manner the Turkish Ambassador was returned, whilst the King 
Ʋla∣dislaus
 went into 
Podolia
 to take a view of his Armies; which he found to consist of eighty thousand fighting Men, all well accoutred, of good Courage, and ready to follow their King to the Walls of 
Constaninople.


The fear of the Motion of this great Army, in a Conjuncture when the Wars broken out a∣gain in 
Persia
 were not prosperous, affected the Mind of 
Morat
 which much terror; so that he became very sollicitous to find out, and make some substantial Proposition in order to an Ac∣commodation. One of the Viziers called 
Mor∣teza,
 was very active in this Business, plying con∣tinually the General 
Konispolzki
 with Letters, Offers, and Expedients for a Peace: To facili∣tate which, and shew that the Grand Signior did heartily relent,
 
Abassa
 was strangled by two Kapugees, and given for a Sacrifice to appease the Anger of his Enemies; a Person who was a

stout Souldier, and one who had performed great and signal Services in the War of 
Persia.


But the Poles not being pacified with this single Act of Penitence, but thirsting farther after the Blood of the Turks, desired to Spoil and Pil∣lage their Richer Provinces. Howsoever at length the Council of 
Poland
 entring into more serious Debates, considered, that the Troops lately come from 
Muscovy,
 were but in a bad condition; that the part of their Army, which consisted of Voluntiers, would not endure a long and tediuos War; and that the Expence and Charge of this great Army was immense and almost insupportable: for which Reasons it was resolved, that a Peace should be made, which was soon afterwards concluded, and agreed on these following Articles.


That the Vaywods of 
Moldavia
 and 
Walachia,
 should be confirmed by the Grand Signior, with the Consent and Recommendation of the King of 
Poland.


That 
Cantemir
 and his Tartars should aban∣don the Country of 
Buckzac;
 and in case of re∣fusal, that then the Turk and Tartar 
Cham
 should join their Forces to expel them from thence.


That the Poles shall suppress all Acts of Ho∣stility of the Cossacks in the Black Sea.


That the Turks renounce for ever all Demands, or future pretence of Tribute from 
Poland:
 and that they shall build no new Forts on the Fron∣tiers.


That the Navigation on the River 
Nieper
 shall remain free and undisturbed to the Poles. That all other Articles shall remain as formerly in their ture Force and Virtue.


In this Year happened out great Differences between the French Ambassador and the Turkish Officers.
 The first Disgust had its Original from the Year 1631, when the Marquess of 
Marcheville
 going Ambassador to 
Constantinople,
 was in his Voyage met off of 
Scio
 by the Cap∣tain-Pasha and his Fleet of Gallies, who imme∣diately sent off a Boat to advise him, that he should strike his Flag, and make ready the Pre∣sents which were due to the Grand Signior's Admiral. 
Marcheville
 duly considering, that this Submission would blemish the Honour of his Master, and the Dignity of his Character, re∣fused Compliance either in one or the other; howsoever that he might testify the Friendship and good Correspondence which he came to confirm between the two Kings, he stood off at some distance, and fired five Guns to salute the Grand Signior's Standard: But the Captain-Pasha not contenting himself herewith, required the Ambassador to come aboard and speak with him; which after divers Messages from one Ves∣sel to another, the Ambassador was counselled to perform, not knowing how far otherwise he might engage the Honour of his Master. 
Mar∣cheville
 being arrived at 
Constantinople,
 did great∣ly complain of the Affront and Violence he re∣ceived from the Captain-Pasha; which though the Grand Signior and other Ministers seemed not to approve, yet the Ambassadour received little other satisfaction than fair Words and pro∣mises, that his Honour should be again repai∣red.


At the Arrival of the Sieur 
Marcheville,
 the Count 
Cesi,
 who was the former Ambassador, was to return into 
France;
 but the Debts which he had contracted by a certain way of living, were so great, that the Creditors would not suffer him to depart without paiment; for De∣fault of which, he endured many Affronts of∣fered to his own Person, and was detained at 
Constantinople
 until this Year 1634; during which time the Marques, 
Marcheville
 managed all the Affairs of the Embassy; who keeping still in mind the Affront offered him before 
Scio,
 watched all Opportunities to disparage the Actions and Person of the Captain-Pasha; who at length re∣turning from the Black Sea, where he had some Success against the Cossacks, was graciously re∣ceived by the Grand Signior; and being adver∣tised, how, during his absence, the French Am∣bassador had endeavoured to blast his Reputati∣on by many Instances of Diminution, which he often inculcated by his Druggerman, took Ad∣vantage of the Grand Signior's good Humor, to vent before him the resentment which he con∣ceived thereof: The Grand Signior, to gratify the Pasha, promised to hang the Druggerman; which the Pasha acknowledged as a singular Fa∣vour, and returned from the Presence of the Sultan full of Joy and Contentment. But better to cover his Malice, and to ensnare the Poor Wretch, he sent a Messenger to the Ambassador, assuring him that he desired his Friendship; and that there might be a right understanding be∣tween them, he perswaded him to send his Druggerman to him, that by his Mouth he might signify the esteem he had for the Ambassador, from whose Spirits he was willing to take off all Jealousies and Umbrages of Discontent.


The Ambassador not suspecting the perfidi∣ousness of the Pasha,
 sent his Druggerman to him; hwo being come within his Power, was im∣mediately hanged by the Grand Signior's express Command, and ordered that he should remain on the Gallows with his Velvet Cap on his Head, which in this Sultan's Reign all Druggermen wore to distinguish them from others.


The Ambassador complained greatly of this Affront, nad Violation of Articles, to the Chi∣macam and other Officers, but could receive no other Answer or Satisfaction, than that the Grand Signior might execute Justice as he plea∣sed on his Subjects, without asking leave, or concerning the King of 
France
 or his Ambassador in the Matter.


But 
Marcheville
 not resting satisfied with this Reply, still prosecuted his Pique and Animosity to such a height, that the Captain-Pasha farther incensed thereat, obtained Authority form the Grand Signior to dispatch him away: so that sending one day for 
Marcheville,
 and first re∣proaching his Contrivances and Designs against him, told him plainly, that it was the Grand Signior's Pleasure that he should depart at that instant; to which he constrained the Ambassador so precipitately, that he would not give him time to advertise his Servants,
 or make up his Baggage, but forced him aboard a French Ship then in Port, which he immediatly compelled to sail; and the Wind being contrary, caused the Vessel to be toaed abroad by two Gallies into the open Sea of the 
Propontis.


After the injurious departure of this Ambas∣sador, the Count 
Cesi,
 who had been detained at 
Constantinople,
 for the Reasons before denoted, took again upon him the Function of Ambassador. To execute which, in better advantage of Trade and Commerce, he was advised to a compliance with the Captain-Pasha, and to use such Means as might mitigate that Acrimony of Spirit which this Pasha nourished against the French Nation.


These Disputes between the French and the Turkish Officers, revived certain Disgusts and Aversion against all the Frank Nations, which favoured the Latine Rites; so that in despight

to them, the Grand Signior restored again 
Cy∣rillus
 the Patriarch to the Patriarchal Jurisdicti∣on, who had long been persecuted by the Jesu∣its, and by their Means been deposed, promi∣sing that for the future he should continue undi∣sturbed, in opposition to all those of the Roman Religion.


The Peace (as we have said) being conclu∣ded with 
Poland,
 the Grand Signior was more at Ieisure to attend the Wars in 
Persia;
 with the Labours and Toils of which the Janisaries being wearied, began new Troubles and Seditions in the Camp; the which Disorder 
Morat
 attribu∣ting to the negligence or cowardise of the Offi∣cers, as wanting Courage to suppress them, sum∣moned the Janisar-Aga to appear before him,
 and without long Process or Excuse cut off his Head, and confiscated his Estate to the Exche∣quer, which amounted to a Million and seventy thousand Dollars: another Janisary also, more rich than seditious, was in like manner sacri∣ficed, and an hundred and sixty thousand Dollars of his Estate added to the Treasury of the Sul∣tan. The Pasha also of 
Damascus,
 with several other Officers of the Army enriched with Spoils of the People, fell a Sacrifice to 
Morat
's Avarice and Cruelty; to whom Riches and Blood were so pleasing, that none acquired a higher degree of Grace in his Favour, than those who could give him notice of opulent Men, who having found Riches, he undertook to find them Guilty, and to prove their Wealth so corrupted by ex∣tortion and violence, that nothing could hallow or purifie it but his Coffers.


The next News from 
Persia
 brought advice, that that King at the Head of a powerful Army was encamped in the Country about 
Van,
 with which the Turks not having sufficient Force to fight, the Vizier wrote to the Grand Signior, that his Presence was necessary to increase the Army, and encourage the Souldiery; whereupon he resolved to leave 
Adrianople,
 and transfer his Court to his Seraglio at 
Scutari,
 that so remain∣ing on the Banks of 
Asia,
 he might be nearer to his Business, both to receive Intelligence, and ad∣minister Supplies; and because Seditions and Discontents in the People do always obstruct the Motion of Publick-Affairs, he not only ruined the Taverns and Tabacco-shops, but forbid Coffee∣houses, and other idle Places of Concourse; nay to Barbers Shops no more than one was suf∣fered to enter at a time; for those being places of resort, Treason was frequently vented there, Men of that Profession being notorious through the World for their Talk and Intemperance of Language: And farther, to restrain Meetings and secret Conventions, strict Orders were gi∣ven, that after an hour and half in the Night, all Fires and Candles in the City should be ex∣tinguished, which was the general Discontent of all People.


But what shewed much of the fierce Spirit of the Sultan, was a certain Fury which he concei∣ved on this occasion. On a certain day, riding on his Horse, thirty Indian Pilgrims met him in the way to demand his Charity, and being in a dif∣ferent habit to what the Turks wear, and not accustomary in that Country, the Grand Signi∣or's Horse started at the sight of them; and be∣ing spurred for bogling in that manner, the Horse capred and reared an end, so that he threw his Rider; at which the Grand Signior being high∣ly enraged, drew out his Cemiter, and with his own hand killed his Horse, and instead of Alms, prepared a place of Entertainment in the Gallies for those unhappy Indians.


The Grand Signior being returned to his Pa∣lace at 
Scutari,
 which is seated on the Asian side opposite to 
Constantinople,
 applied his whole Mind entirely to the Affairs in 
Persia;
 and being resol∣ved to march thither in Person, he put abroad the Horse-tail, which is a signal of departure, he visited the Sepulchres of his Ancestors, made his Corban, which is a distribution of Flesh to the Poor, for a Blessing on his Enterprise. The Officers of the Army contended to out-vy each the other in their Presents to the Grand Signior, some furnished him with Royal Tents, others with curious and light Arms; and others with Horses and Furnitures of value. Great Sums of Mony were extracted out of the Exchequer for Military Preparations and Paiments of the Soul∣diery. The Charge of Affairs, in absence of the Grand Signior, was committed to the Bo∣stangi-bashee, who was made Chimacam of 
Con∣stantinople;
 and so with a fierce Spirit, and aspect full of Indignation and Anger, he mounted his Horse at the Head of an Army of an hundred thousand; he departed from 
Constantinople
 about the end of 
April.


But before we recount the particulars of what succeeded in 
Persia,
 it is requisite to cast our Thoughts back to the Troubles of 
Transylvania,
 occasioned by the competition of 
Stephen Bethlem
 and 
George Ragotski,
 for that Principality.


Bethlem
 (as we have said before) being grie∣ved and discontented at his hard Fortune in being put by the Government,
 and resenting the Pu∣nishment which 
Ragotski
 inflicted on his Son for the Crime of Manslaughter, he went to 
Buda,
 and there renewing his old Complaints to the Pasha, he was, with Recommendations from him, accompanied to the Port; where being introdu∣ced to the Presence of the chief Ministers, he at large declared the Merits and good Services of his Family towards the Sultan:
 
That for this Reason only, in dishonour and despight to the Ottoman Empire, he was excluded from the Government, and therefore challenged its Assi∣stance to re-establish him therein; in considera∣tion of which, he promised the same Faithful∣ness and Devotion to the Sultan, which was professed and maintained by his Ancestors, and was natural to the Family of 
Gabor.
 That as to 
Ragotski
 it was apparent, that he entertained different Principles; that he was a Person of elated Thoughts, and a Turbulent Spirit, and was ever united in Combination with the Em∣peror, Germans, and other Enemies to the Ot∣toman State.


The Turks moved with these Reasons, resol∣ved to favour 
Stephen,
 and to discountenance 
Ra∣gotski;
 and though the Conjuncture of Affairs was such, as that any other Engagement in War, besides that of 
Persia,
 did not square with the present Designs; yet at all times it was judged convenient to sow the Tares of Discord, and promote Differences amongst Christians, which have ever produced Advantages to the Mahome∣tan Cause. And likewise the Pasha of 
Buda
 was commanded to enter 
Transylvania
 with a Force sufficient to contend with 
Ragotski;
 and lest the Emperor should be allarm'd with this Commoti∣on, a Chiaus was dispatched to give him a per∣fect understanding of the Reasons, why an Army marched into 
Transylvania;
 the Design of which was not intended in the least manner to impeach the Articles of Peace between him and the Grand Signior, but only to displace a Man of a furious and turbulent Spirit, and to ordain another in his stead of a more lober and quiet Temper, by whose Moderation and Prudence, the Peace be∣tween

the two Empires may be improved and continued.


Ragotski
 startled at this Design intended against him,
 assembled the States of his Country, to de∣termine and consult concerning a Remedy, and immediately dispatched a Messenger to the Em∣peror, to desire and implore his Imperial Suc∣cour and Protection: and though 
Ragotski
 was sensible of the disparity of his Strength, in com∣parison of that of the Turks; yet neither did his Counsels nor Behaviour betray Fear or want of Constancy.


The Hungarians seconded those Instances which 
Ragotski
 had made at the Imperial Court, and the Party which he had made at 
Vienna
 brought the matter to a debate in Council, which was argued on both sides with solid and convin∣cing Reasons. Those who spake in disfavour of 
Ragotski,
 alledged, That all Assistance contribu∣ted to him would be a just Cause and Pretence to the Grand Signior to make War with the Em∣peror. That 
Ragotski
 himself was of an unquiet Temper,
 not unlike to 
Gabor
 his Predecessor, who had often bid Defiance to the Emperor, and over-running all 
Hungary
 and 
Austria,
 had often erected his Standard in the sight of 
Vienna.
 To protect and cherish a Person of this Disposition, was no other than to nourish a Serpent or Viper in their Bosom; who being elevated at the ex∣pence of the Empire in successes against the Turk, would convert that Power which he had gained to the damage of the House of 
Austria,
 combi∣ning with the Faction of other Princes to procure its destruction. Let us therefore, said they, stand at a gaze, and as Men on the Shore, or in a good Port, behold the agitation of Ships in the Ocean; perhaps the change of a Prince in 
Tran∣sylvania
 may turn to our Benefit, and one may succeed into the place, of such a mild Temper and serene Disposition, as may better agree with the Maxims of this Court, and may cultivate that Peace which can only render these Countries hap∣py.


Howsoever there were other Opinions to the contrary, amongst which it is said, that D. 
An∣nibal Gonzaga,
 a Person acquainted with the State of 
Transylvania,
 and of the Turks, and Director of the Imperial Army, delivered himself in this manner.




May it please Your Sacred Imperial Majesty.


IF Ragotski 
had been the Lawful Son and Hereditary Successor of
 Gabor, 
who was an Enemy to your Majesty, we might then appre∣hend the evil Consequences of a Son, that tra∣ces the same Path and Footsteps of his Father. But here is another Person, another Prince, in Emulation different, and by Enmity hating the House of
 Gabor; 
wherefore I cannot imagine how this Prince can possibly entertain Maxims of like Nature with the other. For my part I believe, that it behoves your Majesty to main∣tain a good Correspondence with the Princes of
 Transylvania, 
by a close Ʋnion against the Turk; your adjoining Countries being like con∣tiguous Buildings, which are strengthned by a mutual Support: Let us therefore support it; for if it depends not on us, it will be over∣run, and remain oppressed without us. To ag∣gravate the Faults of
 Gabor 
to the disparage∣ment of
 Ragotski, 
is no Logical Consequence, unless you will argue, That the Faults of the Guilty are to be punished on the Innocent. Let us therefore consider, which agrees best with the Security of the Empire; that
 Tran∣sylvania 
should remain in the Hands of
 Ra∣gotski, 
or of the Turk; or that we had bet∣ter strike against the Rock of Jealousie, which we conceive against this Transylvanian, or on that ruinous Rock of the Turkish Power. The Ottoman Councils commonly look asquint, they cast their Eye on the Prince, when their sight aims at the Principality; and threaten the Per∣son, when they design to vent their Fury to the subjection of his Country. The true Intent of the Turk is to reduce
 Transylvania 
to the same Condition with
 Moldavia 
and
 Walachia, 
and to incorporate this, with infinite other Provin∣ces, into the gross Body of his Empire. It is notorious to all the World, that the Empe∣rors, your Predecessors, have lost a large Tract of Land by the Turks; and your Losses will every day be greater, as their Conquests in∣crease: And when their Dominions in
 Europe 
are so enlarged, that they are able to quarter their Asiatick Cavalry in these Countries, your Dangers must necessarily be inevitable and full of Terror. For I compute, that when the Turk designs to make War upon us, he mar∣ches with an hundred thousand Men, and per∣haps ten thousand Camels, besides other Beasts of Burden: so numerous a Body as this can∣not be maintained until the Grass be fully grown, which is not until the middle or end of
 June; 
and from that time they have more than a month or six weeks March before they arrive upon our Confines; the which consump∣tion of Time, prolongs their Enterprises, and protracts the time of our Damages. But if once they become Masters of
 Transylvania, 
and that that Country be laid to
 Moldavia, Walachia, 
and other parts of
 Hungary, 
they may then commodiously winter amongst us, and begin their Wars and Attempts upon us early in the Year, and pursue them until the last season of the Autumn: and in this man∣ner, whilst we are debating and taking our Measures in our Diet, they will fatten them∣selves, and satiate their Appetites with our Spoils. It is good therefore for us to defend
 Austria 
in
 Transylvania, 
keeping the Fever as far from the Heart as we are able. Let us suppose, that
 Ragotski 
is the most ungrateful Man in the World; and that after we have supported and succoured him, that he will re∣verse his Arms upon us: Howsoever he is not so strong and considerable as to do us much hurt, and therefore it were better to have him our Neighbour and our Enemy, than the Turk, though our Friend; the first can only admini∣ster some little cause of Jealousie, but the other may destroy and supplant us; the first is but like a putrid Fever, which is cured with every small Evacuation; but the latter is a Pesti∣lence, which dilates and diffuses it self, and is deadly and irrecoverable. Let not the Scruple neither of breaking with the Turk trouble us;

for we may administer Assistance under-hand, and without noise effect our Business, without arriving at the extremity of a Rupture. It is folly and weakness in us to be charmed by the Flatteries of the Turks, and the fair words of this Chaous; or to imagine, that when they have over-run all
 Transylvania, 
they will stop in the midst of their Career, before they ar∣rive at the Gates of
 Vienna; 
no, their In∣tentions are to lull us asleep, and to destroy our Neighbour first, and then us; they cannot devour us both at once, but husband their Diet, and reserve us for another Meal. The Turk is like a Serpent, who lies quiet and coiled up all the Winter; not because he wants either a Sting or Poison, but being benummed with cold, wants warmth and heat to give it Motion and Operation. This is my Sense and Opinion, which I most humbly tender before the greater Wisdom of Your Sacred Majesty.




Notwithstanding these convining Arguments,
 the Result of the Council determined otherwise, and 
Ragotski
 was left to shift for himself, and to stand upon his own Legs; which was a perni∣cious Resolution, and that which was afterwards the cause of the subjection of 
Transylvania
 to the Turk, and the Original of many Mischiefs to the Empire; but thus was the Fortune of the Turks, more favourable to them than 
o the Christian State.


Ragotski
 being thus abandoned by the Impe∣rialists, and exposed to the Mercy of an insatia∣ble Enemy, though his Courage was good and resolute, yet he began to despond of his Force, unable to deal with such an unequal Match as that of the Turks; And his Subjects being fear∣ful of the Event, perswaded him to give way, and resign his Rule to the hands of 
Gabor
 his Competitor; 
Ragotski,
 that he might not seem to neglect the Counsel of his Subjects and Friends, and to gain Time, pretended to hear∣ken to their Advice;
 and accordingly entred in∣to a Treaty with 
Gabor.
 During which Debate he secretly obtained some Forces from 
Poland,
 by connivance of that Government: and the Hungarians being his Friends, privately favoured him, knowing that the Conquest of 
Transylvania
 would be a step to their Destruction; and being at length well fortified and recruited, he began to declare openly, that he found no security to himself in this Surrender, for that a Place was denied him, wherein he put his chief hopes of Defence; and therefore that he was resolved to support and maintain his State and Cause in the best manner that he was able.


Hereupon the Turks entred 
Transylvania
 with an Army of twenty five thousand Men under the Command of the Pasha of 
Buda: Ragotski,
 to obstruct their March, dispatched his General 
Cornis
 with seven thousand Men, to prepossess an advantageous Ground, with Order to entertain, but not fight the Enemy, until he could come up to him with the gross of his Army.


The Turks perceiving their advantage in num∣ber, resolved to engage the Enemy before they were reinforced with new Succours; to perform which they made a Detachment of twelve thou∣sand Horse, and two thousand Janisaries, and some Field Pieces, commanded by the Pasha him∣self and 
Stephen Gabor. Cornis
 not being able to disingage himself, or avoid fighting, made a Vertue of Necessity, and put his Forces into form of Battel; and exhorting his Men to fol∣low his Example, assured them, that Victory was sooner acquired by Valour than Numbers, and that Fortune was always more favourable to the Valiant and Brave, than to the Cowardly and pusillanimous.


Cornis
 unsheathing his Sword,
 sought in the Head of his Men, and led them through the thickest of his Enemies, the first rank of which not being able to sustain the furious Charge of the Christians, gave way; and being disorder∣ed, the first Squadrons ran foul of the secood, and at length all of them betook themselves to a shameful flight.
 The Transylvanians took all their Canon and Baggage, with ten Ensigns, and killed three thousand Turks. The Pasha of 
Agria
 was wounded, and 
Olac
 Bei of 
Temiswar
 was taken Prisoner; and the whole Army had that day been defeated, had not the Janisaries, who fortified themselves in a thick Wood, given a stop to a farther pursuit. 
Ragotski
 likewise in divers succeeding Skirmishes overthrew the Turks, killing many Pasha's and Souldiers of Quality, and at length remained sole Master of the Field.


The Turks retired to 
Lippa,
 and 
Stephen
 to 
Temiswar,
 whilst 
Ragotski
 made his Incursions in∣to the Country of the Turks, burning and spoil∣ing two thousand Villages;
 with which being terrified and beaten into terms of Reason, they agreed to suffer 
Ragotski
 to injoy his Govern∣ment, conditionally, that the Goods and Estate of 
Gabor
 in 
Transylvania
 should be restored un∣to him: and thus 
Ragotski
 established himself in the Government, and obtained a Confirmation thereof from 
Constantinople
 to his Son, accompa∣nied with Presents and Ornaments of a Prince. And this Example shews us in what manner we are to deal with Turks; Resolution and Rigour are better Arms against them than Complements; and with an Enemy it is more advantageous to make Peace with Weapons in our Hands, than to condescend to the hard Terms which a Ty∣rant pleases to impose on an easie and unpro∣vided People.


So soon as this News arrived the Ears of the proud Sultan, he was so incensed, that in a fury he would have desisted from his present War in 
Persia,
 to vent his Revenge upon 
Transylvania;
 but the cooler and more moderate Counsels of wiser Friends, advised him to defer the execu∣tion of his Anger, until he could discharge it more to the purpose, and in a Conjuncture when it would fall more easy on himself, and more heavy on his Enemy: Howsoever in the mean time 
Ragotski
 made such use of this remote Di∣version of the Ottoman Arms, by advantaging himself of an Alliance with the Cossacks, and by the ill Correspondence and Diffidence which at that time intervened between the Tartars and the Port, that he not only avoided the Revenge threatned by 
Morat,
 but obtained an establish∣ment of the Inheritance to his Son.


By this time Sultan 
Morat
 was arrived at 
Erzrum,
 which is a City belonging to the Turks on the Confines of 
Persia;
 where the first Act which he performed of Justice, was to cut off the Head of the Pasha for his Oppression and Extortions inflicted on his People.


Entring into 
Armenia,
 he was grieved to see the upper and lower Provinces so miserably de∣stroyed and wasted by the War; to recover which, he commanded the People, under pain of Death, to return again to their Ancient Ha∣bitations within the space of twenty days; but

they being setled in other Cities, where perhaps they had purchased Houses and Lands, could not possibly comply with the Severity of this De∣cree; and therefore were constrained to buy a Dispensation and release from the Penalty for a Sum of Mony.


About the beginning of 
July,
 in the parts of 
Erzrum, Morat
 made a general Review and Mu∣ster of his whole Army; with which those he brought from 
Constantinople
 joined to Recruits by the way, and those Forces which had wa∣ged War in 
Persia,
 amounted to near the num∣ber of three hundred thousand fighting Men, but such as were admirably well disciplined, not only by the Severity of their Soveraign, but by the example he shewed them of Frugality and Patience: for he often marched afoot in the midst of the Heats;
 he was very temperate in his Diet, though he was naturally of a glutto∣nous and luxurious Palate: for several Months he made use of no other Pillow for his Head than his Saddle, no other Blanket or Quilt than the Covering or Foot-cloth of his Horse.


Being arrived near to the City of 
Revan,
 he bestowed that Largess on the Souldiery of a Dollar a Man, which is accustomary to be given at all times, when the Grand Signior marches in Person, and then made known to them his Intentions of besieging that Place; and in case he took it not in the space of ten days, that then he would leave it begirt with forty thou∣sand Men; and dividing his Army into three Bodies, he would enter the Bowels of 
Persia
 by divers ways. The Tents of the Grand Sig∣nior, and of all the Camp, were pitched, Bat∣teries raised, the Trenches opened, and all Matters laid in the formal manner of a Siege. The Garison within,
 commanded by Emir 
Gu∣mir,
 consisted of fifteen thousand Men, fitted and provided with all sorts of Ammunition, and wanted neither Courage nor Provisions; how∣soever at the end of nine days, the City was fur∣rendred to the Sultan, upon Terms of Quarter to the whole Garison, both for Life and Free∣dom of Estate: And because this Governour Emir 
Gumir,
 a principal Noble-man of 
Persia,
 had by corruption thus voluntarily delivered up the City, he acquired a place of high Grace and esteem in the Favour of the Grand Signior; to which his courtly manner of indulging his Humour, and complying with him in his Wine and Feasts, (to which the joy of this present Success priviledged him to return) gave him daily a new Title to receive extraordinary Ho∣nours from him.


The News of this prosperous Success was posted to 
Constantinople,
 as the first Essay of the good Effects of the Sultan's Presence, and was there celebrated with Feasts,
 Joy, and Lights, according to the Turkish Fashion, called 
Da∣nalma;
 to perform which, the Turks obliged likewise the Christian Ambassadors, saying, That if they were Friends, they ought to evidence their Satisfaction, by demonstrations of Joy in the prosperity of their Ally.


The Festival was kept for the space of four days; during which two Brothers of the Sul∣tan, 
viz. Bajazet
 and 
Orchan
 were strangled; the latter of which, as is said, was so brave, and of that Courage, that he killed four of his Executioners before he submitted his Neck to the fatal Cord.


The Turks entring farther into 
Persia,
 incon∣siderately fell into an Ambush, where twelve thousand of their Men were defeated; howso∣ever the remainder of the Army not being dis∣couraged with this Encounter, proceeded on their March, making most miserable Havock and Destruction of all before them,
 carrying that Dread and Terrour to the Countries round, that all People fled, leaving their Houses and Things not portable, to the possession of the Enemy. Howsoever the Turks found greater Difficulties than they expected; for meeting frequently Par∣ties of the Persian Cavalry, which were practi∣sed to manage their Horse and Sword, were often defeated, at least endured and sustained the shock of Bloody Skirmishes; and then the Persians re∣tiring into the Mountains known to them, but unknown to the Turks, which served them bet∣ter than fortified Places, returned again when any Advantage or Booty appeared, which perpe∣tually vexed and wearied the Enemy; and burn∣ing all Things which might afford them relief, rendred that fruitful Country more Desolate and barren than the Desarts of 
Lybia,
 or the Sands of 
Arabia.


In this manner the Turkish Army being desti∣tute of all sorts of Provisions and Refreshments, were forced to retire to the Country of 
Tauris;
 which being harassed and impoverished like o∣ther Provinces, caused a miserable Famine in the Camp, whereby Multitudes of Horses and Ca∣mels perished for want of Nutriment; at which the Grand Signior being highly incensed against the Inhabitants of 
Tauris,
 committed their City to the Will and Mercy of the Souldiery, who having pillaged and sacked it, lest it a miserable spectacle of Fire and Sword.


The King of 
Persia
 seeing in what manner the Troops of his Enemy were wearied and consu∣med, took hold of this Opportunity as seasonable to propose certain Articles of Peace by an Am∣bassador, to which 
Morat
 seemed to incline a flexible Ear; but lodging his Souldiers in their Winter-quarters in the parts of 
Damascus
 and 
Aleppo,
 he took his way towards 
Constantinople,
 with intention to ease the Hardships and Labours of the Summers War, by a voluptuous Ease and Winters pastime in the delights and softness of the Seraglio.


The 
16th
 day of 
December
 he arrived at 
Con∣stantinople,
 having passed from 
Ismit
 through the Gulph of 
Nicomedia
 with the attendance of four∣teen Gallies: he made his Entry by the Jews Gate, and not by that of 
Adrianople,
 as was ac∣customary; he was mounted on one of the best of his Horses, and cloathed with a Coat of Mail, a Casket on his Head, with three Feathers ador∣ned with Pearls and precious Stones; his Sword was girt to his side with his Bow and Quiver, his Beard was in a rough and neglected manner, which made him appear more Fierce and Marti∣al; the Chimacam came after him, accompanied with the Traitor who surrendred 
Revan.
 This Festival for his return was celebrated for the space of a whole week, during which time the Shops were shut, the Doors and Outsides ador∣ned with green Boughs and Paintings, and by Night the Streets with Torches were made as clear as the day: howsoever the People secretly murmured, that the War was not prosecuted, and the Advantages taken, when Fortune began to smile and favour their Enterprises; and that now desisting in the middle way, the Work was again to be begun, and all the foregoing Blood and Treasure was spent and consumed to no pur∣pose. These Murmurings of the People were not without some Ground and Cause; for after the departure of the Grand Signior, the Persians put themselves again into the Field, and recovered the Country which they had lost; and having

offered a Sum of Mony to 
Mortesa
 Pasha to sur∣render 
Revan;
 which he refusing to accept on Principles of Fidelity and Honour, they prepa∣red to lay close Siege to the Place: the Janisaries were also displeased to see themselves neglected, and cast out of the Guard, and their Places sup∣plied by the Bostangees; nor less disgusted were the Lawyers to see several of their Judges and Kadies handged, and their Heads cut off, upon pretence of Sedition and Faction. His ill Hu∣mor more inceased to the height of Tyranny, by reason of certain twinges which he suffered of the Gout, which is not usual in Persons of his Age, not surpassing twenty six years; and because his Physician, a Jew, forbid him wholly to drink Wine, as poison to his Disease and Com∣plexion, he was so enraged, that he drove him from his Presence with Indignation; and im∣mediately conceived such Anger and Prejudice a∣gainst the whole Nation, that he caused their Houses to be searched, and their Jewels taken from them. But what was most strange, was his horrid aversion to Tobacco,
 the taking of which, by any Person whatsoever, he forbid upon pain of Death; which Sentence he so ri∣gorously executed, that he caused the Legs and Arms of two Men, one that sold Tobacco, and the other that took it, to be sawed off, and in that manner exposed to the view of the People: he also caused two others, a Man and a Woman, to be impaled alive, for the same Offence, with a Roll of Tabaco about their Necks.


As the Gout caused him to be froward and ill-natur'd, so more especially when ill news came from 
Persia,
 he was observed to be more raving and tyrannical than ever. His Army in 
Persia
 wanting Provisions, disbanded; 
Mortesa
 Pasha Godvernour of 
Revan
 being killed, the Souldiers rebel,
 open the Gates, and yeild themselves to the persian, for which Offence the Janisaries fearing the Justice of their Master the Grand Signior, two thousand of them took up Arms in Service of the Enemy: the sense hereof vexing 
Morat
 to the Soul, he caused the Register of the Janisaries to be hanged, and another of their principal Officers to be beheaded,
 and strowed the Streets of 
Constantinople
 with dead Bodies, some for one cause, and some for another, which struch the whole City with a general Dread and Consternation.


He often walked in the night, punishing Quar∣rels and Disorders of the Streets, and meeting two Women wandring in the dark, he caused them to be cut in pieces.


He put hi Cook to Death for not dressing his Meat well, or not seasoning his Sauces according to his Palate.


In his Seraglio sporting with his Arms, he wounded himself with a Dart in the thigh; and by accident wounded the Son of 
Mehmet
 the late Vizier with a Carbine-shot, of which in a short time after he died.


The Persians having taken 
Revan
 (as we have said) instituted Chambers of Janisaries in that place after the Turkish fashion, paying them in the same form as at 
Constantinople;
 and to allure the Spahees to enter into his Service, he offered to all that came in twelve Aspers a day of con∣stant Pay; and declared, That their Faith and Law had no difference from the Mahometan.


The Grand Signior receiving these Advices with extreme indignation, proclaimed his Inten∣tions to return again into 
Persia;
 and though the Design pleased not the Militia, who wre weary of the War, yet his Power was too great to be resisted, and his Humors too violent to be diverted by sober Counsels; for having subjected and absolutely subdued the Insolence of the Soul∣diers, and suppressed the Arrogance of the Law∣yers and Church-men, he ordered every thing according to his Arbitrary and Uncontroulable Pleasure; which being rendred Extravagant and Unsupportable, by reason that in his Cups, and at the time of his Debauchery, he would often take his Counsels and determine his Reso∣lutions, were notwithstanding with more patience endured, upon hopes that they would not be lasting, and that Excesses would accelerate his Death, and the end of their Oppressions.


The Pasha's of greatest Note and Riches he put to Death, and confiscated their Estates to his Exchequer; and whereas Avarice and Cru∣elty were equally predominant in his Nature, there was scarce a day wherein he made not some demonstration of those Dispositions.


The English Ambassador making some instan∣ces for the releasement of English Slaves from Captivity, was forced to purchase their Liberty by giving two Russians, or other Slaves in the place of one English-man.


He took a singular delight to sit in a Chiosk by the Sea-side, and from thence to shoot at the People with his Bow and Arrows, as they row∣ed near the Banks of the Seraglio; which cau∣sed the Boat-men afterwards to keep themselves at a distance from the Walls of the Seraglio. And as he likewise took pleasure to go from one Garden to another on the 
Bosphorus,
 so if he ob∣served any so bold, as to put forth his Head to see him pass, he commonly made him pay the price of his Curiosity by a shot from his Car∣bine.


In all his Gardens and places of Pleasure, his chief Recreation was Drinking, in which his prin∣cipal or almost sole Companions were Emir 
Gu∣mir
 the Persian who betrayed 
Revan,
 and a Ve∣netian of the Family of 
Bianchi,
 who having been taken by the Turks, when he was young, was placed in the Seraglio, and educated in all the Learning and Customs of it, and becoming as well a Proficient in Drinking, as in other Vi∣ces, he was made a Favourite and Companion to 
Morat.
 And thus did they follow this trade of Drunkenness so constantly, that the Health of the Grand Signior began to impair; and at length he became so sensible of his Extravagan∣cies, that he incharged the Chimacam not to obey him after Dinner: and when in the heat of his Wine he took a humor to ride through the Streets, the Janisaires and Officers would sometimes run before to advise the People to withdraw, and sometimes drive them away with Stones, that so they might escape the hazard of this capricious Tyrant.


As it cannot be expressed in what Dread and Fear the People stood of him, so neither in what Veneration he was with his Servants, who obser∣ved the looks and every cast of his Eyes; had learned his Nods, and the meaning of every Motion and Gesture of his Body. It happened once, that a Paper falling casually from his Hand out of a Window, the Pages ran in all haste down the Stairs, striving who should be the first to take it up; but one more desirous than the others to evidence the Zeal of his Ser∣vice, took the nearest way and leaped out of the Window; and though with the fall he broke the Bone of his Thigh, yet being the first that took up the Paper, he came halting to present it with his own Hand: this bold readiness in his Service so pleased the Grand Signior, that being cured, he was afterwards preferred to one of

the most considerable Offices of the Empire. Thus was 
Morat
 revered in his Seraglio, as he was feared aboard, his Servants having the same awe of him, as 
Bagotes
 the Eunuch had of 
Alex∣ander
 the Great, who holding the Pot of Incense and Perfumes whilst his Master slept, suffered his Hands to burn to the Bone, rather than to awaken him by moving out of his place. 
Q. Cur∣tius.


But it is time now to leave off farther Dis∣course of the Extravagancies of 
Morat,
 and to return to the Wars in 
Persia;
 howsoever before the departure of the Grand Signior, it will be requisite to recount somewhat of the State of Affairs in 
Europe.


On the Frontiers of 
Hungary
 and 
Poland,
 there wanted not Exercises and Skirmishes to employ and practise the Souldiery, and keep them in Breath.


The Poles heightned with their good Successes, would not longer endure the Incursions of the Tartars, complaining against the Turk, that he had given Orders, and secretly abetted them in their Robberies and Invasions, against the Arti∣cles of the last Peace; and therefore to avenge themselves, the Poles appeared on the Fron∣tiers with forty or fifty thousand Horse: but the Grand Signior not willing in this Conjuncture to break with the Poles, absolutely disowned a∣ny such Order or Permission given to the Tar∣tars; and being willing to continue the League, that he might oblige the King of 
Poland,
 gave liberty to all the People of that Nation,
 and to the Russians, who had been taken since the Last Treaty, positively prohibiting all People from buying, or keeping any of the Subjects of that Country for Slaves, during the continuance of this Peace.


In 
Hungary,
 though the Ambassador had but lately brought a Confirmation of the Peace from 
Constantinople;
 yet the Turks pretending that the Articles were not complied with, continued to trouble and disturb those Frontiers; for four thousand of them being gotten into a Body, burnt certain Villages, made divers Slaves, and battered the Castle of 
Raab;
 but being repulsed by that Garison, and by that of 
Komorra,
 they again made Head, and encamped within three Leagues of 
Presbourg:
 The which gave great trouble to the Emperor, both because he had lately declared a War against 
France,
 and be∣cause he apprehended, that those Commotions of the Turks were designed to no other end,
 than to engage him to renounce all assistance and succour to be given unto 
Ragotski.


We have already recounted in what manner the Turks had espoused the Quarrel of 
Stephen Gabor,
 and resolved to establish him in the Prin∣cipality of 
Transylvania,
 with the Ruin of 
Ra∣gotski;
 which now being designed to be done by open Force, several Troops were sent to the Frontiers of 
Transylvania;
 which so alarmed the Hungarians, that they put themselves on their Guard, and obliged the Estates of 
Austria
 and 
Hungary
 to contribute toward the Succour of the Transylvanian Prince.


The Emperor remained long in suspense what course to steer, until at length the Perswasions of the Confederate Princes, the shame of aban∣doning a Friend and an Ally for a Prey to the Turks, and the fear of displeasing his Heredita∣ry Dominions in 
Hungary,
 who considered 
Tran∣sylvania
 as the Bulwark of their Country, indu∣ced him to promise secretly, and underhand, As∣sistance to 
Ragotski.


As to the Turks themselves, the Effects did not correspond with their Menaces: for though they had gathered an Army of twenty thousand Men at 
Buda,
 they not only were disappointed of their Design upon 
Newhausel,
 but were open∣ly repulsed, and shamefully expelled the Fron∣tiers by the palatine of 
Hungary:
 And 
Ragotski
 being recruited by Succours from the Emperor, and by an Alliance with 
Poland,
 defied the For∣ces of the Turk, and contemned the Reports of sixty thousand Men preparing to march a∣gainst him.


For indeed the Grand Signior had too great an Incumbrance on his Shoulders by the War in 
Persia,
 to attend unto a perfect and studied Re∣venge against 
Ragotski;
 for 
Revan
 being reco∣vered by the Persian, (as we have already de∣clared) was a Matter of high Moment; and what distracted all his Counsels, and weakened his Hopes.


When News came first of the Siege of 
Revan,
 Orders were given to the Vizier to Besiege 
Bag∣dat,
 as a means to cause a diversion of Arms;
 but the Souldiery entertaining an aversion to this Enterprise, unanimously refused to March, or to proceed farther than 
Erzrum. Jambolat Ogli,
 who commanded the Army before the the Arrival of the Vizier, had strangled a Pasha, and taken his Estate to supply the Wants of the Army; and had likewise put to Death several Spahees and Janisaries for Mutiny, and because they had de∣clared an unwillingness to this War. The Soul∣diery prepared to address themselves to the Vi∣zier for Justice against these violent Proceed∣ings: but he not willing to hear them, endea∣voured to divert their Complaints, which caused a greater Commotion and Storm than before. And though 
Jambolat
 pleaded hid Orders and positive Commission from the Grand Signior for what he had acted; yet that Allegation not being accepted by the Multitude as a justifiable Plea, the Vizier was forced to con∣descend to their Desire, and strangle 
Jambo∣lat,
 as he had done the others, being the only Means to quiet and compose this Trouble of his Army.


But as after some great Storm, there is al∣ways remaining for a while a swelling and fluctua∣tion in the Waters, so there still remained on the Spirits of the Souldiery, Discontents and unquietness of Mind: Wherefore the Vizier fearing lest the Enemy taking advantage of the present Seditions, should charge them at a time of Disorder, he retired at a distance from them into the Plains of 
Erzrum:
 But he was not a∣ble to continue long in those Parts for want of Fuel, and of Wood and Planks to secure them against the Rains and Snow; for it being Win∣ter, which is rigorous and cold in that Country, their Tents were not sufficient proof to defend them against the Extremity of the Weather.


Whilst the Turkish Army remained at this Place, advice came,
 that the Persians had Be∣sieged 
Van,
 which is a strong Fortress situate on an inaccessible Rock, on the Frontiers of the Province of 
Diarbequir.
 And though the Persi∣ans were not able to take this Place, neither by Storm nor Famine, yet during this Siege, they made use of their time to ruin all the Country of 
Diarbequir,
 which they left so desolate, that the Turkish Army could not quarter there, nor ex∣tract the least Provision or Subsistence from thence.


To all these Misfortunes a greater was added by the Treachery of a certain 
Curd,
 one who pretending to be ill-satisfied with the Persian Par∣ty, voluntarily offered himself to the Service of

the Turks; and having done them some little Services, by being their Guide through certain difficult Passages, he gained a confidence so far with them, as that designing to surprise a quar∣ter of the Enemy, they committed themselves to his Guidance and Conduct; who having brought them into a narrow Passage,
 where an Ambush of the Enemy lay, he then turned his Coat, and fought against the Turks, of whom 15000 were killed and taken in this Snare.


In short, all Matters of this War proceeded cross and unfortunate for the Turks; for be∣sides their unlucky Fights with the Enemy, their own Seditions in the Camp were greater Mis∣chiefs;
 for now enduring no longer these pun∣gent Miseries, under the pretence of wanting Pay, they cut in pieces the Treasurer of the Ar∣my, two Aga's of the Spahees, and the Chaous∣bashee of the Janisaries.


This News arriving at 
Constantinople,
 when 
Morat
 was afflicted with a grievous accession of the Gout, served to redouble his Pains; in which raving against the Conduct of his Officers, he immediately deprived the Vizier of his Charge, and ordained 
Biram
 Pasha, late Chimacam, to succeed him in his Employment.


The new Vizier immediately set forth the Horses Tail,
 which is a signal of departure, with sound of Drums and Trumpets, making Corban, which is a distribution of Mutton to the Poor, in divers Places: His Retinue was spee∣dily equipped with such sumptuous Magnificence, that it looked rather like the Train of an Am∣bassador, which intended to make Peace, than to the Troops of a General, whose Business was nothing but Blood and Destruction. And indeed Matters seemed to be inclining that way, the Per∣sians having far advanced in this Negotiation; for they wisely pondering the immense Force of the Ottoman Empire, with which they were now contending, judged it the most politick course to make Peace, under the auspicious Planet of their good Fortune; for not knowing how long that might remain constant, they might, so soon as the Wheel turns on the other side, be forced to accept Terms of less Advantage than at pre∣sent they might promise to themselves under their happy Stars.


Wherefore a Proposition being made of send∣ing an Ambassador to the Grand Signior,
 he ac∣cepted of it; and accordingly arrived at 
Con∣stantinople
 in the Month of 
August,
 when the Vi∣zier was scarce in the middle of his Journey. The Grand Signior entertaining some real Incli∣nations to Peace, laid aside something of his u∣sual Grandeur and State, giving the Ambassador Audience in a few days after his arrival; and as nothing mollisies the hard Mettle of a Turk's Spirit, like a gentle Shower of Gold, and the emulgent softness of Rich Presents; so 
Morat
 understanding of Gifts with which he came ac∣companied, afforded to the Ambassador an easy Ear and a pleasing Countenance.


The Presents for the Grand Signior, besides those for the Court, were 
ese that follow.




Eight Indian Horses of great Price.


Forty Dromedaries.


An hundred and fifty Meticals of Musk. As much Ambergriese made up in several Bags; all sealed up with the King's own Seal.


Thirty bundles of the best black Sables.


Eight large Carpets mixed with Gold and Silver; with divers others of Silk, very rare and precious.


Many Pieces of the finest Linnen to make Turbants.


A great number of the rarest Girdles. Por∣celine to a great value.


Divers Pieces of Satin and Velvet, with Golden Flowers.


Fifty Pieces of Silken Stuffs.


Eight Bows of excellent Work.




These Presents so well disposed and prepared the Mind of the Grand Signior towards an Ac∣commodation, that he bestowed a kind Aspect and gentle Words on the Ambassador, so that all the World expected that a Peace would have ensued.


And indeed one might well have believed his Reality in this Intention, since the ardent Passion he had to be revenged of 
Ragotski,
 availed more with him than all other Considerations in the World. His Honour also called him to give a stop to the Progress of the Moscovites, who had taken 
Asac;
 and the Tartars and Cossacks gave some ground of Jealousy, that before long they designed some Action on the Turkish Territo∣ries: the Reasons whereof we shall discourse in this following Year.


We have already related, some Years past, on what Terms the Tartars stood with the Turk, how they refused to accept that King which the Port recommended to them, though the el∣dest and first of the true Line: how they fought and overthrew the Forces which the Grand Sig∣nior sent to compel them to the Election he de∣sired; and this last Year, upon pretence of a War with 
Cantemir,
 they refused to send their Army against the Persian, as had always been ac∣customary to do against the Enemies of the Sultan, whensoever required.


The Pasha, Muftee, and Kadi of 
Caffa
 (which is the Grand Signior's Town in 
Tartary
) urged the Tartar 
Han
 to prepare and forward his For∣ces, according to the Duty and Obligation which was incumbent on him; and enlivening their Arguments with Reproaches of Cowardise and Ingratitude; so far provoked the 
Han,
 that he caused them all three to be strangled.


Notwithstanding this high Provocation, the Grand Signior dissembled the Injury, lest a due Resentment should raise them into an open Re∣bellion: and dissembling an approbation of the Fact, as done with Reason and Justice, sent to the Tartar 
Han
 a Sword and a Vest, as Signals of his Favour: And farther suspecting, lest in prosecution of so sensible a Blow, the Tartar joining in League with the Cossacks and Mosco∣vites, should make himself Master of 
Caffa,
 he prudently touched the Wound with a gentle Hand, offering to ordain such a Pasha, as should be warranted with his Assent and Approbati∣on.


The Tartar being overcome by such Lenitives as these, protested that he never entertained other Thoughts, than to maintain his Faith and Alle∣giance inviolable towards the Grand Signior; and that the Alliance he had made with the 
No∣gay
 Tartars, and the Forces now raised, were maintained with no other Design, than to sup∣press the Rebellion and Insolence of 
Cantemir.


This 
Cantemir
 being a Person of a bold Spirit, and daring in all his Actions, did oftentimes, by virtue of his own Authority, lead a strong Par∣ty to the Field, being followed by the bravest and stoutest Souldiers of 
Tartary;
 for which Reason being hated by the Tartar 
Han,
 and his Life often attempted, and his own Spirit not supporting a Subjection to any other, he passed

the 
Niester,
 and retired with his own Troops, and such others as would follow him, into the Country of 
Budziak,
 near to 
Beliegrod
 and 
Ki∣lia,
 confining on the Frontiers of 
Moldavia;
 where he intended to plant and form a new Co∣lony and Government.


In a short time, divers chief Captains being desirous to follow the Ensigns of so famous a Ge∣neral, came in to him; and multitudes of Peo∣ple forsaking the Sands and barren Rocks of 
Tartary,
 came crowding into this Country; that the Plains of 
Budziak
 not being capable to con∣tain them, they passed into 
Moldavia;
 where in∣croaching on the Lands of the proper Inhabi∣tants, gave a Jealousie as if they intended to take possession of the whole Province.


The Poles being jealous of these ill Neigh∣bours, which lay at the Gate of their Country, ready to enter on all occasions, had made Provi∣sion in their last Articles of Peace with the Grand Signior, that he should force them to return, and urged that point by the Ambassador with all earnestness.


The Tartar 
Han
 also finding his Countries depopulated and weakened by so large an Eva∣cuation, made also his Complaints and Addresses to the Port. But the Grand Signior looking on this Colony, as an increase of his Dominions, and to be composed of such People whom Ne∣cessity must render obedient; and that they could easily, at his Command, make Irruptions into 
Poland, Hungary,
 and 
Transylvania,
 seemed deaf to all Applications in this Business; and as if they were a People in whom he had no part, shewed no concernment for them, though secret∣ly he promised them his Protection.


Hereupon 
Ʋladislaus
 King of 
Poland,
 being wearied with Delays, resolved by force of Arms, to drive out this detestible Neighbour∣hood: But the Tartar 
Han,
 whom this Business more nearly concerned, being more speedy in execution than the Poles, having raised an Army of thirty thousand Men, encountred 
Cantemir
 with twenty thousand,
 and charged him so fu∣riously, that he killed seven thousand of them on the Place, and put the rest to flight, pursuing them through the Plains of 
Dobruc
 on the other side of the 
Danube.


The Grand Signior, who had all this Time re∣mained a Spectator of this Success, began now to take the part of 
Cantemir,
 and severely to reprove the Proceedings of the Tartar 
Han,
 for having disturbed 
Cantemir,
 whilst he was pre∣paring to serve him in the Wars of 
Persia.
 But the Tartar, having shaken off much of his Re∣spect and Reverence towards the Grand Signior, despised the Menaces which he vented against him, and proceeded in his own Business, com∣pelling his People to return again to their Coun∣try, and to their Ancient Habitations. 
Morat
 being forced to suffer what he could not remedy, summoned 
Cantemir,
 with all diligence, to ren∣der himself at 
Constantinople;
 where being arri∣ved, he was at first regarded with a favourable Eye; but his Son soon after having in a private Quarrel killed a Tartar near the Walls of the Seraglio, was for that Fact justly strangled by Order of the Grand Signior; the day fol∣lowing, 
Cantemir
 was also imprisoned,
 and in a short time underwent the like Fate with that of his Son.


During these Troubles, a Nephew of 
Can∣temir
 feigning himself to be disgusted with his Uncle, revolted to the Party of the Tartar 
Han,
 with no other than a treacherous Design to take away the Lives of the two Brothers; the which he compassed at a time of their hunting, when being far remote from their Attendance, following their Game in untroden Paths, he set upon them with an hundred Villains,
 and perfi∣dioufly took away their Lives. The News here∣of was highly applauded at 
Constantinople,
 and the Traitor extolled as a Person of mighty Cou∣rage and wonderful Ingenuity; so that now dif∣ferent Counsels, and new Measures, were taken concerning the Affairs in 
Tartary.


Bechir Gherry,
 Brother to those Princes of 
Tartary
 which were killed, was then at 
Jamboli,
 a City in 
Thrace,
 retired thither under the Pro∣tection of the Grand Signior, for fear and jea∣lousie of Treachery from his elder. Brother. 
Mo∣rat
 caused him to be brought to 
Constantinople,
 where he was sumptuously received, and con∣ducted to Audience by the Chimacam, who gave him the upper-hand, which is the Left amongst Men of the Sword, as the Right is a∣mongst Men of Learning or of the Pen; for as the right Hand governs the latter, so the first is appendent to the left Side.


The Bodies of the two dead Brothers were brought to 
Constantinople,
 where fetulent or stink∣ing, they were exposed to the sight of 
Morat;
 who to gratify his own Humour of Revenge, caused them to be thrown into the Sea.


This good News from 
Tartary,
 was attem∣pered with a worse from 
Asac,
 which the Mos∣covites and Cossacks had besieged. This Town is situated at the Mouth of the River 
Tanais,
 up∣on the declining of a Hill; it is in form four∣square, and may be about twelve hundred Paces in Compass. Before it fell into the Hands of the Turks, it was a famous Scale for all sorts of Merchandise, especially for Butter, Cheese, salt Fish, Leather, Slaves, and other Commodities brought hither by Turks, Tartars, and Mosco∣vites. The Venetians when they addicted them∣selves more to Traffick and Commerce than they do at present, took this Scale for their Way into 
Persia.
 The Town was fortified with ancient Walls, flanked with capacious Towers, and with a Castle which being in the middle, and on the side of the Water, divides the Town, as it were, into two equal parts. The Garison con∣sisted not of above three or four hundred Men; for being a place remote from powerful Enemies, it fell not under any great jealousie, now was it deemed worthy of the Charge of numerous De∣fendats.


The City being in this weak Condition, the Cossacks soon made themselves Masters of it;
 which after they had sacked and pillaged to the utmost, they considered it as a place worthy of better Fortifications; and therefore applying themselves to raise new Works, and repair the Old, they soon made it a Fortress of Strength and Consideration. This happening at a time when the Turks were diverted by the Persian War, the Cossacks injoyed this new Conquest for the space of four Years without molestation, until that in the Year 1641, it was recovered with much Blood and Slaughter by the Arms of Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 as we shall hereafter recount in the sequel of this History.


And now because the taking of this Place was the Original from whence the Divisions and Civil Wars between the Poles and Cossacks de∣rived their beginning, and was the Occasion that the Cossacks revolted from their just Obe∣dience, to the Protection of the Turks; the Relation will not only be curious, but a di∣gression necessary to the clearer Light of the present History.




Ʋladislaus
 the Fourth King of 
Poland
 being wearied with constant Complaints of the Rob∣beries and Incursions made by the Cossacks upon the Turks,
 contrary to Articles and Treaties of Peace, was at length perswaded by his Ba∣rons and Counsellors, that the only Means to suppress the Violence of this unruly People, was to disarm them; and taking away their Wea∣pons of War, to supply them, in lieu thereof, with the Shovel and Mattock, with Ploughts and Pruning-Hooks: by which industrious Diver∣version, from a wicked Life of Blood and Rob∣bery, to honest Husbandry and lawful Arts of living, they might with time be rendred useful to their own Prince, and capable of Faith and just Communication with their Neghbours. It is not one Age past since these people were cal∣led Cossacks,
 derived, as is supposed, from 
Co∣sai,
 a word in their Language which signifies a Goat, perhaps because of their Agility of Bo∣dy, or because their Garments are chiefly made of Goats Skins.


Pellibus & laxis arcent mala frigora bracchis,


Orá{que} sunt longis horrida tecta comis.


The Country inhabited by them, was at first on the Banks of the River 
Boristhenes,
 about fif∣teen Leagues in length to the entrance into the Euxine Sea, where it is reported, that 
Ovid
 was banished; and some say, that from him a Vil∣lage thereabouts called 
Ovidoua
 derives its deno∣mination; and hereunto we may afford the grea∣ter belief from one of his Elegies, in his Book 
De Tristibus,
 which seems to describe this Coun∣try, and the fierceness of the Inhabitants. 
Eleg.
 8: 
lib.
 5.


Quam legis à Scythicâ tibi venit Epistola terrâ,


Latus ubi aequoreis jungitur Ister aquis.


Mista sit hac quamvìs inter Graecós{que} Getás{que}


A malè placatis plus trahit ora Getis;


Sarmaticae major Geticae{que} frequentia gentis,


Per medias in aquis ít{que} reít{que} vias.


In quibus est nemo, qui non Coryton, & arcum,


Telá{que} vipereo lurida felle gerat.


Vox fera, trux vultus, verissima mortis imago,


Non coma, non ullâ barba resecta manu.


At present the name of Cossacks, and their Coun∣try also, is of a far greater extent than it was formerly; for they call now all such in 
Poland
 Cossacks, that are light Horse armed with Bow and Arrow and Fire-arms: and their Country since the late Commotions is measured from the farthest parts of the Palatinate of 
Chiovia,
 for the space of and hundred and twenty Leagues on one side, and the other of the 
Boristhenes,
 which comprehends likewise all the Country of 
Ʋkra∣nia.
 This Country was always inhabited by the most Warlike People of 
Russia;
 for that being subject to the frequent Incursions of the Tartars, necessary Defence, and constant practice in Arms, endued them with a Bold and Martial Spirit.


Ʋkrania
 is a Country so fertile, that it may compare with the most fruitful Soil in the World, producing such quantities of Corn, with little labour, that the Husband-men being made neg∣ligent by their abundance, produced with little Toil, have leisure to apply themselves to Vio∣lence and Rapine. They have no Wine, but use themselves much to Strong-waters. Their Houses are not built of Wood or Stone, but of Osiers, interwoven and daubed over with Earth and Lime; so that they use no Nails or Iron: they have no Merchants unless in 
Kiow;
 nor do they serve themselves of Physicians or Apotheca∣ries. Their learned Language, or the Tongue wherein they write, is the Sclavonian, anciently called the Illyrian: so that in all things this Peo∣ple is rude and barbarous; and though their manner of Government and Policy is not refined or methodically disposed, yet nevertheless it is solid and of deep Foundation, appropriated to the nature and disposition of that People.


This honest Design of King 
Ʋladislaus,
 to re∣duce this People to a just and an industrious course of living, not agreeing with their Temper and Customs, they rather resolved to leave their Country, and betake themselves to various For∣tunes; some of them passed into 
Moscovia
 to plant a Colony in those uninhabited Parts: a Bo∣dy of them, to the number of six thousand, join∣ing together, resolved to pass into 
Persia
 to offer their service unto that King; and being on their Journey, as far as the 
Tanais,
 they encountred with a Party of Moscovite Cossacks, who inha∣bited certain Islands of that River; with whom entertaining Discourse, they understood that 
Asac
 might easily be surprised by them, if they could agree to unite Forces, which together might compose a Body of ten thousand Men: The Importance of the Place being well conside∣red, it was resolved, that the March into 
Persia
 should be shortned, and this City be ordained for the ultimate End of their Travels and Place of Repose. According to this counsel 
Asac
 be∣ing assaulted and taken, (as we have already in∣timated) the Cossacks fortified it in the best manner that they were able, making an Ar∣senal for their Boats and Saicks, whereby af∣terwards they did much more infest the Turks than before.


The other Cossacks who continued in their Country, being much persecuted by the Polish Nobility, chose 
Kilminieschi
 for their General, (the Son of a Noble Family in 
Lituania,
 but ba∣nished and degraded of his Honour for his Cri∣minal Offences) and rebelled against the Go∣vernment. At first not being able to resist the Force of 
Poland,
 they retired within the Woods; but joining afterwards with other Cossacks, they issued forth at the beginning of the Spring, beat the Poles, and carried away a considerable Boo∣ty. Afterwards joining with the Tartars, they made their Incursions as far as 
Zamosca,
 within twenty Leagues of 
Warsaw;
 and so Matters con∣tinued with various Successes not appertaining to this History. Only thus far it is pertinent to the Matter discussed for us to have shewn, That the Counsels of 
Poland
 were in a great Error, when they resolved to change the Life, and alter the Humour of this Warlike People, which being protected in their Priviledges, and encouraged in their Wars, would at all Times, as occasion served, have been ready to have ejected great numbers of good Souldiers into the Ottoman Territories, and might still have been conser∣ved to ballance the Power of the Tartars, which now daily infest and ruin the Borders of 
Po∣land.


These People were like Ill Humors, which being vomited out into the Dominions of the Turk, eased and made healthy the Body Politick of 
Poland;
 but being conserved within the Sto∣mach, caused Syncopes, Convulsions, and such Commotions, as have of late Years shaken the whole Body of the Polish Kingdom: and at length withdrawing themselves entirely from all Obedience, together with that large Pro∣vince of 
Ʋkrania,
 as they have weakned that

Government; so now of late years seeking pro∣tection from the Turk, have added to his King∣dom, and enfeebled that of 
Poland.


When the News arrived first at 
Constantinople
 that 
Asac
 was besieged, the Captain-Pasha going then to instate 
Bechir
 into his Kingdom of 
Tar∣tary,
 received Orders to relieve 
Asac,
 and if possible, to raise the Siege; but the Succours coming too late, and the Town being taken, the loss thereof was not esteemed important enough to divert either Thoughts or Forces from the Per∣sian War.


For now 
Morat
 resolving to presecute the War in 
Persia,
 which could not be successful without the united Power of his whole Empire, con∣ducted by his own Person, he resolved to make a second Journey into those Parts, and with his own Hand to knock at the Gates of 
Babylon.
 To prepare and dispose all matters in order here∣unto, he in the first place countermanded his De∣cree, which prohibited a farther increase of the number of Janisaries; for now being desirous to augment his Army beyond the account of an∣cient Registers, he opened the Janisaries Door, (as they call it) and enrolled six thousand more into that Order.


To conserve still the Order of this Militia, he appointed Officers strictly and severely to take the Decimation of the Christian Children in 
Europe,
 and lest (as was usual) they should be corrupted by the Parents, who often give Pre∣sents, whereby to blind the Eyes of the Mini∣sters, that so they may oversee their Children, or in lieu of the comliest and most fit for Service, accept of the Sickly and Impotent, or such as are unworthy of the Bread and Education given them by the Sultan, he most severely injoined this Service, and under a thousand Menaces en∣charged the care hereof to be executed without Favour or Partiality to any. He carefully re∣viewed the Books of the Timjar-Spahees, count∣ting the number exactly that every Country yields, and comparing them with those mustered in the Field, he confiscated the Lands of those that wanted, being forfeited for non-appear∣ance: he would admit of no Excuse or Delay to the Matter in hand. The Superintendant of the Ordnance but making a Scruple about the Proportion of some Guns, as too weighty and unwieldy for so long a March, lost his Life, for doubting or making a difficulty in what the Grand Signior proposed or designed.


And that no Commotions at home might di∣vert or call him back before his Business was per∣fected, he encharged his Pasha's of the Fronti∣ers to live quietly with their Neighbours, and to be sure to give no occasions of Complaint, or Cause for War during his absence; recommend∣ing to the prudence of the Pasha of 
Silistria
 the care of composing certain Differences between the Princes of 
Moldavia
 and 
Walachia.


Having secured Matters as well as he could at home, he ordered the Horse-tail to be set forth at the gate of the Divan, and all Pasha's and Officers of the Army did the like at their own Doors. His Troops began now to grow nume∣rous; the Spahees and Timariots appointed for the Guard of the Grand Signior's Tents, toge∣ther with other Cavalry, which hold their Lands under Service, amounted unto two hundred thousand. From the hundred seventy two Chambers of Janisaries he drew forth thirty thousand. From the Topgees or Gunners, whereof there are no more than twelve hundred in their Chambers at 
Constantinople,
 yet make up twelve thousand in other parts, he drew out three thousand for the present Service. The Shepherds and Plough-men of 
Bulgaria
 made up twenty thousand; which with Water-bearers, Smiths, Bakers, Butchers, and all other Trades∣men which followed the Camp, were in vast Numbers: so that the whole Army, with the At∣tendants belonging thereunto, were at a mode∣rate calculation computed to amount unto near five hundred thousand Men; whereof three hundred thousand were fighting Men.


The Pestilence, which is the Epidemical Dis∣ease of 
Turkie,
 and which abates the Numbers and Pride of that People, raged this Year great∣ly in 
Constantinople,
 and in the parts of 
Romag∣nia;
 it entred into the Seraglio, and amongst others, took away the only Son of the Grand Signior of two or three Years old. This caused 
Morat
 to pass most part of the Summer at a Pa∣lace on the 
Bosphorus,
 where he recreated him∣self with his drunken Companion the Persian Traitor; and hereby he contradicted the Pro∣verb, 
That Princes love the Treason, but not the Traitor;
 for 
Morat
 it seems loved them both, entertaining this Fellow in his Bosom: His Cloaths, his Garb, his Horses, and Equipage, might rival with that of the Sultan's; He took place of the Chimacam in all Publick Appear∣ances; and what was most strange, he preceded the Mufti; which was a new Form never before practised, and would have afforded matter of Wonder and Discourse, but that the World considered this Novelty, as a Method agreeable to the extravagant Humor of the Sultan.


Amongst his Pastimes, nothing was more plea∣sing than some Divertisement acted with Blood; he shot the Son of a Pasha with his Gun, for daring to approach near the Walls of his Serag∣lio, supposing that he came with curiosity to discover his Pleasures,
 and manner of voluptu∣ous Recreations: For the same Reason he would have sunk a Boat laden with Women, as it glided slowly by the Banks of the Garden. He would himself behold two Thieves impailed, which were condemned to die for robbing some∣thing out of his Seraglio. He commanded the Head of the Treasurer of 
Cyprus
 to be cut off in his presence; as also the Master of his Musick, for daring to sing a certain Air which seemed Persian, and to praise the Valour of that Na∣tion. The Pasha of 
Temiswar
 he put to Death at a full Divan, for fighting unfortunately against 
Ragotski.


To these severe Acts of Cruelty, which he called Justice, he added one not unpleasant; A certain Greek called 
Stridia Bei,
 or Lord 
Oy∣sters,
 who had been Prince of 
Walachia,
 and one whom we have before mentioned, having, by his oppression and harassing that People, amassed a considerable Sum of Mony, essayed a second time, by force thereof, to obtain the Principa∣lity; and making his Offer and Request before the Grand Signior, he was heard with some railery: At length the Grand Signior told him, That he was too proud and aspiring, and there∣fore ordered the tips of his Nose and Ears to be cut off, telling him, that that was to clip the Wings of his Ambition.


But that before his departure for 
Persia,
 he might consummate his Acts of Tyranny, he pra∣ctised one upon his Brother, a Youth of Twenty two Years of Age, of great Hopes, and good Endowments. He was conducted to the pre∣sence of his Brother, at the Biram, to pay his Respects, as is usual at that Festival; and having performed the Ceremony, he enlarged himself in high Praises and Admiration of the Grand

Signior's Generosity and Bravery; who for re∣covery of 
Bagdat,
 was contented to expose his Person to the Inconveniences of a long Journey, and the Dangers of a hazardous War, and that therein he equalled, if not surpassed, the Glory of his Ancestors: Which courtly and rational manner of Discourse did not please 
Morat,
 but rather administred Subject of Jealousy, fearing that he knew too much; and that as he could Speak well, so he might Act accordingly; wherefore the same Day he caused him to be strangled, to the great Sorrow of the People, and detestation of his Abominable Tyranny: But to amuse the Minds of the Multitude, and cease their Murmurings, he caused it to be di∣vulged abroad; that fourteen of his Women in the Seraglio were with Child: which was all false, there remaining none of the Ottoman Race besides his Brother Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 who was Weak, as well in Body as Understanding, and whose Imperfections secured and compound∣ed for his Life: And to suppress the Discourse about his Brother's Murder, he changed it into a talk about his Preparations for War, and his departure for 
Persia.
 Wherefore the Fore∣runners and Harbingers of the Army being sent away with Labourers to repair Bridges, and to level the Ways for the more easie passage of the Cannon. 
Morat
 passed over to his Tents at 
Scutari,
 cloathed in a Coat of Mail, and with a Head-piece set with Precious Stones, and his Sar∣gouch or Feathers clasped to it with Buckles of Diamonds.


As he landed at 
Scutari,
 he was received by three Squadrons of Souldiers, each Squadron consisting of four thousand Men well Armed, and richly Attired; the Garments of one Squa∣dron of which were provided at the Expence of the Grand Signior, and of the other two at the Charge of his Favourite, and of the Captain-Pasha: the latter of which presented to the Grand Signior thirty Purses of Mony, for be∣stowing on him the Honour to command that Gally which transported him to the Asian Coast. The Ambassador sent from 
Persia
 was detained at 
Constantinople
 until this time, and after the Turkish Fashion not permitted to depart at his own liberty; but being now ordered to follow the Camp, his Port and Quarters were assigned, that so he might be a Spectator of that Tragedy which was now to be acted. All things were now disposed in good Posture, with much So∣lemnity, in order to a March; the Conacks, or days Journies, with their Places of Quarters, were laid out in an hundred and twenty days of March from 
Scutary
 to 
Babylon,
 and seventy days of Otorack or Repose. The Journies with the gross Body of such an Army could not be long; and the joyning with other Forces in the way, required leisure and time.


In short, the Horse, after the Turkish man∣ner, having eaten their Grass and been soiled, this powerful Army decamped from 
Scutari
 a∣bout the end of 
May.
 The first day of Oto∣rack or Repose was appointed at 
Ismit,
 where the Grand Signior made a review of his Army; such as were Aged, and unable to endure the Fatigues of a long March, he dismissed, giving them half Pay for their Lives, with the Name of Otoracks, which is the same with 
Milites E∣meriti
 among the Romans: with exact Order therefore and severe Discipline, to which their fierce Monarch had reduced them, marched this numerous Army; no Villages were abused, nor Country-people plundred, and all things were purchased with ready Mony: And the Grand Signior himself being rendred more gentle and tractable in the Field than in his Seraglio, heard all Complaints, and distributed Justice with an equal and impartial Hand.


In the mean time, at 
Coustantinople,
 due care was taken to keep things Quiet and in Order; the Bostangibashee, like Lord High Chamberlain, had the Charge committed to him of the Seraglio, and the Moveables of it; he frequently made his Rounds both by Sea and Land, punished those whom he found in Taverns; nor would he suf∣fer any Candles to be lighted after two hours in the Night. The Chimacam, and the Captain-Pasha, likewise executed their Offices with all care and severity in their respective Stations.


At this time, to the great dissatisfaction of the Greek Nation, 
Cyril
 the Patriarch,
 who had been in 
England,
 and greatly affected with the Discipline of our Church, was deposed, impri∣soned in the Seven Towers, and strangled: in his place one 
Carfila
 was ordained Patriarch, and his Commission or Baratz obtained from the Grand Signior at the expence of fifty thousand Crowns, one Moity whereof was paid from 
Rome,
 the whole Design against 
Cyrillus
 being managed by the Jesuits and other Religious living at 
Galata,
 who accused him before the Turks, of keeping a secret Correspondence with the Moscovites and Cossacks; for which losing his Life 
Carfila,
 a pretended Friend to the Roman Faction, was instituted Patriarch.


The Grand Signior marching with his potent and numerous Army, all the World remained at a gaze what the Issue should be of this mighty Enterprise; yet most were of Opinion, that the Honour and Riches of the Ottoman Empire be∣ing now at Stake, the War could not otherwise conclude than with the Conquest of 
Babylon.
 All that could be feared, was some diversion by the Christian Princes; who taking hold of the pre∣sent Conjuncture, should enter the Frontiers with a powerful Army, and thereby force the Sultan to return. But as to 
Poland,
 the Jea∣lousy soon vanished. When the News came of a Civil War between the Poles and the Cossacks, and that ten thousand of the latter were slain in a Battel, this Intelligence came most seasonable and grateful to the Port, expecting now a Mes∣sage from the Cossacks, desiring Succour in their Extremity; for such Accidente as these have nou∣rished the Turkish Interest, which hath grown out of the Civil Discords of Christian Prin∣ces.


By this means, as the Apprehensions of War by Land ceased, so there appeared some Clouds of Storm at Sea; which doubtless might have produced a War with 
Venice,
 and the Turks been at leisure to attend it; for sixteen Gallies belonging to 
Algier, Tunis,
 and 
Biserta,
 well armed with Slaves and Souldiers, and provided sufficiently with Cannon, Powder, and Bullet, Commanded by 
Ali Picenin,
 united together and formed a small Fleet, with design to rove over the Adriatick Sea, and infest the Coast of 
Italy.
 Their Intentions were to plunder the Riches of 
Loretto;
 but being hindred by contrary Winds, from entring so high into the Gulf, they made a descent in 
Puglia,
 and sacked all the Country of 
Nicotra,
 carrying away a great Booty, with Slaves, and amongst them several Nuns which they prostituted to their Lust; thence they pas∣sed over to the side of 
Dalmatia,
 and in sight of 
Cataro
 took a Vessel, and made Prize of all Ships which they met in those Seas; the Rumor of which made great noise over all 
Italy,
 the People exclaiming against their Princes for suf∣fering

their Lives and Estates to remain subject to the petty Force of a few Pirats. For the Ves∣sels of 
Malta
 and 
Florence
 were disjoined, and roving after purchase in the 
Archipelago,
 took little notice of what was acted in the Gulf. The Spaniards, after their fashion, were slow in Arming, and spent the Summer in Preparations, till the Pirats, laden with Booty, were depar∣ted towards the Winter; so that none remain∣ed to take care of 
Italy,
 and the Venetian Gulf, but 
Venice
 only, to whom the Dominion of those Seas are rightly appropriated.


To suppress therefore the Insolence of these Pirats, the Republick set forth a Fleet consisting of twenty eight Gallies and two Galleasses, un∣der the Command of 
Marin Capello,
 with In∣structions to sink, burn, and destroy those Pi∣rats, either in the open Seas, or in Harbour of the Turks; for that by the Articles of Peace, between the Grand Signior and the Venetians, it was agreed, That no Port or Harbour of his should be priviledged to afford entertainment or protection to any Free-booter or Pirat of that nature.


It happened about that time, that the Malteses and Florentines crusing in the 
Archipelago,
 had done great Mischief to the Turks in those Seas; to revenge which, and to prevent farther da∣mage, the Captain-Pasha sent Orders to these Vessels of 
Barbary
 immediately to come to his Assistance; to which they were now more ea∣sily perswaded; for being already laden with Booty and Spoils, they contented themselves with a change of their Station. But to give a fare∣wel to those Parts, they first resolved to spoil, and plunder 
Lissa,
 aliàs 
Lesina,
 an Island belong∣ing to the Republick; but being overtaken by the Venetian Fleet in their Voyage thither, near to 
Valona,
 a Port and Harbour belonging to the Turks, they put themselves under the Defence of the Town and Castle, which received them willingly to their Protection, notwithstanding all Articles and Agreements to the contrary. The Venetian Fleet saluted the Castle without a Shot,
 desiring, that according to the Capitula∣tions of Peace, the Pirats might be rejected, and commanded to abandon their Port: in answer hereunto the Turks replied with a Shot, making known their Intentions to defend their Friends: wherefore the Venetians retiring at some di∣stance came to an Anchor, designing to block up the Port. Many days had not passed before the Pirats endeavoured, by help of their Oars, and a gentle Gale, to make their escape; and being, with the gray of the Morning, advanced with∣out the Port, they were espyed by the watch∣ful Venetians, who dividing their Fleet into two Squadrons, charged them with high Courage; the Fight continued for the space of two hours, during all which time the Castle of 
Valona
 fired at the Venetians, and shot down a Mast of one of the Galleases, a Splinter of which wounded 
Lorenzo Marcello
 the Commander; at length five of the Gallies of the Pirats being disabled, any many of their People killed, they began to fly, and retire again under the Protection of the Town; as also did the Venetians to their Place of Anchorage.


A distinct Advice of all Particulars being dis∣patched to 
Venice,
 the Senate wrote to 
Capello,
 That since the respect which the Republick owes to the Ottoman Court was not unknown to him, he should by no means make any attempt against those Pirats upon the Land, but meeting them fairly at Sea, he ought then to make use of all the valour and force he was able.


In the mean time the Duke of 
Medina las Tor∣res,
 Vice-King of 
Naples,
 dispatched an Ex∣press to 
Capello,
 with Letters applauding the ge∣nerosity of the Design, wherein he was now en∣gaged for the Glory of his Republick, and the Common Good of all Christendom, proffering to supply him with Refreshments and Ammunition, and what else might supply his Occasions; ex∣pecting, that by such Encouragement as this, he might be induced to Assault the Enemies in 
Valona,
 without respect to the Grand Signior, or any Inconveniences which might arise thereby. On the contrary the Governour of the Castle, and Kadi of the Town wrote a Letter to 
Ca∣pello,
 putting him in mind, that he was within the Grand Signior's Dominions, and that he should be careful how he offered any Violence to those Places, which would certainly prove a Violation of the Peace, and be the Original of an inevitable War.


Capello
 had now lain a whole Month before the Port, having all the time injoied fair Weather, and a smooth Sea, against the hope and desire of the Turks, who expected that by means of some Storm, the Enemy would be forced to re∣move their Quarters to some secure Harbour, and thereby afford them an opportunity to escape.
 But 
Capello
 growing weary of such te∣dious Attendance, resolved to expect no longer, nor yet to lose the present Advantage of ren∣dring himself Master of the Vessels of the Ene∣my: wherefore dividing his Fleet into several Squadrons, he advanced near the Port, firing se∣veral Shot at the Tents of the Pirats, of which one from a Galeass struck a Mosch; and arming with store of Men the Galeots and Bri∣gantines, they entred the Port, and to the asto∣nishment and vexation of the Turks, possessed all the sixteen Vessels, and brought them to their Admiral: which though they had disfurnished of all their chief Booty, yet their Cannon and Arms remained, of which there were twelve Pieces of great Brass Guns, besides others of Iron, with divers Falcons and lesser Arms.


The Intelligence hereof being carried to 
Ve∣nice,
 Orders were given, that all the Vessels should be sunk in the Port of 
Corfu,
 excepting only the Admiral of 
Algier,
 which was to be brought to the Arsenal of 
Venice,
 there to remain as a Trophy of Victory, and for a perpetual Memory of this Glorious Atchievement. How∣soever this Exploit was variously interpreted at 
Venice,
 and approved, or disproved, according to the diversity of Humors. The younger Men applauded it as an Action of great Gallantry, excusing his Transgression of the Senats Orders by a transport of Passion and Zeal towards his Country, and desire of Glory. But the Sena∣tors, and Men of mature Judgments, highly re∣sented this Breach of their Orders, which as they are strictly Enjoined, so they expected that they should be punctually Obeyed. That this action was a sufficient and Just Cause alone to kindle a War, and that it was a matter intolera∣ble, that a single Citizen should of his own Head and Humor, presume to act such things, as must necessarily involve the Publick in a War, contrary to their Pleasure, and in opposition to their express Commands. For which Crime and other subsequent Defaults, 
Capello
 was after∣wards forced to justify himself, as will be signi∣fied in the sequel of this History.


The Particulars of this Advice, were by an express Messenger dispatched to 
Luigi Contari∣ni
 the Bailo or Ambassador for the Venetians at 
Constantinople,
 a Person of great Reputation and

Esteem, having been conversant in the principal Courts of Christendom, and employed for the space of seven years at 
Munster,
 where he was Assistant with the Nuntio 
Chigi,
 afterwards 
Alexander
 the 
7th,
 in the general Peace of 
Eu∣rope.


The Turks also receiving this News aggrava∣ted to them with all the foul Circumstances ima∣ginable, the Chimacam immediately summoned the Bailo to Audience, and with an Angry Countenance began to exclaim: 
That taking advantage of the Grand Signior's absence in remote Parts, the Venetians had, in a perfidi∣dious and hostile manner, assaulted and de∣stroyed the Fleet of 
Barbary,
 which were his Subjects, and such as he had called to his assi∣stance against the Corsares of 
Malta
 and 
Li∣gorn.
 That being accidentally compelled by storm to enter into the Port of 
Valonia,
 they were forcibly taken thence, and violence offer∣ed to the Grand Signior's Port and Castle, by way of a manifest and open Breach. If this presumption were grounded on the long di∣stance of the Grand Signior from these parts, the Venetians would do well to consider, how that they provoke an angry Prince, and one who esteems neither Expence, Hazards, nor Labours to compleat his Revenge. If this were a design to divert the Grand Signior's Arms from 
Persia,
 they would do well to con∣sider, that the Sultan was not so far advanced, but that he could turn a Current, if he plea∣sed, sufficient to drown, and in an instant to overwhelm the Dominions of 
Venice;
 or could at least collect Forces from nearer parts able to revenge his Quarrel, and vindicate his Ho∣nour from the Disdain and Scorn of such pet∣ty Neighbours.


Hereunto the Bailo or Ambassador made this Reply: 
That this Piratical People was the same which the Year before had landed in 
Can∣dia,
 and made spoil of the Estates of the In∣habitants, and carried many of them into sla∣very; and not contented with this Booty, they entred the Gulph, and penetrated into the ve∣ry Bowels of 
Italy,
 with design to Sack and Plunder the Island of 
Lissa,
 which was under the Dominion of the Republick. That the Ve∣netian General friendly saluted the Castle of 
Valona,
 which was returned with several Shots from thence; that had it been his intention to have attempted the Port in the beginning, he would not have lain thirty seven days in ex∣pectation of the forth-coming of those Pirats, it being only respect to the Grand Signior, which obliged him to that attendance. At length being wearied, and provoked by the insolenee of that People, he forcibly entred the Port, knowing, that by Capitulations with the Grand Signior, it was agreed, That all Ports should be forbidden, and that to these Pirats, unless they first gave Security and Cau∣tion not to injure and make Prize of the Sub∣jects of the Republick.


The Chimacam replied hereunto, 
That there were ten thousand Souldiers and Slaves belonging to those Gallies, which had taken their Refuge in 
Valona;
 and therefore he re∣quired the Venetians to permit them free pas∣sage into their own Country, and to restore their Gallies, unless they intended to come to an open Rupture with the Grand Signior.


The Chimacam also pressed more urgently for restitution of the Gallies, in regard, that having advised the Grand Signior of this Disaster, he had at the same time given him hopes, and al∣most assurance to believe, that by his Negotia∣tions he should recover them out of their Hands: But the Senate was of a different Opinion; and therefore gave express Orders to their Officers of the Marine Affairs, immediatly to sink all those Vessels; that so the expectation of the Turks being disappointed by an impossibility of recovery, might not, by the rude Instances and Threats of 
Morat,
 oblige them to a dishonoura∣ble and an undecent Restitution.


The News of this Misfortune made greater noise and disturbance in the Divan of 
Algier
 than at 
Constantinople,
 that rude Rabble raved, and railed, and threatned, laying the blame sometimes on one, then on another, being ready to come to blows amongst themselves; but that being obliged, by order of their Divan, to keep their Thumbs within their Girdles, they durst only express their Anger by Punches and Thrusts of their Elbows. At length coming to cooler Terms, they charged all the Fault on their Ad∣miral 
Ali,
 and resolved to make Applications to the Grand Signior for Redress, and Repara∣tions on the Estates af the Venetians in his Do∣minions.


The News also hereof overtaking 
Morat
 in his March into 
Persia,
 angred him to the Heart, and transported him to that heat of Indignation, that he immediately ordered, that the Venetian Bailo, with all his Nation in the Ottoman Do∣minions, should without exception, be cut to pieces; but the Great Vizier, and his Favourite, suffering him for some time to vent the impetuo∣sity of his Fume and Rage without contradicti∣on, gave a stop for thirteen days to the dispatch of these fatal Orders; until taking him in a more gentle mood, they perswaded him to change this Sentence of Death, to the imprison∣ment only of the Bailo; and such care was ta∣ken, lest the News of a War with 
Venice
 should fly into 
Persia,
 and thereby prejudice the Terms of Peace, that this Accident was kept as a Se∣cret, and communicated to none, but such as were nearly concerned in the Government.


The Command for the Bailo's Imprisonment being arrived at 
Constantinople,
 he was summon∣ed to Audience by the Chimacam; and though at that time he was exceedingly afflicted with the Gout, yet the Turkish Obedience to Impe∣rial Commands admitting of no Excuse, he was forced to an attendance; and being brought in his Sedan, he was carried to the Chamber of Audience, where he expected some time until the Chimacam came to him: in the interim being entertained by some Aga's, whom the Chimacam had employed to sound him touching the resti∣tution of the Vessels; who finding by his Dis∣course that they were sunk, without possibility of recovery, and that there could be no com∣pensation made for them, they returned with this Answer to the Chimacam: of which being now informed, he came in, and having no far∣ther to expostulate on this Matter, produced the Grand Signior's Command for his Imprisonment, and kissing it first, caused it to be road. The Bailo replied, That he was ready to submit,
 being not only willing to suffer Imprisonment, but also Martyrdom, accompanied with the se∣verest Pains, for the sake of his Prince and his Country.


To soften and mitigate Matters, the other Christian Ambassadors then resident at the Port, had made Arz to the Grand Signior, wherein, with all reverence and respect, they offered themselves for Mediators in this Difference, en∣gaging themselves, but not the Parole of their

Princes, for the Person of the Bailo, that he should not fly from the Port, nor yet refuse any reasonable Terms by way of Accommodation. This Mediation of the Ambassadors, seconded with some Presents from the Bailo to the Turkish Ministers, so facilitated Matters, that the Bailo at first was conducted to the
 Kahya's Chamber, and afterwards was confined to his own House in 
Galata,
 guarded by four Chiaouses, with free Liberty to all Visitants whatsoever.


There was now no other Rumour or Discourse in 
Constantinople,
 but of a War with 
Venice,
 so soon as that with 
Persia
 was concluded: And in the mean time the Grand Signior gave Orders, that ten Gallies should be built in his own Arse∣nal at his Charge, and presented to the Barba∣rouses, with condition that they should stay un∣til the Spring, and accompany his Fleet to Sea. But 
Ali Picenin
 the Admiral suspecting that this was only a Snare to engage him and his Men for ever in the Grand Signior's Service, refused the Obligation, and set two Gallies on the Stocks for his own Account.


Advice of the Bailo's Confinement being come to 
Venice,
 with a Report of the Passion and Rage of the Sultan, they expected nothing more than a War with the Turk, which they communica∣ted to all Christian Princes, requesting their Succours and Assistance against the common Ene∣my. These Addresses produced rather Compas∣sion of their Case, than substantial Contributi∣ons: Pope 
Ʋrban
 himself giving them great Assu∣rances of some help from the Ecclesiastical Reve∣nues, besides Processions, Masses, and Benedicti∣ons for their good Success, in as great a Number as they could desire: Notwithstanding which due Care wast taken to make ready and provide against all Encounters. Letters were wrote to the Captain-General in the Levant, to make due Preparations against the Enemy: Sixteen Gallies were armed out of 
Candia,
 to which were joyn∣ed other Galleasses under the Command of 
Anto∣nio Pisani
 and 
Sebastiano Veniero:
 Souldiers were levied in every Place, and all Garrisons provided with Ammunition and Victuals, and reinforced with Numbers of an Auxiliary Militia. Howso∣ever it was not the Business nor Advantage of the Venetians, to make a War with the Turks, but rather, whilst they feared the worst, and made Provisions against the utmost Extremities, they endeavoured to enter into Treaties of Peace, and to qualifie the hot Spirit of the Grand Signior with the gentle Lenitives of fair Words, and proffers of making Atonement with the Sacrifice of Gold and other Presents: In order unto which they wrote a Letter to the Grand Signior to this Effect.


That being provoked by the Insolence and frequent Robberies of the Pirates of 
Barbary,
 who did not esteem Faith or Obedience to his Majesty, nor the Commands which he had of∣ten fent to restrain them, they were induced, out of natural Defence of themselves, to cha∣stise and correct them; but as this was acted without intention to disoblige his Majesty, so they were ready to maintain and cultivate that ancient Friendship and Correspondence which was ingrafted on the firm Root of his Glorious Progenitors.


Morat,
 though he received this Letter in an huff, and gave an Answer to it with Disdain, which breathed nothing but Threats of Revenge, and total Destruction; yet he sent it by an Ex∣press of his own to 
Venice,
 couching something within the Terrour of his Words, as if there was place left for an Accommodation, if the Venetians knew what Salve was to be applied to obduct the Skin of this bleeding Wound. The Venetians quickly apprehended, that Gold was the only Remedy, of which they were ready to contribute freely; since they could make no better a Pur∣chase with their Money than Peace, not could make a better Bargain than with such a Sum as would serve only to make the first Preparations of War, to evade all Hazards, Troubles, and Ca∣lamities by a happy and safe Conclusion of Peace. The which notwithstanding took no Effect, until the Return of 
Morat
 from 
Persia;
 and therefore we shall defer Discourse thereof to its proper place.


Amurat
 marched now at the Head of a formida∣ble Army,
 cloathed in the Habit of a Janisary, to render himself acceptable to the Militia, whom having subdued by Rigour and severe Discipline, he would now oblige by Courtesie and fairer Treatment: With Courage and great Patience he marched through sandy Desarts and unfre∣quented Places; and being the first who offered to expose himself to Dangers and Sufferings, the Souldiery followed willingly his Example, estee∣ming no Attempts either hazardous or tedious, in which they saw themselves preceded by their Valiant General. In this March he was overta∣ken by one who rode hard to demand 
Mostaluck,
 which is the Reward of good News for the Birth of a Son, of which one of his Sultana's was deli∣vered at 
Ismit:
 the Messenger was secured until the News was confirmed; which being after∣wards turned to the Birth of a Daughter, the poor Man suffered Death, being cruelly impaled for his unadvised haste and excess of officious Re∣spect towards his Ptince.


The Great Vizier met his Master at 
Iconium
 with a moderate Equipage, to give more Room for the Quarters of the Army, and rendring him∣self more gracious in his Eyes by a Present of fif∣ty thousand Dollars, he was again remunerated with a Cemiter and a Vest of Sables, which are the usual Signals of the Sultan's Favour.


All 
Asia
 was now in Arms, and the Princes and great Men came in to perform their Duty, ac∣companied with their Forces and Attendance: Only Complaints were made of a certain Shegh,
 Santone or Preacher belonging to the Mountains of 
Anatolia,
 who had refused to do Homage; or serve in the War: He was one, who by a feig∣ned Sanctity had acquired a great Reputation a∣mongst his People; and having declared himself to be the 
Mehedy,
 or the Mediator, which, accor∣ding to the Mahometan Doctrine, is to fore-run Antichrist, for reducing all the World to one Unity of Faith: He had perswaded his People, that he, and they under him, were by Priviledge of his Office, exempted from all Taxes, Contri∣butions, or Impositions by any Secular Power whatsoever. The Grand Signior who could not understand or believe this Doctrine, presently detached a strong Body with some Cannon under Command of the Captain-Pasha (who, as we have said, was to accompany the Grand Signior in the War) to confute the Principies of this Rebel, and to reduce him to Obedience. These Forces being entred on his Dominions, Procla∣mation was made to the People, that they should deliver up their Impostor into the hands of Ju∣stice; which if they refused to do, then Fire and Sword was to be their Portion,
 and Destruction to extend even unto their Children of seven years of Age. This terrible Denunciation of the Sultan's Sentence struck all the People with cold Fear and Amazement; howsoever the Shegh a∣vailing himself on certain Prophecies, which he

interpreted in his own Favour, adventured to stand a shock with the Grand Signior's Forces; but being overcome by them the Shegh was ta∣ken alive and carried to the Grand signior; who having given a stop to his March at 
Iconium,
 un∣til the end of this Business, he condemned him to be flead alive; and in this Guise being a horrid Spectacle to all Beholders, he was carried upon an Ass to the Wheel, on which he seemed to en∣dure the Remainder of his Punishment without any sensible Touches or Pangs in the Torments.


This Success being attained, 
Morat
 proceeded in his March, and passing through 
Alexandretta
 or 
Scanderone,
 he was there saluted by the Guns of all the English and Dutch Ships then in Port, and presented by the Merchants and Consuls, es∣pecially by the Venetian called 
Marco Foscolo,
 whose Presents were computed to amount unto the Value of ten thousand Dollars. Thence he proceeded to 
Antioch,
 where he refreshed his Ar∣my for a few days, observing the Antiquities of that Place. At 
Aleppo
 he was met by the Pasha of Grand 
Cairo,
 who brought with him a rich Tri∣bute, accompanied with an Army of twenty four thousand Souldiers, all choice Men well armed and well cloathed; at the same Place also the For∣ces of 
Palestine
 joyned with him, so that his Ar∣my was now increased to a vast Number. Pro∣ceeding forward new Sangiacks came in daily belonging to the Countries through which they marched, and a strong Party of Tartars despai∣ring of being able to act any considerable Matter against 
Asac,
 offered themselves to the Service of the Grand Signior.


The King of 
Persia
 entred the Field at the Head of an hundred and twenty thousand Horse;
 but being inferiour in Force, made only use of them to reinforce his Garrison of 
Bagdat
 with an Addition of thirty thousand Men; which now being well provided, he judged that the Force within, and the Strength of the Place would be able to endure a long Siege, and with time wea∣ken, if not destroy the vast numbers of the Turks, of which there were former Examples: With the rest of his Forces he returned to encounter the Great 
Mogul,
 who (as we have said) promised 
Morat
 to assist him in this War, and attack the Persian on the other side of his Dominions, which served for an advantageous Diversion to the Turk. This was the Reason that no memorable Battels succeeded in the Field, there being none of greater Note than a Fight which 
Quinan
 Pasha had with two thousand Persians belonging to 
Re∣van,
 with whom accidentally encountring, he killed fifteen hundred of them on the Place, and took the rest Prisoners, which being five hundred in number were brought before 
Morat,
 and all barbarously put to death by him.


During the time of this March, 
Morat
 often exercised himself in Feats of Arms, to shew his strength of Body and dexterity of Hand; a∣mongst other things wonderful to the Souldiers, he pierced a Suit of Arms of Musket-Proof, with a Dart, called by them a 
Gerit,
 thrown from his Hand; for evidence of which, the Armour is placed on one of the Gates of 
Aleppo,
 with an Inscription under it.


About the Beginning of the Month of 
August
 the Turkish Army passed the River 
Euphrates,
 by means of a Bridge, which was not so well built, but that it sunk under the weight of Horses, Ca∣mels, and Baggage, by which Disaster many pe∣rished in the Water, which great Rains had swel∣led above the Bounds of its Banks. As this nu∣merous Army proceeded, so all Petty Princes ap∣plied themselves to perform their Homage; a∣mongst which one Tarpos a King of the Arabs came with his Wife, Mother, and Son to prostrate himself before the Sultan: He was entertained in the Tent of the Favourite, who being always in company with 
at
 was never suffered to se∣parate from him, and his Tent, more for Ostenta∣tion, than to serve his occasion. 
Tarpos
 being ad∣mitted to Audience, was received with Respect and a favourable Countenance, and presented with a Vest of Cloth of Gold lined with Sables, and a small Purse of Gold: In recompence where∣of the Arab Prince returned certain choice Horses and two Leopards. In like manner the Georgi∣ans and Mengrelians, who are Tributaries to Turk and Persian, and commonly incline to the strongest side, whose Nations we have described 
in the present State of the Ottoman Empire,
 would not be wanting at this time to bring their Tri∣bute of eighty thousand yards of Linen-cloth, which they pay every three year, with some Chil∣dren of both Sexes chosen out of the comeliest and most healthful amongst them.


At 
Mosul
 the Army lay encamped for some time,
 where was a general Rendezvous and Con∣fluence of People from all Parts, and every thing ordered and modelized for a War. Severe Dis∣cipline was kept amongst all, Offenders were Impaled, Flead alive, their Bowels ript out, and thrown into the publick Ways: Nor did Takers of Tobacco escape with less Punishment than the rest. In the mean time Wine was for∣bid to his whole Camp, unless to himself and his Favourite, being a Royal drink; and when the chief Physician commended the admirable vertue of Opium, advising 
Morat
 to use it in the place of Wine, he enjoyned him to make his Words good by his own Example, and thereby for∣ced him to take so much, that he was over∣come, and died by swallowing too great a quantity.


From 
Mosul
 the Army marched in due order to 
Babylon,
 where the Great Vizier arrived with thirty thousand Men about the 
19th
 of 
October:
 But by reason of the great weight of Artillery, and the many Impediments which at∣tend such vast numbers, the Grand Signior came not thither till the 
5th
 of 
November,
 and on the 
9th
 the whole Turkish Army presented it self be∣fore the Walls of 
Babylon.


Babylon
 the ancientest City of the World,
 reported to be built by 
Nimrod
 on the Banks of the River 
Euphrates,
 and afterwards beautified and enlarged by 
Semiramis
 the Wife of 
Ninus,
 is recorded in History for the vastness thereof to be one of the seven Miracles of the World. Afterwards the furious Inundations of the Ri∣ver, and the Iron Teeth of devouring Time, and the subjection thereof to the Macedonian Empire, did much eclipse the Glory of that City, and caused 
Seleucus Nicanor,
 one of 
Alex∣ander
's Captains, to build a new one where the 
Tigris
 and 
Euphrates
 meet, forty Miles more Northwards than the old 
Babylon,
 which he there∣fore called 
Seleucia
 after his own Name. In the Year of our Lord 753, 
Abugiafer Almansor,
 an Arab King, enlarged this City to the Eastern side of the 
Tigris,
 as being less subject to the In∣undations of the River, giving it the Name of 
Badgat,
 or the place of Gardens; but his Son 
Almolied
 being more pleased with the Western side, encouraged People to build the stateliest Palaces and best Fabricks near the place where he delighted to keep his Court, so that the River 
Ti∣gris
 divided the City. The which with the Coun∣try thereabouts was subdued by 
Solyman
 the Mag∣nificent; and afterwards in the Year 1625; it was

recovered by 
Abas
 King of 
Persia,
 until at length in this of 1638. it was vanquished by the mighty Force and Prowess of this Magnanimous Sultan, as we shall now understand.


The numerous Troops of the Ottoman Army covering all the Plains,
 a General Council of War was called of the Chief Commanders of the Jani∣saries and Spahees, especially of such who had been practised in the Sieges of the strong Fortres∣ses in 
Hungary.
 After some Debate and long Consideration, it was agreed, That the City should be battered in three Places. One Battery of twelve Pieces of Cannon commanded by the Great Vizier was to be erected against the Bright Gate; the second against the Dark Gate of ten Pieces of Cannon, under the Command of the Captain-Pasha: and a third of eight Pieces direct∣ed against the Gate of 
Persia,
 under the Govern∣ment of 
Chusaein
 Pasha Beglerbei of 
Anatolia.
 The Grand Signior in the mean time habited like an ordinary Souldier, that he might be the less exposed to Danger, visited all Posts and Places, encouraging them with his Words and Presence, protesting that he would not change his Cloaths for ever in any place but within the Walls of 
Bag∣dat.
 In the space of three days the Trenches were opened, the Batteries raised, and the Cannon planted; and 
Morat
 having made Korban, gave fire to the first Cannot with his own Hand, as he had brought the first Basket of Earth to raise the Works. The Defendants within consisted of eighty thousand fighting Men, with which they made frequent Sallies of four and five thousand Men at a time, who being retired, were again se∣conded by another of the like Number, which put the Turkish Camp into much Confusion, and into danger of having their Trenches levelled, and their Cannon spiked; but the Turks valiantly fighting, the Slaughter proved bloody on both sides; and being guided rather by the Bravery of their Courage, than by Art or Experience in in War, they carried their Works forward to the very Brink of the Ditch, having an Italian and a Candiot for their chief Engineers; who though they were not Persons of that Ability, as our modern Times have produced, yet they were such, as for want of better, served the present occasions, where force and Numbers, with small Additions of Art, were the most available. For in this Siege the Sword was more exercised than the Spade or Mattock, and there was more need of Arms than Works; for the constant Sallies kept the Turks always watchful and imployed, and perpetually disturbed them, until at length they were forced with great Labour to raise a high Circumvallation, with a very deep Ditch, defended by several Redoubts; whereby the Besieged be∣ing kept in, thier Numbers decreased by former Sallies, and their Courages abated by despair of Relief, they began to grow cold in the Acts of Bravery, and to reserve their Men for the ulti∣mate and last Efforts of Defence. In the mean time the Turks plied their Batteries so hotly, that in a few days the Walls were laid open almost fif∣ty paces wide. In this Condition the Defendants having no other Refuge than some small Re∣trenchments, which they had made during the Siege, were exposed to the open Force of the E∣nemy. For now the Turks having filled up the first and second Ditches with Sacks of Wool, Fag∣gots, and other Rubbish, crowded in vast Num∣bers to enter the Breach, which the Persians de∣fended as stoutly with Stones, Bullets, Artificial Fires, and all Instruments of Death, which fell like Showers of Hail on the Heads of the Ene∣my. The Great Vizier signalizing himself above all by his undaunted Courage, commanding with his Hand and Voice, was unhappily shot by a Musket-bullet, and fell on the heaps of the dead, amongst whom there is no distinction between the common Souldier and the bravest Captain. This Fight within the Breach continued for five days, where both sides fighting like Men in de∣spair, the dead Bodies lay in heaps, and Blood was stagnated like a Pool to wade thorough. At length the Numbers of the Turks prevailing, commanded now by 
Mustapha
 the Captain-Pasha, entred the Town by force of Arms on the twenty second of 
December
 about the time of Sun-set, when the Royal Standard of the Turks was plan∣ted in this City. Howsoever twenty four thou∣sand of the Persians remaining still alive, and u∣nited in a Body, capitulated for Quarter, other∣wise threatning not to die unrevenged: Pardon, and Quarter for their Lives was readily granted, on Confidence of which the Persians threw down their Arms, and submitted to the Publick Faith, or the Sultan's Clemency.
 But the Grand Signior afterwards considering, that the granting Quar∣ter at 
Revan
 had been the cause of the Loss of the City, he repented him of his Promise, and gave Order to the Janisaries most inhumanely to open a Torrent a Blood, and make a barbarous Massa∣cre of those who had newly thrown down their Arms at his Feet, not sparing either Woman or Child, either Sex or Age; the which Slaughter, like a Work of Darkness, was acted in the Night by the light of Torches and Lanthorns, and ap∣peared a horrid Spectacle to all, especially to the Persian Ambassadour, who being conducted like a Prisoner in the Camp, was a sad Spectator of his Countries Destruction on the horrid Theatre of its Capital City.


So soon as 
Bagdat
 was taken, 
Morat
 dispatch∣ed away Posts immediately with the News in∣to all Parts, and wrote a Letter with his own Hand to the Chimacam, ordering a 
Dunalma
 or Feast of Thanksgiving, and rejoicing for the space of twenty Days; during which time no Business was to be acted, the Houses were to be adorned both without and within with the best Furniture, and every House was to set forth Lights, Torches, and Fire-works agreeable to the Condition and Ability of the Person. The People exclaimed hereat as too great an Expence, and the Vacation from Business seemed too long for those who lived by their daily Labour. The chief Ministers and Grandees evidenced external actions of Joy, but inwardly feared and tremb∣led, suspecting that the fierce and cruel Humour of their Sultan would be elated, and rendred more tyrannical and untractable by Success and a favourable Fortune. The Christian Princes re∣ceived this Intelligence like bad News, and as an Alarm to awaken then from the easiness of Peace, to expectations of War: For War with 
Persia
 was like an Ulcer in the Bowels of the Turkish Empire, which gangreen'd and consu∣med the Strength and Marrow of their Power; which now being cured, and the Body Poli∣tick rendred healthy by such a seasonable Success, would convert it self to Enterprises pernicious and dangerous to the neighbouring States.


After the Conquest of this City, 
Morat
 gave out, That he resolved to procced with his Army into 
Persia,
 and to enter the Walls of 
Spahan;
 but having some indispositions of Health upon him, and recalled by the charming Letters of a Favourite Mistress, whom he had left at 
Diarbechir,
 he inclined to return again to 
Con∣stantinople.
 Wherefore mustering first his Army,

he found that it was abated near an hundred thousand Men, two thirds whereof being killed in the War, the rest perished by the Pestilence, and other Diseases and Maladies incident to Camps; a great part of the Slaughter fell on the most veterane Souldiers of the Janisaries and Spahees, of which many of the Chief being slain, their Lands and Revenues returned to the Grand Signior, and gave him both Opportunity and Ability to reward many with such Offices and Gifts as came by the Death and Fall of other Commanders. Thus the Captain-Pasha, whose Valour had rendred him Famous, was made Great Vizier in the place of him that was slain, and the Persian Favourite was constituted Cap∣tain-Pasha; and though many repined at this Advancement, as conferred on a Stranger, and a Person without Merit, yet the Grand Sig∣nior considered him as one whose Experience in that Country, and the Information he had given him of the Scituation and Strength of 
Babylon,
 had made abundant Compensation for the Favour and Honour he had bestowed upon him.


The Grand Signior having left a Garison of thirty thousand Men in 
Bagdat,
 dispatched the Great Vizier with a considerable Army to penetrate far into the Country of 
Persia.
 And having now released the Persian Ambassadour, giving him liberty to return to his Master, wrote by him this braving Letter.




I
 That am Lord of Lords, and Conquerour in the parts of 
Arabia, Persia,
 and 
Greece:
 King that Commands with eminent Rule in the World, exalted by Divine Assi∣stance to the Empire of the Ʋniverse; the most Invincible Possessor of the White and Black Seas, and of all the Cities and For∣tresses which encompass them. Lord of the Divine and Prophetick Temple, that is, of 
Mecha
 and 
Medina,
 as also of 
Jerusalem, Aleppo, Damascus,
 and of all those Holy and Venerable Countries, of Grand 
Cairo,
 Salutiferous 
Babylon,
 and of 
Van,
 of 
Ethi∣opia, Balsora,
 and the Lesser 
Asia;
 of all the Countries of the Curds, Georgians, and Tartars; of 
Moldavia, Walachia,
 and uni∣versally of all the Provinces and Regions of 
Greece
 and 
Anatolia.
 And in summ, Su∣preme Lord of the Seven Climates, the Victo∣rious and Triumphant King in the Service of God Sultan 
Amurat Han,
 to the Valiant 
Sof
,
 to whom may God give Peace, if he deserve it. This Imperial Letter worthy of Obedi∣ence being come to thee, Be it known unto thee, That the Ambassador which Thou didst send to my happy Port with desires of Peace, I have detained until this time in which I have sub∣dued 
Bagdat,
 by means of the keen Edge of my Invincible Semiter. If Thou desirest Peace, surrender those Provinces which belong to the Dominions of my Victorious Predecessors, into the Hands of my Beglerbeys, who are now Marching at the Head of my Victorious and Inexpugnable Army: Otherwise expect me next Spring with my Troops more numerous than the Sands of the Sea, within the Bowels of thy Dominions; where I will appear on Horse-back to unkennel Thee from the Ca∣verns wherein thou now lurkest, not daring to manage those Arms, which are unworthily girt to thy Side. That afterwards shall succeed, which was determined from all Eternity. Peace be to him who directs his ways a∣right.




This Letter being dispatched, the Grand Sig∣nior recalled the forty thousand Men which he had lent, from the Service of the Great 
Mogul,
 which he quartered about 
Bagdat
 to hinder the Attempts of the Persians, in case they should de∣sign to pursue him in the Rear, and disturb his return into 
Europe.
 By reason of the Rigour and Extremity of the Winter, and a certain Defluxion which falling on his Nerves, made him something Paralytical,
 the Grand Signior depar∣ted not from 
Bagdat
 until the 
15th
 of 
April,
 and then for recovery of his Health, and to soil the Horses by the way with convenience of Grass, short Days Journeys were appointed.


The Grand Signior's Indisposition encreasing, with some cold and shivering Fits, gave the first Symptoms of a Feaver; but afterwards it plainly appearing to be a paralytical Distemper, suspe∣cted by the Physicians to end in an Apoplexy, it was rumoured abroad, that 
Morat
 was dead; but it was whispered with such Caution, as if they had feared lest the Grand Signior would have over-heard them, and risen from his Grave to punish their secret and inward Joy. Being some∣what recovered from the last Accession of his Palsie, the Humour fell into his Legs, and swelled so much, that he could scarce sit upon his Horse; howsoever he hastened as fast as he could to 
Con∣stantinople
 to disprove and confute the falsity of that Report concerning his Death.


In the mean time it is not to be expressed with what Fear and Terrour the Chimacam and other great Ministers of State expected the return of their formidable Prince, not knowing where the Thunderbolt of his cruel Disposition would strike, until at length it fell on the Head of the poor Sultan 
Mustapha,
 whose weakness, as it ren∣dred him unable for Government and Command, so it made him stupid and insensible of Death.


At length on the 
10th
 of 
June
 the Grand Sig∣nior arrived at 
Constantinople:
 The Favourite 
Soltana,
 which had accompanied him to the War, passed by Water from 
Ismit
 attended with six Gallies, and took her Lodging the first Night of her arrival at a small Chiosk or House of Pleasure under the Wall, so as to make a magni∣ficent Entry the Day following. Her Coach was covered with Cloth of Gold, and the Spokes of the Wheels were gilded, and the Wheels shod with Silver; she was followed by twelve Coaches, and the Mufti, Pasha's, Kadees, and other Offi∣cers went before to conduct her to the Seraglio. The Grand Signior, who arrived the same Day, attended with fifty six Gallies, made not his so∣lemn Entry until two Days after, being perform∣ed with all the Ceremony, State, and Magnifi∣cence which could be contrived. The Grand Signior in his own Person appeared in the Persian Habit, with a Leopard's Skin thrown over his Shoulders, after the manner of a Kausee (as they call them) or a brave huffing Champion, having his Stirrup attended with twenty two of the chie∣fest Nobles, whom he had reserved at 
Bagdat,
 purposely to lead in Triumph when he made this Entry. The Treasure brought to 
Constantinople,
 was landed at the Seraglio out of ten Gallies, and calculated to amount to a greater Sum than that which was carried from thence; for besides the

Riches taken in the Plunder of 
Babylon,
 seisure was mad in divers places of the Estates of Pasha's and other Great Men, which by Death, or for Crimes, escheated to the Grand Signior.


After the Grand Signior's Departure out of 
Persia,
 little of Action succeeded, as if by mutu∣al Agreement, a Truce or Cessation of Arms had been contrived. The Persians desired a Peace, because they were enfeebled and tired with the War: The Turks had regained their Honour by the Conquest of 
Badgat;
 and being unwilling to lose it by change of unconstant Fortune, and lon∣ger consume their Riches and Men in a tedious and remote March, were attending to receive Propositions of Peace first offered by the Persi∣an. To effect which the Great Vizier, who was left at 
Badgat
 to command the Army, intimated to the Governours of the Frontiers, that a prof∣fer of Peace should be accepted;
 which being made known to the King of 
Persia,
 he immediate∣ly dispatched an Ambassadour to the Grand Sig∣nior to propose Terms of Accommodation. The Ambassadour being arrived at 
Constantinople,
 was grateful and acceptable to all, and his Day of Au∣dience appointed after the usual manner on the Pay-day of the Janisaries, when the Floor of the Divan is covered with Sacks of Mony; before the Door of the Chamber of Audience stood the Persian Captives all cloathed in rich Vests. The Ambassadour being conducted to the Royal Pre∣sence with the usual Ceremonies (of which we have given an Account in another place) was re∣ceived by the Sultan sitting upon a Saffaw cove∣red with Crimson Velvet, embroidered with Pearl; his Turbant was encompassed with a Chain of Diamonds, cloathed with a rich Vest lined with Sables; he cast no Pleasantness of As∣pect on the Ambassadour, but beholding him with a fierce and scornful Look, received the Letter in a kind of careless Disdain, behaving himself in every Motion, as if he neither esteemed the King, nor his Ambassadour; or as if the Persian had been wholly conquered by him, had sent to beg Peace, and Pardon for his Life: The Ambassa∣dour was soon dismissed from his Presence; and matters being referred to the Negotiation of the Chimacam, no other difficulty arose besides the Dispute concerning 
Revan,
 which at length was agreed by another Ambassadour sent to the Vizi∣er on the Frontiers to remain unto the Persian, as 
Bagdat
 was confirmed to the Turk: And so Peace was without long Debate clapt up; the Grand Signior, by reason of his Indisposition which in∣creased upon him, being not inclinable to trou∣ble his Head with the Burden of Business.


Peace being thus concluded with 
Persia,
 there appeared a perfect Sun-shine and fair Weather in the Ottoman Court, neither Dissensions at home, nor Wars abroad troubling the Quiet and Repose of the Sultan: Until some Differences happe∣ning between the Princes of 
Moldavia
 and 
Wala∣chia
 exhaled the first Cloud of Disturbance. At that time 
Lupulo
 was Prince of 
Moldavia,
 a Per∣son of evil Principles, covetous, and unjust. 
Mat∣thew
 was Prince of 
Walachia,
 a good Man, zea∣lous for the Christian Religion, and one who ad∣ministred equal Justice to his People. 
Lupulo
 not, contenting himself with his own, but desirous al∣so of his Neighbours Possession,
 made instances to the Port to have the Principality of 
Moldavia
 con∣ferred upon his Son, alledging that thereby he should be better enabled to balance the Power of 
Ragotski
 in 
Transylvania,
 and on all occasions be rendred more serviceable to the Grand Signior's Designs and Interest: And seconding this Propo∣sition with a Present of fifty thousand Dollars to the Chimacam, and promise to increase the annual Tribute, he obtained the Chimacam's Friendship, at whose Instance the Grand Sig∣nior was perswaded to write unto 
Matthew
 to surrender up his Province into the hands of the Son of 
Lupulo;
 declaring, That it having been accustomary to change the Princes of those Countries every three years, he ought after an Injoyment of above seven years to content himself with a quiet and voluntary Re∣signation, unless he would desire to draw up∣on himself a Ruin by the Anger and Displea∣sure of the Sultan. 
Matthew
 having no Po∣sterity, resolved not to surrender his Govern∣ment but with his Life; and having a parti∣cular Animosity against 
Lupulo,
 could by no means incline his Mind to make his Enemy happy with the Spoils of his Estate. Where∣fore having obtained Assistance from 
Ragotski,
 he resolved to withstand the Forces of young 
Lupulo,
 and engage with him: And being rea∣dy to mount on Horse-back, and begin the Battel, he first dispatched an humble Message to the Grand Signior, acquainting him, 
That he was ready at his Command to resign his Principality into the Hands of the meanest Greek his Majesty would appoint; who be∣ing the Source of all Equity and Justice, he hoped that he would not oblige him to such Terms as would raise his Mortal Ene∣my upon his Ruin; a Man so intent to his own Interests, and so unconscionable to compass them, that all late Revolutions, Wars, and Commotions have been raised either by him, or by his Instruments.


This Letter being received and read by the Grand Signior, was seconded in a few hours after, with News of the total Defeat of young 
Lupulo;
 which put the Grand Signior so much into choler, that he immediately committed the Chimacam to the seven Towers, for being the Projector and Author of this Counsel. It was supposed however, that 
Morat
's Anger would not proceed to that degree, as to extend to his Life; but being informed, that he was rich, and that he was possessed of two Milli∣ons of Dollars, which lay by him in ready Mony, it was concluded, that so vast a Wealth could not in a short time be honestly gained; which appearing as an undeniable Evidence and Testimony of his Violence and Oppression, the Grand Signior made no Difficulty to pass the Sentence of Death against him,
 nor to con∣demn the Mony to his own Exchequer: His Office was given to 
Sinan
 Pasha, and the Prin∣cipality confirmed unto 
Matthew.


During all this Time, the Quarrel which the Turks conceived against the Venetians, for vio∣lating their Port of 
Valona,
 was not yet com∣posed; but now having time to peruse and con∣sider old Accounts, the Venetian Bailo was called by the Chimacam to Audience, and to a Con∣ference with him concerning this Matter. In the first place therefore the Bailo alledged, 
That the Pirates of 
Barbary
 had for the space of twenty Years roved in the Venetian Gulf, and made Prize in that time of so many Ships and Goods belonging to Merchants, that the Republick had been prejudiced by them in several Millions; which also did in some manner prejudice the Customs of the Grand Signior, to whom the Venetian Mer∣chants pay for the most part yearly the Sum of an hundred thousand Dollars in Custom for their Goods, besides the benefit which the Ottoman Dominions receive by so profitable a Commerce.




Hereunto the Chimacam replied:
 
That the damages which the Turks received by the Corsairs or Free-booters at Sea under the Colours of 
Malta, Leghorn, Majorca,
 and other places, were greater and more disho∣nourable to the Majesty of the Ottoman Grandeur, than the depredations of the other side were to 
Venice:
 And therefore it would be necessary for the good of the World, that such Violences were prevented in all places: and that Men of such wicked Profession should be esteemed for universal Enemies, and to have no other Quarter, nor Articles grant∣ed them, than what we give to wild and hurtful Beasts, whom we destroy by Snares and Gins, and all Advantages. The which also was never denied to the Venetians, whilst they encountred and took them in the open Seas; but to enter into priviledged Places, and violate a Sanctuary of the Grand Signi∣or's, without respect to the mighty Power of so dreadful a Monarch, was an act so inso∣lent, as could never obtain Pardon without due Compensation for the Offence; which could not be done, but either by a Restitu∣tion of the Vessels, or else of a like Num∣ber in the places of them.


Hereunto the Bailo replied:
 
That if an Accommodation could not be made on other Terms, nor Peace maintained, but by a sub∣mission to Pyrats, and supportation of all their Injuries and Robberies, a War must inevitably ensue; for the good success of which they depended on the Blessing of God Almighty, and the general Assistance of all Christendom, which will esteem it self uni∣versally concerned in this Cause, and obli∣ged as well to make good this Quarrel a∣gainst Pirates, as to preserve 
Venice
 for their main Bulwark and Defence against the Otto∣man Force.


You make me Smile (answered the Chi∣macam) when you tell me of the Power of Christendom, which contains nothing more of Terrour than the Name. Do not I know, who have been Pasha of 
Buda,
 that the Em∣perour hath no Mony; and that when the Sweeds, a small and inconsiderable People, have made War upon him, they have almost over-run his Country? As for 
France,
 if they understand their own Politicks, they will scarce be perswaded to lend assistance to the Empire, when we make War against it. The 
Spaniards
 have so much to do at Home, and to conserve themselves from the Incroachments of their powerful Neighbour the French, that they are wholly unable to lend Forces to wage a War at such a di∣stance from their Dominions. Wherefore considering the Advantage we have upon you, which we well know and understand; you must either have War on these hazard∣ous Terms, or else purchase your Peace with a considerable Sum of Mony. In ma∣king of which Bargain you must consider, that you have to deal with a mighty Prince, and not with a Merchant; and therefore your Offer ought to be large at first, so as it may gain Credit, and be received with a favourable Ear; for a small Sum to him is like a little Morsel given to an hungry Sto∣mach, which serves only to increase the Ap∣petite. And you know, that we our selves are often forced to sacrifice to the Avarice of our Prince, by effusions of vast Sums of Money, which are always best compounded for, when they are done readily, and at first, before we give our Master time to consult with his Pillow, and to make up our Accounts according to the Calculation of his own Reckoning. Let me therefore exhort you to follow the like Example, and imme∣diately make an Offer of three hundred thou∣sand Zechins of Gold, which if you will do, and employ my Interest to make this Com∣position for you, I hope, though with some difficulty, to gain its acceptance. To talk and reason of Things past is but to beat the Air, because the time is vanished and gone; but you may consider of the present, that you may secure the future. We sell you Peace at this Price; if it be worth your Mony, take it; if not, refuse it, as you judge the Purchase most agreeable to your Interest.


At this time Christendom was embroiled in its usual Combustions, so that Assistance from other Princes was not only uncertain, but without all Foundation; so that the Venetians could have no sure Trust to any other than their own Force. In regard that many were desirous at that time to see the Venetians en∣gaged with the Turk, that so they might not be able to concern themselves in the War of 
Italy,
 which then grew hot by rhe Wars of 
Savoy, Modena,
 and 
Matoua,
 favoured by the Protection of the Spaniards, by whose means all the Differences arose about the Valtoline. Considering which, the wise Senate being wil∣ling to purchase so great a Blessing to their Country by a moderate Price, gave Liberty to their Bailo to compound for it at what rate and terms he was able; which by the Bailo's Dexterity in the Management, was con∣cluded for the Sum of two hundred and fif∣ty thousand Zechins, which was esteemed for a great Service, and redounded much to the Reputation of the Bailo: after which Conclu∣sion, the former Articles were ratified, and these which follow added thereunto.


That the Ambassadour or Bailo should be set at Liberty, and permitted to return to his own Habitation: That Commerce be renewed as formerly between the Subjects of both Countries: That all Controversie about the Maters happened at 
Valona,
 for ever be silenced and forgotten. When at any time the Pirats of 
Barbary
 shall hap∣pen to enter within the Ports of the Grand Signior, they shall give Security, that they will commit no Damage or Spoil on the Subjects of 
Venice.
 And in case they shall have taken any Prizes belonging to the a∣foresaid State, they shall not be admitted nor protected in the Ports belonging to the Grand Signior. Wherefore in virtue hereof all Aga's, Captains of Castles, and other Ministers who shall not obey and ob∣serve this Capitulation, shall be deprived of their Office; and if the Venetians shall then enter violently into the Port, where such Enemies have taken Refuge, it shall not be imputed to them for a Crime, or esteemed a Breach of the Capitulations. And farther, if the Venetians shall at any time encounter the aforesaid People of 
Barbary
 in the open Sea, it shall be lawful for them to assault, take, and destroy them without notice, or exceptions of the Ottoman Port. And lastly, the new Bailo lately elected, shall pay unto the Grand Signior five hundred thousand Pieces of Eight, which make two

hundred and fifty thousand Zechins of Gold. This Writing was firmed and ratified about the middle of the Moon 
Rebiul
 in the 
Hegeira
 or Year of 
Mahomet
 1049.
 Hereof Authen∣tick Copies were immediately dispatched to the Beglerbeys, Sangiacks, and Kadi's on the Coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, and to the Pasha of 
Bosna,
 for better Publication of the Peace, and free Traffick and Commerce between the Subjects of both People.


The Baron 
Chinski
 arrived at that time from the Emperour in Quality of Envoy Ex∣traordinary,
 to congratulate the Grand Signi∣or's Success in taking 
Bagdat,
 and making a Peace with 
Persia;
 but not bringing with him Pre∣sents to that value, which on this occasion were expected, he was not looked on, not con∣sidered with that Favour and Respect, as was agreeable to his Character and Quality. And there happening a Dispute between this Envoy and the English Ambassadour concerning Pre∣cedency of place; the Turks yielded it to the English, being made to understand the Diffe∣rence which Christian Princes make between the Title of an Ambassadour and that of an Envoy, though the Turks use but that one word of 
Elchi
 to express both. And though the Baron 
Chinski
 laboured to diminish the Dignity of an English Ambassadour at 
Constan∣tinople,
 by alledging, that he was elected by the Company of Merchants for Conservation of their Trade only, and afterwards confirmed and honoured by the King: yet this Argu∣ment was in no wise prevalent with the Turks, who esteeming the Commission of the Prince, and the Charge of an Office the only Qualifi∣cation to ennoble a Person, made no Diffi∣culty to determine the Point in behalf of the English. And though some Italian Writers say, that the English Ambassadour gave fifteen Pur∣ses of Mony, or seven thousand five hundred Dollars to the Chimacam for this Favour; yet those who understand how unwillingly the 
Turky
-Merchants part with their Mony on defence of such Punctillio's and Niceties, especially where the Ambassadour might have avoided the bringing them into Dispute, will more readily believe, that the Turks from free motives of their own Justice and Reason judged this Honour due to the Ambassador, than that he should purchase this indisputable Point by the disgraceful means of Mony.


All matters being now determined between the Turks and 
Persia,
 and the black Clouds blown over from the Venetians,
 the Grand Signior studied how and where he might turn his Arms with most Advantage: he had con∣ceived an irreconcileable pique against 
Ragotski
 and 
Matthew
 for the Causes before related; but having an intention to make use of their Force against 
Poland
 or 
Germany,
 or against them both together, he dissembled the Passion he conceived against them, and rather defer∣red his Revenge, than pardoned the Liberty which they had exercised without his Licence or Assent. Sometimes he resolved to recover 
Asac
 out of the hands of the Cossacks; some∣times he thought of making War upon 
Po∣land,
 judging himself much affronted by that King, for not sending an Ambassadour to con∣gratulate his late Successes: Then he suppo∣sed, that a War in 
Germany
 would be more easie, and the Conquest more profitable by rea∣son of the Riches of the People, and the Fer∣tility of the Soil, to which pretences could never be wanting on the score of those Dif∣ferences which always arise amongst the Peo∣ple of the Frontiers. During these Debates and Counsels, Preparations were made for War both by Sea and Land, as yet uncertain where they should be imployed:
 To command them the Great Vizier was ordered to hasten his Journey from 
Persia,
 whose Arrival was celebrated at 
Constantinople
 with a solemn En∣try; and for a particular and distinguishing Honour, the Grand Signior sent him a Vest from his own Back to wear on the day of his Triumph. This Vizier was a Person very au∣stere in his Behaviour, bold and valiant, as he evidenced by his Actions in taking 
Bag∣dat,
 zealous for his Master's Interest; and, what is rare in a Turk, not much addicted to his own: He had acquired a great share in the Esteem of his Master, and his Authori∣ty increased, as the daily Decay of the Grand Signior's Health rendred him less able for Go∣vernment. For now the strong Complexion of 
Morat
 began to grow feeble by excesses of fre∣quent Debauchery, his Stomach was become cold and weak, not able to digest the lightest Meats, his hand shook, and a paralytical Di∣stemper seized him in every part; so that his Mother and the Physicians perswaded him to forsake the use of Wine, as Poyson and De∣struction to his Health; and he, whilst he was sensible of his languishing Condition, like a true Penitent, made many Protestations and Vows against it, forbidding the accursed Poy∣son to be received within the Walls of the Seraglio: Howsoever his kind Heart could not possibly withstand the Temptation of a Ban∣quet, to which his Pot-companions did some∣times invite him; amongst which the Great Vizier would not be wanting also to please and cajole the Humour of his Master with the Liquor that he loved. But his chief and con∣stant Camerades in drinking were his Persian Favourite, and 
Mustapha
 Pasha of 
Bosna,
 one educated in the Seraglio, promoted to the place of Selictar Aga, to whom he gave the stately Palace of 
Ibrahim
 Pasha on the 
Hippo∣drome,
 together with his eldest Daughter in Marriage. These two stout Sons of 
Bacchus
 perswaded the Grand Signior to appoint one solemn Drinking-day in time of the Biram, which is the great Festival of the Year, and introduced by their Prophet in imitation of our 
Easter. Morat
 being at this time posses∣sed with the Spirit of Debauchery, accepted the Motion, and invited the two Drunkards to dinner with him. The Persian provoked his Pleasure of drinking by salt Meats, and by peppered and spiced Dishes; the sort of Wine they most used, was a sweet Malvoisia, sometimes twisted, and encouraged with the strong Waters, called 
Rosa Solis,
 of which they sucked so long, and with such Excess, that falling under the force of it, they were insensibly carried away to their several Beds. This dissolute Repast became fatal to the Grand Signior; for a Fire being kindled in his Veins and Bowels, he fell into a violent and continued Feaver. The Physicians being called, were fearful to administer Remedies, lest proving unsuccessful, their Lives should pay for the ineffectual Operation: At length they agreed to let him blood,
 but this haste∣ned his Death. For he died the fourth Day of his Feaver, being the 
8th
 of 
February,
 in the seventeenth Year of his Reign, and the one and thirtieth of his Age, having ruled in the height of all Disorders and irregular Ex∣cesses,

which his youthful Years enabled him to support. With his Death all his thoughts and Designs of making a War against Chri∣stendom perished, having sworn after his Re∣turn from 
Persia
 to reduce all his neighbour∣ing Countries to the Mahometan Law.
 He was of a most cruel and implacable Dispositi∣on, having amongst his other Acts of Tyran∣ny imbrued his Hands in the Blood of his two Brothers, 
Orchan
 and 
Bajazet;
 as also strangled his Uncle 
Mustapha,
 whose innocent Weakness had been sufficient to secure his Life against any, but the most horrid Monster of human Tyranny. He left no Son; for though he had divers, they died in their In∣fancy, notwithstanding which his Kingred were so detested by him, that he envied the Descendence of Monarchy on his Brother 
I∣brahim,
 who was preserved by a strange Pro∣vidence from his Fury: Often saying, that he wished that he might be the last of the Ottoman Line, that the Empire of that Family might end with him, and devolve unto the Tartar. He was certainly the most absolute Prince that ever swayed the Ottoman Em∣pire; but of no Religion, seldom fasting in the Month of 
Ramasan,
 contemning and laugh∣ing at the Santones, and others of their Re∣ligious Orders. He was very inquisitive into all Actions of the City, for which he maintained his Spies, and oftentimes took his Rules and Measures from Discourses of People concerning his Government. He was a great Dissembler, ready, active, and revengeful, covetous to Ex∣tremity, having left fiteen Millions of Gold in his Treasury, which was empty when he en∣tred upon the Soveraignty. In short, he was so bad, that he had scarce any Allay of Ver∣tue; being so great a Tyrant, that at length he became his own Assassinate, and fell unla∣mented by all but the two Companions of his bestial Excess.


The End of Sultan
 Morat's 
Life.








THE REIGN OF Sultan IBRAHIM, TWELFTH EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.


SƲltan Amurath,
 or 
Morat,
 after a Fever of eight Days continuance, caused by an excess of Debauchery in Wine, having on the eighth of 
February,
 1640, ac∣cording to the New-Stile, expired his last Breath.
 His Mother, called 
Kiosem,
 comforted her self with the thoughts thather Son 
Sultan Ibrahim
 still lived, and was the sole Surviver, and undoubted Heir of the Ottoman Family. To whose Succession, that she might make the more facile and undisturbed Entrance, she con∣sulted with all the Viziers, requesting their Consent and Assistance, in the lawful promotion of her remaining Son to the Throne of his An∣cestors: For she had understood, that 
Morat,
 who always abhorred the ill-shap'd Body, and weaker Mind of his Brother, envied him the Dignity of the Ottoman Scepter, and there∣fore had bequeathed the Succession to the Tartar, having, in the Heat of a Debauch, and Fumes of Wine, compelled his Pasha's to swear to the performance of his Testament.


Wherefore the Queen, assembling them toge∣ther, with gentle Words, desired them to re∣member, That 
Ibrahim
 was the Lawful Heir, and their true Emperor; that the Tartar 
Han
 was a Stranger, odious to the Souldiery, and not beloved by the People: that an Alteration of this Nature could never be contrived and exe∣cuted, without danger to the Actors; and that they, to whom she assured the continuance of the same Honours and Offices, in Reward of their con∣stant Allegiance, would be in hazard of losing all, by the coming of a Foreign Prince, who having Confidents of his own to prefer, and grand Necessities to satisfy, would make bold even with Estates and Provinces to prefer his Fa∣vorites, his Kindred, and Country-Men, and establish the firmness of his Government on their Ruin. Yet, setting aside those Considerations, touching their own Safety and Interest, she pro∣mised, That if they would reach out their Hands unto her Son, for to lift him unto the Throne, he should acknowledg his Empire from them, and accordingly love, tender, and esteem such faithful Subjects.


The Viziers, after some Reflections on the Tye and Obligation which Sultan 
Morat
 had caused them to make to him, declared, and pub∣lished it to be unlawful, and void; protesting, That they were resolved to maintain inviolable the Allegiance they owed unto Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 descended from the Ottoman Blood, which they reverenced and adored, with an Awe equal to the Religious Esteem which their Fore-fathers had of it; and therefore, with one Voice they cried out, 
Let Sultan
 Ibrahim 
live.


Herewith the Council breaking up, the Vi∣ziers, accompanied with all the Officers and At∣tendants of the Seraglio, went with Shouts and loud Acclamations, to the Prison of 
Ibrahim,
 to salute him Emperor; for he, poor Prince, had now for four Years remained a sad Recluse in a dark Room, where he had received neither Light nor Air, but what came from a little Window, which sometimes in favour was opened to him from Above; and what was worse, the conti∣nual expectations, and fear of Death, without Friends, Conversation, or Hope, rendred those Apprehensions worse than Death it self; which daily were represented to him in that Solemnity, as might terrify a Mind more constant and firm than his.


So soon as he heard the Shouts and Voices of a Multitude near his Door, he immediately con∣ceived, that the Fate was now come which he had so long expected, and therefore he barred his Door, and denied to give Entrance: And when the Viziers proclaimed him Emperor, (fearing it might be some Artifice of his Brother,

to see with what Joy he would entertain the News) he answered, That he did not so much as think of the Empire, nor desire it, but only prayed that Sultan 
Morat
 might live, to whom he pretended not to be a Brother, but a Slave: And when he perceived that they began to force the Door, though with terms of Respect and Observance, he still endeavoured to keep it close; for Nature had taught him to conserve a Life, for Nature had taught him to conserve a Life, howsoever Miserable, and void of Conso∣lation.


He continuing thus resolute not to open, Re∣verence to his Person commanded them to for∣bear any ruder Violence; until the Queen-Mother over-hearing all this Stir, descended her self in Person; and first causing the dead Corps of Sul∣tan 
Morat
 to be extended before his Door, with gentle Compellations, and confident Assurances, averred the Death of his Brother. The Voice of his Mother began to dissipate the Fears, and being in part already convinced by his Ears, he adventured to peep at the Door, and giving then entire Credence to his Eyes, his Heart and Spirits consented to revive; and s retiring back into his Chamber, he willingly received the Congratulations of the Ministers and Souldiers; which being past, he readily applied his Shoul∣ders to the Coffin of his dead Brother; and having bore his share of that dear Burden to the Gate of the Seraglio, he there resigned it to his Domestick Officers, who buried him in the Sepulchre of Sultan 
Achmet.


From thence he took Boat, and passed to the Mosch of 
Jub
's Seraglio, where in the space of eight days, he compleated all the Ceremonies of his Coronation; and afterwards, according to the Custom of his Ancestors, he rode through the City to his great Palace; but whether it were for want of practice, or by reason of a Posture natural unto Fools, he fat so ridiculously on his Saddle, as moved rather the Laughter than the Acclamation of the People.


In fine, being entred the Seraglio, he began to breath, and enjoy the Air of Liberty, with so much contentment and satisfaction, that he un∣willingly would empair the least Particle of his late acquired Freedom, by thinking, or attend∣ing to Business, and as if he enjoyed sufficient, committed all to the management of his Mother; howsoever, being desirous to handle something of the Government, he did it with so little Grace and Dexterity, that it plainly appeared, that that Soul animated a Body not fit to sway or wield a Scepter.


The Queen-Mother, to maintain the Word she had given to the Viziers, continued them all in their respective Offices; so that, though there was great disproportion in the Mind of the two Princes, yet the Ministers being the same, there seemed to be little or no Alteration in the Government.


The Great Vizier remembring well the thoughts of War which Sultan 
Morat
 meditated against the Cossacks, and being desirous of Glo∣ry, and continuance of his Power, resolved to prosecute the same Design, hoping to meet a Spirit in 
Ibrahim
 equal to the Generosity of his Brother.
 To this War many and various were the Motives; as first, A natural desire of Revenge on the Cossacks, for having infested the Black Seas, that they might thereby provoke 
Poland
 to a War, which when they had reduced to some Extremity, the Emperor would consequent∣ly fall in to their Assistance, and thereby create Quarrels, which must necessarily open a large Field of Troubles; which being sown with the Seed of Discord, could not fail to produce Cau∣ses and Pretentions for a War.


It being thus resolved, to which the Vizier nei∣ther wanted Eloquence nor Reasons to perswade, great Preparations were made for a War, which was intended to be maintained for many Years: During which time, God, who disposes all Things at his Pleasure, permitted a false Report to fly, that the Persians were providing a great Army to besiege 
Bagdat;
 to which the Turks giving entire Credence, it was resolved in the Divan, that those Preparations against Christen∣dom, should be diverted towards the Parts of the Eastern Countries. By this vain Rumour only were all these Grand Designs disappointed, and all farther Thoughts vanished for the pre∣sent of molesting the Christians. From whence it is observable, how necessary are the Foreign Residences of Ministers, and how absurdly the Turks err; who, by reason of their Pride, vouchsafe not to entertain Ambassadors in the Courts of Strangers, being beholden to the Jews, or Armenian-Merchants for all their Intel∣ligence they receive touching the Affairs of Neighbouring Kingdoms.


The Wars being thus suspended, the Great Vizier had time to cast his Eyes about him, and contrive the Ruin of such whom he suspected most dangerous to his Condition. Amongst the rest, none appeared more formidable than 
Mu∣stapha
 Pasha, Captain-Pasha, a young brisk Per∣son, and Favourite of the Queen-Mother, whom to remove was difficult and dangerous, being a Vizier as well as he, and in one of the most emi∣nent Degrees of Dignity in the whole Empire: And therefore that he might touch him with smooth and gentle Terms, he practised upon him the ordinary Decoy of Preferment, prof∣fering him the Government of 
Buda;
 which whilst the one seemed out of modesty to refuse, the other with the greater force of Complement, and obliging expressions of Friendship, pressed him to accept. At length, overcome with im∣portunity and kindness, 
Mustapha
 received the Proffer; whereby being divested of the Queen's Protection, he was soon after overtaken in his Journey towards his Principality, and by ano∣ther Mandate required to take his way to the Province of 
Silistria,
 the smallest, and most in∣considerable of the Empire: in which he was no sooner invested, than a second Edict took off his Head.


But another 
Mustapha,
 more fortunate, was sent Pasha to 
Grand Cairo
 in 
Aegypt;
 he was a mortal Enemy to the 
Crim Tartar,
 of whom he shewed his hatred at 
Rhodes,
 by putting his Son to Death, for having said, That Sultan 
Morat,
 and Sultan 
Ibrahim
 dying without Issue, the Em∣pire was to descend to his Family. This Son of Tartar was then at 
Rhodes,
 it being a Custom al∣ways to have one of them as a Hostage for the Father's obedient Comportment towards the Turks, their place of Residence being either at 
Rhodes,
 or some Town on the Black Sea, as we have elsewhere declared.


The Sultan in this Interim had little regard un∣to the Government, both for want of Capacity, and by reason of his luxurious and wanton Ap∣petite, the which he indulged in the highest ex∣cess of Sensuality; for having been accustomed to a Prison, and Restraint, he knew not how to enjoy that freedom he had recovered, but by subjecting it to the imperious servitude of his Lusts. This Humor the Vizier and great Mi∣nisters cherished in him, by continual Banquets, Feass, and Entertainments, in which he always

took high contentment and satisfaction. His other Recreations were, Horse-races, and Shoot∣ing with the Bow, rewarding the most dexte∣rous Archers. Business was a Stranger to him, he knew not what it meant, nor thought there was other Employment for the Emperor than to study those Pastimes, which most corresponded with his Youth and Nature: only the Vizier would sometimes, in Matters of high Impor∣tance, demand his Assent, which was either out of formality, or else to secure himself with the Name and Authority of his Master.


The News of Sultan 
Ibrahim
's promotion to the Throne being arrived at 
Venice,
 the most serene Republick dispatched 
Pietro Foscarini
 as their Ambassador Extraordinary to complement the Sultan.
 The Prince of 
Transylvania
 in like manner sent his Tribute, which was some Hawks, and twelve Vessels of Gilded Plate, as feudatary Acknowledgments for the Lands held, and for his Confirmation in the Principality.


The Ministers of other Princes having passed the like Addresses, which were customary, the Ambassadors of 
Poland
 made Complaints of the Tartars, whose Incursions against them, the Turks, by Conditions of Peace, were obliged to restrain; but in this, as in other Occasions since that time, the Poles could obtain no Re∣dress from the Turks, who willing to have the Christians oppressed or ruined, either seem∣ed not to give Credit to the Subject of Com∣plaints, or else to find out Excuses to acquit the Tartar; which being so known and common a Practice with the Turk, it is to be wondred why the Poles have sent so many late Messages of this Nature, which in former, as well as in this present Age, have proved fruitless; a pregnant Example of which we shall find in the Reign of Sultan 
Mahomet,
 Son of this 
Ibrahim.


Amongst other Corruptions these Times, Aspers were so cut and clipt, that the Dollar rose from eighty to an hundred and twenty A∣spers; which Irregularity being complained of in the Divan, all Monies were reduced to their intrinsick Value; and the Aspers called in to be coined in the Mint, to the great Damage of the People.


But this Matter will not appear strange, if it be compared to the Vellion of 
Spain,
 and to the Permission in 
Turkey,
 of the base Alloy of Te∣mins, by which never any Nation before was ever so cheated and abused.


And now the Storms of War, which threat∣ned from 
Persia,
 being blown over, it was judged seasonable to reassume the thoughts of War so long meditated against the Cossacks: In order unto which, Gallies were commanded to be built, which should draw little Water, and purposely made to pass the Shoals on the Black Sea near 
Asac,
 for the recovery of that Place out of the Hands of the Enemy. Another Squa∣dron also of Gallies was designed for the 
Archi∣pelago,
 to oppose the Gallies of 
Malta
 and 
Na∣ples,
 which much infested those Seas.


To the first Enterprise, the Tartar much ex∣cited the Turk, by reason that 
Asac
 did not on∣ly hinder his Incursions by Land, but rendred his Navigation in the Black Seas very unsecure. To the second, The Gallies of 
Malta
 much pro∣voked them, under the Command of 
Frederick
 the Landgrave of 
Hesse;
 who by the Perswa∣sions of the Cardinals of 
Savoy,
 and 
Barberini,
 from a Protestant was become a Roman Catho∣lick, and had obtained the great Cross of 
Malta;
 and with several Gallies and Ships, performed some Exploits at 
Biserta,
 and at the 
Golletta
 near 
Tunis.


The Year 1641 being now entered, the Sul∣tan passed a most Luxurious Life in his Seraglio, consuming an immense Treasure on his Women; and whilst whese two Fleets were preparing to proceed on their respective Expedition, that in∣tended for 
Asac
 had almost been diverted by the Rumors and Disturbances on the Frontiers of 
Hungary;
 but they were soon afterwards ap∣peased, by an appearance of an Envoy from the Emperor, and return of a Chiaus to 
Vienna,
 with Ratification of all the former Articles and Conditions of Peace. Howsoever the German Internuncio was braved at the Port, for not ap∣pearing sooner with his Presents and Comple∣ments of Congratulation, for the happy En∣trance of Sultan 
Ibrahim
 to the Ottoman Throne; so apt are the Turks to believe Acts of Civility, or Ceremony, to be Parts of Obedi∣ence and Submission; and what Christians have once given them voluntarily, is afterwards ex∣acted as a Matter of Debt or Duty.


And being thus freed from a Suspicion of Troubles in 
Hungary,
 and exempted from the Fears of waging two Wars at once, (which the Turks always studiously avoid) they dispatched a Letter into 
Poland,
 to demand passage for their Army, through that Country, to the Siege of 
Asac;
 but that not being consented unto; the Turks prepared to open their way by Force, and the Poles to defend the Passage. In which interim, many Disasters concurred, sufficient to discourage the Turks in their Design; who are a People, that superstitiously calculate the Suc∣cess of their Enterprises, by the difficulty or smooth success of their first beginnings: For when the Vizier was ready to depart, a dreadful Fire happened in 
Constantinople,
 to the quench∣ing of which, applying not only his Orders, but his own Person; he adventured so far, that he burned both his Hands, and singed his Beard in that manner, that he was forced to take his Bed for several Days, where he was honoured with a Visit of the Sultan.


News also came at the same time, that 
Tauris,
 or 
Ecbatan,
 on the Borders of 
Persia,
 was mi∣serably ruin'd by an Earthquake; and what was worse, the Sultan himself was seized with an Apoplexy, which turned to a Paralytical Distem∣per, the Cause whereof was attributed to his excessive use of Women; to whom he was so immoderately addicted, that he consumed his Days and Nights in their Apartments. This Disease, which is rarely or never cured, being joined to a Report given out by his Ladies, that notwithstanding his Venereal Heat, he was yet Impotent as to Women; created a Belief, or at least a strong probability, that he might die without Issue, which caused high Confusion in the Counsels of the Grandees, that no Design could make any chearful Progress, until Provi∣sion was first made for Supply of the Ottoman House; for the Succession of the Tartar was in no manner convenient or secure; but rather that the Throne should be furnished with the Son of a Sister, or of a Niece, than to subject them∣selves to the Rule and Passions of a Foreign Prince. And though the Sultan did afterwards recover his Health, yet all suspected and feared, that by the immoderate Heat of his Veneri I In∣clination, he would die without Children; eve∣ry one discoursing, as moved by his Passion, or his Interest.


About this time arrived an Ambassador at 
Constantinople
 from the Softá of 
Persia,
 bringing a Ratisication of the Peace; who was so much the more welcome, by how much more the present

Conjuncture rendred it advantagious; and being ushered in with exceeding rich Presents, ravished the Hearts of the Turks, whose good Nature melts and dissolves with the sight or hopes of Gifts.


In 
Dalmatia,
 near the Consines of 
Zara,
 the Turks made Incursions on the Venetian Terri∣tories, and caused some Disturbances: but being chastised by an Ambush laid for them, whereby about two hundred of them perished; all Mat∣ters were again reconciled, and the Peace re∣newed.


And now one would imagine, that the De∣sign against 
Asac,
 by such diversity of Obstructi∣ons, were absolutely laid aside; which though they were of that Importance, and especially the fear of 
Ibrahim
's Death, to detain the Vi∣zier at Home; yet he thought fit to prosecute the Design under the command of the Pasha of 
Silistria,
 to whom he had committed the Con∣duct of this War.


The Pasha proud of his Charge,
 rejoiced to be imployed in a War, wherein he apprehended so little difficulty, and prognosticated to himself nothing but Glory and Victory; esteemed the Defendants for no other than Fishermen, and better experienccd to sail their Boats, and go∣vern their Saiks in the Black Seas, than to draw up an Army in the Field, or defend their Walls. This Confidence was farther increased, by an Embassy at the same time from the Moscovite, who not only renounced all Assistance or Con∣cernment for that Town, but renewed with them his Friendship, and Articles of ancient Agree∣ment.


The Ottoman Army, besides Janisaries, and other Turks, consisted of Moldavians, and Wa∣lachians, and a great number of Tartars, which at first entred into their Trenches, and besieged the Town; but here they rested not securely, by reason of the frequent Sallies the Besieged made upon them; and more especially by the Mines which they sprang, to the terror and damage of their Enemies. The Turks moved hereat, made furious Assaults, but were as valiantly repulsed by the Defendants, who threw scalding Water, and Pitch, and burning Sulphur upon the Assai∣lants; so that not being able to take the Town by Force, they retired to their Trenches, and deliberated in what manner, by fair Promises, and Mony; they might invite them to Surren∣der. Hereupon the Captain-Pasha, the Tartar 
Han,
 and others, tried the Efficacy of large Proffers of Priviledges to the Town, their Country, and Inhabitants; with a Gratuity of twelve thousand Hungers of Gold: But these Promises could make no more entrance into their Hearts, than the Turks could do into their Walls, which they seemed resolute to defend, wanting neither Provision, nor Ammunition, nor courage for the War: but on the contrary side, all these were wanting in the Turkish Camp; so that fifteen days passed without any Action, until they were supplied by the arrival of cer∣tain Brigantines, and light Vessels, dispatched with all expedition with the necessaries of War: At the coming of which, the Turkds prepared for another Assault, which they continued un∣cessantly for the space of seven days, but were received with that vigour by the Besieged, that they could not gain one palm or inch of ground; So that at length with disgrace, and discourage∣ment, they were forced to give over their At∣tempt, despairing to gain the Town in the time, and with the Force which was allotted for this Enterprize.


With this ill Success, Extremity and Famine pinched the Turks in their Trenches so much, that an Ox was sold for fifteen Zechins, a Lamb for three, and a Measure of Barley, which fer∣ved a Horse for one time, for a Dollar; so that at length they were forced to raise the Siege; and the Captain Pasha, by tempestuous Weather, was constrained to shelter his Fleet in the Port of 
Caffa.
 In their return Home, the General was fearful of having forfeited his Head; the Commanders were silent, and ashamed of their Success, and the Souldlers discouraged, famished, and poor; for they had lost three thousand Spa∣hees, seven thousand Janisaries, and eight hun∣dred other Souldiers, besides Moldavians, Wa∣lachians, and Tartars; those that survived of the Foot were naked, and many sick; the Spa∣hees were without Horses, with which they were supplied by the Tartars; and in fine, so unsuc∣cessful were all Matters, that the Veteran Soul∣diery avouched, that they never endured a more cruel, nor a more miserable War.


And now we shall end this Year 1641,
 with the ruin of 
Emir Guimir,
 a Persian by Birth, a Favourite, and yet Traitor to his Natural Prince. This 
Emir,
 in the last Wars which Sul∣tay 
Morat
 waged against 
Persia,
 was entrusted with an Embassy, and with Couduct of part of his Army, but he betrayed both to the Turk, under whose Protection he took Sanctuary, and obtained great Gifts and Preferments, for a Re∣ward and Price of his Treachery. Sultan 
Morat
 afterwards bestowed a magnificent Seraglio upon him, situated on the 
Bosphorus,
 enriched him with a vast Treasury, and what is more, with his Favour, making him his Companion in his Pastimes, and his Confident in his serious Coun∣sels: It was he that first perswaded the Sultan to drink Wine, in which both of them were beast∣ly intemperate, and mighty and valiant to bear, until the heat thereof having extinguished the natural heat of their Stomachs, it became too cold and crude, unless corrected, or fortified with Rach, or distilled Spirits. The Fumes of such strong Drinks, were the cause of the ex∣travagant Actions which 
Morat
 practised in his Life, and afterwards became the means to hasten his Death; whose days being ended, it was time also for prosperous Wickedness to expire, and to meet a Punishment equal to its Demerits, Where∣fore one day, (having desired License of the Vi∣zier to return to his own Country, where it is be∣lieved he had by Mony purchased his Pardon) he was called to the Vizier's Presence, and there, without any Impeachment, Process, or Accusa∣tion, had the String applied to his Throat, and strangled on the place; the reason hereof some give, to be the immense Riches which Sultan 
Mo∣rat
 had bestowed upon him, though there wan∣ted not many Causes to render him suspected, and obnoxious to the present Government; first, because he was too well acquainted with the Se∣crets of the Seraglio, and of that State, to live in any other country than the Turkish Domi∣nions; then it was feared that the Persian Am∣bassador might make use of this Person to act what Treason he pleased on the remainder of the Ottoman Family, on promise that such an Attempt should expiate his former Villany, and regain the favour of his natural Prince. But such signal Actions as these, are commonly wrote in such large Characters of Divine Justice, which never lest treason unpunished, either in this life or the other; that we need not search or enquire for a further Cause or Occasion of this Punish∣ment.




The Year 1642 being now entred, and the Turks desirous to repair their last Years Dis∣grace, resolved again, with better Preparation and Conduct, to attempt 
Asac;
 but before they would engage, according to their usual Custom, they determined to conclude all Um∣brages, and Matters of Dispute arisen on the Consines of 
Hungary.
 To which end, the Em∣peror deputed the Baron of 
Qnestemberg,
 with other Barons; and the Turks on their side com∣missionated the Pashaws of the Confines, with In∣structions not to insist too strictly on the Con∣ditions, lost it should retard the Peace, and ob∣struct the other Design of War: Wherefore the Turks condescenging to Matters reasonable; and yielding up part of their Usurpation, a Peace was concluded for twenty Years, much to the Advantage and Favour of the Christians.


And now,
 to give farther Courage to the Pro∣secution of higher Attempts, the whole Tur∣kish Empire was replenished with Joy, for the Birth of a young Prince Sultan 
Mahomet,
 that now reigns; so that the supposed Impotency of the Father (whereby the Ottoman Family might have been extinguished) was proved otherwise by plain Effect; and the fear of those that ru∣led the Empite vaishing by the Rising of this new Star, all places were filled with Joy and Triumphs; only the Tartar 
Han
 finding himself thus disappointed, was 
supposed
 not willing to concur heartily in this common Joy. In this manner vaished the appearance of Civil Dis∣sention in that Family, which now flourishes and encreases every day, and insensibly creeps for∣ward to the Design (which they hope) of an Universal Monarchy. Pardon me, O Christian Kings, if I say insensibly, for methinks you are sensible of the least touch you receive from one another, but feel not the gripes and pinches of your Common Enemy, who like a Hectick Feaver hath mingled with your Blood, and sto∣len into the Marrow of your Strength, where he will lurk until he hath dissolved the Fabrick of your Christian World, unless expelled by Con∣cord amongst your selves, and the Divine Assi∣Stance favouring your united Forces.


But now to return again to the famous Siege of 
Asac;
 It being the custome to cast all Miscar∣riages in War on the General, the Visier dis∣placed the Captain-Pasha, taking upon himself that Office and Title, of which there was never any former Example. In the Place likewise of the Pasha of 
Silistria,
 was constituted 
Mustapha
 Pasha of 
Aegypt;
 which Government, though much inferiour to his former, yet was received without fence of Disgrace, it not being the Rich∣es or Power of any office that confers Honour, but the Favour and good Will of the 
Sulan.
 Nor did only the Miscarriage of the late War tend to the disrepute of the former Pasha of 
Silistria,
 but the Report of his having poisoned the Tar∣tar 
Han
 encreased the difficulty of reconcilement with his Superiors, which being a Matter rather suspected than proved, excused him from far∣ther punishment than only a deprivation of his Office.


The new Pasha of 
Silistria
 thus taking upon himself the Command of the Army, and Con∣duct of this War, assembled a Force of 
Turks, Tartars, Moldavians,
 and 
Walachians,
 far exceed∣ing the number of the last Year. At the News of which, and of the Fleet of Gallies designed to besiege them by Sea, they apprehended their Danger so great, that without the Assistance of the Moscovite, they concluded it impossible to defend their City; to him therefore they made Applications for Succour, representing unto him the extremity their Affairs were in, by reason of that powerful Enemy which threatned them; and that having always acknowledged him for their Protector, there was no Refuge left them but under the defence of his Arms. But hereun∣to the Moscovite gave a brief reply, That he had lately concluded Peace with the Turk; since which, having received from him no occasion of breach, he could not with any Justice engage so soon against him in a War.


The Cossacks being thus disappointed of their principal Hopes,
 resolved to abandon their Ci∣ty; but to make the best advantage of their flight, they carried with them all their Move∣ables; and demolished their salls, and ruined their Houses, leaving the Place a notorious Spe∣ctacle of Despair and Ruin; and no other Pos∣session to their Enemies, than the compass of so much ground pestered with Rubbish, and rude heaps of Stones. The Pasha howsoever abun∣dantly contented, that his very Name was suffi∣cient to affright his Enemies, entred the City with Triumph, where he began to repair the Walls, and invite the Inhabitants to return, with all assurance of Security, and Protection. This gentle Treatment recalled many back to their Homes, so hardly are Men weaned from their Native Country; and in a short time the City beginning to fill, all Matters seemed to re∣turn to their pristine State and Condition.


About this time the Persian,
 by his Ambassa∣dor, renewed his League with the Turk, and confirmed it in the Name of the new king; which was performed on condition that the 
Soft
 should demolish the Fortress of 
Fortrina,
 which he had, contrary to Articles, built on the Fron∣tiers, not far from the Caspian Sea; which that it might assuredly be performed, a Capugibathee was dispatched to see it effected.


And in this manner, 
Asac
 being subdued, and a Peace secured with the Persian; The Turks, who can neither live in quiet with their Neigh∣bours, nor observe Capitulations longer than they turn to their advantage, contrived to take 
Giavarine,
 aliàs 
Rab,
 a strong Fortress on the Confines of 
Hungary,
 by a Stratagem which they designed in this manner: Certain souldiers ha∣bited like Peasants,
 were crouded into several Carts, covered with Hay, which being entered within the Walls, were immediatly to leap forth, and surprise the Centinels and Guards at the Gates (which might easily be executed on Men, whom twenty Years before of Peace had made secure) these were to be seconded by four thou∣sand Souldiers, which lay ready in a Neighbou∣ring Vally; but it happened, That an Officer of the Garrison returning from Hunting, had by chance discovered this strong Party of Turks, which caused him to quicken his pace towards the Town, and overtaking in his way certain Carts of Straw, which appearing to be laden in a form different to what was usual, increased in him a farther suspicion of Treachery; how so∣ever, he proceeded forward with the more haste, yet without any appearance of Jealousy: until being entred into the Town, he declared what he had seen, at which the Garison was immedi∣ately in Arms; and having permitted the Carts to enter, the Bridg was drawn up, and the Carts be∣ing searched, the shole Fraud and Treachery was discovered; and having made the Turks Pri∣soners, and armed the Walls with Souldiers, the whole Design was disappointed; so that those who lay in Ambush returned to their own Cities, The Emperor hereupon resolved to send

an Ambassador to 
Constantinople,
 complain of this Treachery; whereof the Turks being a∣shamed, and the more because it did not succeed; resufed to admit the Ambassador, unless the Em∣peror would first agree to pay a yearly Charge of an hundred thousand Ris-Dollars to the Port; not by way of Tribute, but of present; in which unreasonable Demand, they took more confidence, in regard they perceived that the Em∣peror was engaged in a War against the 
Swede.
 Upon this dishonourable Demand, the Emperor deferr'd the Embassy intended, supposing it less perilous to adventure a War in 
Hungary,
 than dishonourable to condescend unto a Proposition so derogatory to the Majesty of his Cesarean Greatness.


This Year 1643 being entered, the Prince of 
Transylvania
 conveyed his Annual Tribute, be∣ing ten thousand Zechins, to the Port; which when the Agents of that Prince presented before the Vizier, he seemingly refused it; pretending that the compleat Tribute was to be fifteen thousand, according to Agreement: but the A∣gents replied, that five thousand had been re∣mitted unto 
Bethlem Gabor,
 not by way of Gra∣tuity or Recompence for his Service, but in Ex∣change, or as the price of two Cities, which the Prince had yielded to the Sultan, out of his own proper Estate in 
Hungary:
 With which Answer the Vizier remained satisfied, being jealous of the Turbulent and active Spirit of that Prince.


During all these Wars and Revolutions in Kingdoms and States, Sultan 
Ibrahim
 contained and contented himself within the Precincts of his Seraglio; where becoming a faithful and va∣liant Soldier of 
Venus,
 he consumed more Trea∣sure in that War, than his Brother 
Morat
 did in Foreign Conquests; and being, as it were, en∣tered into the Mahometan Paradise, where the Company of fair Women is the chiefest Felicity promised, he laboured to increase the Ottoman Family, and to acquit his People of the appre∣hension they had of wanting an Heir to succeed in the Throne; so that on the 
15th
 of 
February
 he had a second Son born, and a third on the 
12th
 of 
March
 following; which absolutely took away the Reproach of his Frigidity or Impo∣tence, proving afterwards the most lascivious and devout Sultan that ever aspired to the Ma∣hometan Heaven.


This Year the Turks armed out twenty Gal∣lies more than usual, besides thirty Sail of Ships, and Gally-Grosses; in the beginning of 
June,
 riding at the Seraglio Point (where the Com∣manders in Chief came to take their leave of Sultan 
Ibrahim
) they divided into two Squa∣drons; one of which consisting of twenty Gal∣lies, under the Command of 
Beker
 Pasha, took their Voyage into the Black Sea; the remainder under the Captain Pasha, sailed for 
Cyprus,
 with intention to do Justice on the Pasha of that Island, whose Riches gained by Oppression, had de∣bauched him from due Obedience towards his Prince; and being arrived there, without Rumor or Noise, giving signs of good Will and Re∣spects towards the Pasha, one day he sent to in∣vite him Aboard to banquet with him; where the Pasha foolishly coming, and having well eaten and drank with him, his Entertainment had not time time to digest, before he breathed his Last; for being on his departure, the Slaves assaulted him, and strangled him by Order of the Captain∣Pasha.


No other Matters remarkable did the Turkish Fleet perform this Year at Sea, before they re∣turned again to their Winter-Quarters. Howso∣ever this Year proved savourable to many poor Christians in Slavery; for there happening a most miserable Plague in 
Alexandria,
 which re∣laxed the Spirits of Men, and rendered every one so negligent in his Office, that about four∣thousand Slaves taking advantage of such Remis∣ness in their Guardians, seized a Ship in Port, and crouding themselves therein, set Sail, and landed some of their People at 
Candia,
 others at 
Malta,
 the rest at 
Marseillia,
 by which means they happily regained their Liberty: on which incouragement eight hundred more adventuring to perform the like, and fighting in a Body at the Gate of 
Alexandria,
 three hundred of them were flain, the rest leaped into a Gally, which though without Oars, had yet her Sails to the Yard, and having the fortune of a favourable Wind, arrived safe at 
Candia;
 in like manner they became free, taking convenient passage from thence to divers parts of Christendom: These Slaves were all redemanded by the Grand Signior from the Venetians; in which no Satisfaction be∣ing given, was one Cause and Original of that War which afterwards ensued.


And now the Year 1644 being begun, 
Ra∣gotski,
 who was never contented but in Combu∣stions, and never at. ease but when he was proving new Projects, made Demands of certain Places on the Confines of 
Moravia,
 scituated within the Mountains, which he challenged as the Inheritance of his Son; besides other Pre∣tences which he made in right of 
Bethlem Gabor.
 To forward which Designs, moved with an in∣veterate Enmity to the Austrian Family, he en∣deavoured to win the Hearts of the Commonal∣ty with a plausible Declaration for Liberty, and to throw off the Yoke which had so long gauled the Neck of 
Hungary;
 whereby having raised an Army of twenty thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, he entred, and spoiled the Coun∣try of his old Enemy and Neighbour the Count of 
Humanay
 an Hungarian, took 
Solnock
 by force, and besieged 
Fileck,
 and 
Cassovia:
 For suppression of which Insurrection and Rebelli∣on of 
Ragotski,
 the Emperor was forced to a War; and having Rendezvoused his Army at 
Presbourg,
 the Conduct thereof was committed to the Charge of Cout 
Puceain.


The Turks having intelligence of these Pre∣parations for War, commanded twenty thou∣sand Men to march into those Parts to oppose these Combustions on the Frontiers; with six∣thousand of which the Count 
Puecaim
 encoun∣tering furiously, assaulted and routed them. And in the mean time 
Ragotski
 laying aside all care for the War in 
Hungary,
 applied himself to relieve 
Olimz
 in 
Moravia;
 but in his March thither he was recalled by the Inhabitants of 
Sendar,
 which is a Castle erected on a Hill near 
Cassovia,
 offer∣ing to surrender unto him; but the Governor 
Forgatz,
 of the People, a Civil War began a∣mongst themselves, but at length the advantage falling unto 
Ragotski,
 the Gates were opened un∣to the Transylvanians; with which Success their Spirits being raised to higher Matters, they pro∣ceeded forward, until General 
Getz
 with a strong Body, gave a stop unto their Progress. And thus was the Fire of sar rekindled again in 
Hungary,
 by means of 
Ragotski;
 to whom notwithstanding the Turks would never adhere, being well acquainted with his turbulent and unsteady Humour. In the mean time the Empe∣ror dispatched his Ambassador with rich Presents to the Sultan, desiring him to forbear giving far∣ther Assistance unto 
Ragotski;
 but what between

Skirmishes, Propositions, and Treaties, Matters were not complsed until the 
14th
 of 
August
 1645, at which time all Articles were concluded and signed between the Emperor and 
Ragotski.


But to return now to the Affairs of 
Constanti∣nople;
 Sultan 
Ibrahim
 having the Fortune of Active and Prudent Ministers, attended en∣tirely to his Pastimes and Pleasures, without Prejudice to his Interest, and the State of his Empire; for the first Vizier being Faithful and Vigilant, immediately cut off those Members with the Sword, which he suspected in the least manner inclinable to Sedition; amongst which were the Pashaws of 
Aleppo
 and 
Caffa.
 For by this kind of seasonable and speedy Remedies, the Plethory of the Ottoman Empire is common∣ly evacuated, and the Body Politick thereof restored to its pristine state of Health and Safety.


In like manner the 
Valede Sultana,
 being a Woman of great Courage and Abilities, attend∣ed carefully to the Welfare of her Son, whom she sometimes decked up, and set forth as a Property of Majestick Gravity to the People, whilst she her self assumed the Authority, and carried allthings with a high and imperious Spi∣rit; and being ambitious to be feared as well as honoured, she laid Viloent Hands on the first Vi∣zier, called 
Mustapha,
 and strangled him; for though he was an Active and Faithful Minister, yet because he passed something on her which she imagined did favour of neglect, and because she ap∣prehended his Power, which was greatly confirmed by the Interest and Favour he had with the Janisa∣ries, and their Favourers, she resolved to make him an Example, as well of her Revenge, as her Power; after whose Death the Charge of first Vizier was conferred on 
Mahomet
 the Pasha of 
Damascus.


The fame Fate befel the Captain-Pasha, who was likewise strangled for having over-boldly, or peremptorily, made answer to some Imper∣tinencies of the Grand Signior; and his Office was afterwards conferred on 
Beker
 Pasha of 
Rhodes.
 With such Rigour as this do the Sul∣tans govern, who resolve to be obeyed, and to have their Commands executed without delay or contradiction.


Whilst these Matters were in agitation,
 the Tartars forgetful of their Peace, made another Incursion with thirty thousand Men into 
Russia,
 against whom 
Konispolski
 having made Head with twenty thousand Men only, overthrew them, and killed twelve thousand, and took three thousand Prisoners, pursuing the rest to the Borders of 
Walachia.
 In like manner 
Wisno∣wick,
 a noble Polander, happily encountred ano∣ther Party of Tartars, as they were on their re∣turn from spoiling the Countries of 
Moscovia;
 of whom having killed 10000 Men, he recovered their Booty, and sent the rest Home naked and empty. This was the true and most effectual Means for the Polanders to avenge and right their Injuries, and more prevalent then Ambassies and Messages of Complaint unto the Port; which we have experienced since, and in the present Reign of the Son of 
Ibrahim,
 to have been so far from producing Matter worthy so much as the Charge of the Ambassador, that they have been retorted with lgnominy and affronts.


But here 
Ibrahim
 perceiving how the Poles had avenged themselves with their own Sword, would seem to approve of the Action, which he could not hinder; and to appear a sincere Observer of the Peace, he deposed the Tartar 
Han
 for his unlawful Incursions; which was such a satisfacti∣on to the Crown of 
Poland,
 as they never could obtain by force of Justice, Complaints, and Vertue of passive Valour, until their active Fortitude cook their Cause in Hand, and pleaded for them.


On the 
19th
 of 
March
 of this Year, a fourth Son was born to Sultan 
Ibrahim;
 and on the 
19th
 of 
February
 following, being in the Year 1645, notwithstanding all the Reports of his Impotency, was born a fifth Son, named 
So∣lyman,
 to the great contentment of his Peo∣ple.


The Turks Gallies this Year, under the Com∣mand of 
Beker
 their new Captain-Pasha, made an Attempt on the Coast of 
Calabria,
 bringing from thence two hundred Slaves; and attempting the like near 
Corton,
 paid for their former Booty, with the loss of five hundred Men.


How soever, the Gallies of 
Malta,
 being six in number, had better Success as to themselves, though the Consequences thereof proved fatal to the Venetians, having given the first occasion of that long War, which afterwards ensued be∣tween the Turk and them.


The truth of which Story is this,
 free of all Romance or Fable, which the Knights of St. 
John
 or 
Malta
 would mix therewith: It happened that the Kuzlir Aga, or chief Eunuch, which governs the Women in the Signior's Seraglio, having cast his Eye on a fair Slave, then set to sale by a Persian Merchant, became so enamoured of her, that he purchased her for himself, under the No∣tion of a virgin, at the price of four hundred and fifty Dollars: But the Eunuch had not long entertained this Lady in his Service, before she proved with Child; not by him (you may con∣ceive) if you understand how the Eunuchs of this Country are disarm'd of their Virility: At which he was so greatly offended, that he ba∣nished her from his Society, and confined her to the House of his Steward. The time being come for her to be delivered of her great Belly, it proved a Son; and some Months after, the Aga being desirous to see the Babe, was so pleased with the aspect of it, that he resolved to adopt it for his own, ordering it Cloaths, and other Necessaries agreeable to its Condition. It hap∣pened that about that time Sultan 
Mahomet
 (which now reigns) was then born; and there wanting a Nurse for the Child, this beautiful Slave was preferred to the Honour; so that she was entertained near two Years in the Seraglio: During which time Sultan 
Ibrahim
 took such an affection to the Nurse's Boy, that he loved him better than his own eldest Son, who was of a bad Complexion, and of no better Air in his Face than his Father, and took great delight to play and sport with him; at which the Mother of Sultan 
Mahomet
 was so displeased, that she could not longer endure either Nurse or her Boy; and for her sake, took so much displeasure against the Kuzlir Aga, who preferred her, that neither his presence nor Service were acceptable; and so violent she was in her Passion, that one day, when Sultan 
Ibrahim
 was playing with his Wo∣men and Children in the Garden, according to his usual Custom, throwing them one on the other into the Water, the Queen grew so furi∣ous, that she could not contain longer from venting her Anger in unhansome Terms, and jealousy against the Nurse and her Son. At which the Sultan being much displeased, and be∣ing ill-natured, (if we may speak boldly of an Emperor) took her Son (which is now Sultan 
Mahomet
) out of her Arms, and with some few Curses swung him into a Cistern; where he had been certainly drowned, had not every one in that instance applied themselves to save him; at

which time he received the Mark or Scar he wears at this day in his Forehead.


All these Matters served for farther Fuel to nourish the implacable Spirit of the Queen; which the Kuzlir Aga well observing, judged it prudence to give way to her Fury, and so beg∣ged his Dismission from the Court, together with his Slave and Son; and that having wisited 
Mecha,
 according to his Law, he might enjoy a Retirement in 
Egypt,
 which is the Portion of ba∣nished Eunuchs.


The Queen easily consented hereunto; nor was it difficult to procure the Licence of the Sul∣tan, who was as easily perswaded to any by those who were about him; wherefore the Eunuch ha∣ving provided, to be gone, shipped himself with his great Treasure, on the Fleet which was now designed, and ready to depart for 
Alexandria,
 which consisted of three Ships; one a great Gallion, and two others of lesser Burthen, and seven Saiks; these having at the beginning of their Voyage found contrary Winds,
 put into 
Rhodes;
 from whence loosing with more favou∣rable Weather, they unfortunately met with six 
Malta
 Gallies, excellently well manned, and provided. The Admiral Gally immediately Boarded one of the Saiks, and took her, man∣ned only by Greeks; by whom they were in∣formed of the Condition, Quality, and Cargo of the greater Ship, which gave Heat and Re∣solution to the Souldiery. In like manner, with little Oppsition, the Gallies called the St. 
John,
 and 
Joseph,
 possessed themselves of one of the lesser Ships, which being laden only with Tim∣ber, brought from the Black Sea, to build Ships at 
Alexandria,
 was of little value, having forty Turks aboard, eight Women, and a Child which sucked at the Mother's Breast. In the mean time, the three other Gallies, called the St. 
Mary,
 St. 
Lorenzo,
 and 
Victory,
 attacked the great Gallion, and having cast their Iron Graples into the Ship, with the Motion of the Ship, the Irons gave way and broke, only that of the St. 
Lorenzo
 held fast, so that the whole force of the Ship, both of small and great Shot, was poured in upon the Gally, to their damage and loss of Men. In the mean time the Admiral Gally came in to their Assistance, and Assaulting the Ship on the other Quarter, made a Diversion of their Men; and having thrown in their Graples, they scaled the sides of the Gallion, as if it had been a Fortress; where being entred, they remained for some time at handy-blows with the Turks; but at length, all the Gallies coming to their help, having made an end of subduing the other Ships, the Turks were forced to retire under Covert of their Decks, which they defended still with singular Valour, wounding the Christi∣ans with their half Pikes through the Gra∣tings.


But, in fine, the Captains of the Gallies, per∣ceiving that this was not the way to compel them to a speedy Surrender, ordered several Musque∣tiers out of every Gally, to sire in at the Win∣dows and loop-holes of the Ship; by which ha∣ving killed their Commander in Chief, their Va∣lour and Constancy began to fail, and desirous to save their lives with loss of Liberty and E∣states, they cast down their Arms, and begged Mercy.


In this Engagement were killed the Captain of the St. 
Mary,
 and seven Cavaliers, of which five were French, one Italian, and one German; the Admiral himself, and the Captain of his Gally were both wounded; seventy nine Soul∣diers and Mariners killed, and an hundred thirty two wounded: Of the Turks it is not certain how many fell, in regard as they were killed, according to Custom, they cast them over-board; the Eunuch himself, though always educated in the softness of the Seraglio, and in the Conver∣sation of the Female Court, yet in the end con∣cluded his days like one of the Masculine Sex, fighting valiantly with his Sword, until over∣whelmed by his Enemies: by which it is obser∣vable, that those Persons lose not their Courage with their virile Parts; for it hath been known in former days, how that Eunuchs have been Generals in the Turkish and other Armies, and conducted their Affairs with admirable Courage and Success.


The Prize which the Christians had gained in this manner, was very considerable; for besides the Gold, Silver, and Jawels, which were the Treasure this Eunuch had amassed in the Reign of three several Sultans, they gained three hun∣dred and fifty Slaves, besides thirty Women, some of which were young and Virgins; so that there was not a Souldier or Seaman who had not a considerable share of benefit proportioned un∣to him. With this Fortune, towing their Pri∣zes, they in a short time came to an Anchor in the Port of 
Calismene,
 in the Island of 
Candia,
 called anciently 
Phenice,
 on the South-side of the Island, remote from all Venetian Garisons; and where (as it is reported) they were supplied with no Provisions, excepting a small quantity of Bisket, which was furnished by a Coutry Fellow, who for that very Cause was shot to Death. From hence the Gallies departing, ar∣rived in 
Malta
 with their Prizes, where they were received in great Triumph. The young Son of the Eunuch (for so we call him) was reported to be a Son of the Grand Signior, fent into 
Egypt
 to be Educated, and was accordingly saluted, treated, and reverenced by the Grand Master; the same Opinion was dispersed and confirmed in all parts of 
Europe,
 and the Er∣rour for many Years maintained at the Ex∣pence of the
 Religion, until the Boy grow∣ing up to a good Age, and not judged worthy of a Ransom, or enquiry after by the Turks, it was thought convenient for him to put off his State, and Greatness, and become a Fryer, and I think a Dominican, and this is he who now goes under the name of the 
Padre Ottomano.


The News hereof arriving at the Ottoman Court, Sultan 
Ibrahim
 was transported with An∣ger, threatning Destruction and Ruin unto 
Mal∣ta;
 besides he shewed a most inveterate Passion against the Venetians, for not guarding the Seas from his Enemies, and for relieving them in their Ports. In which Rage and Fury, he put his own Captain Pasha to death, and Summoned the Christian Ambassadors, braving them all for the little respect was shown to his proper Ship∣ing; and in short, was angry with all, but re∣served the Effect of his Wrath to be poured on the Venetians, to which this Accident admini∣stred the first Original, and will afford us am∣ple matter of Discourse in this ensuing Histo∣ry.


For the Grand Signior first made his Com∣plaints against 
Venice,
 to their Minister, or Bai∣lo, then resident at 
Constantinople,
 called 
Soranço;
 alledging, that contrary to the Articles of Peace, they had afforded Prvisions and Entertainment to his Enemies in 
Candia,
 and at a time when having made Prize of his own Ship, and Dome∣stiques of his Seraglio, they seemed, with more extraordinary demonstrations of Hospitality than usual, to receive them into their Harbours.

To which the Bailo made Answer, That his Maje∣sty was ill informed of the true state of those Mat∣ters; for that the Port to which the Malteses came, had neither Castle nor Fortress belonging to it, but was an open, wide, and unfortified place; for if the Grand Signior is not able to defend those Ships from careening, as they have often done before 
Rhodes
 it self, how was it possible for the Venetians to drive them from the Seas, and deny them the use of that Salt Water, which hath neither Fort nor Castle to reach and command them? With which Answer 
Ibrahim
 seemed to remain satisfied; and Matters ap∣peared so appeased on the side of the Veneti∣ans, that 
Soranço,
 though a Person of a most acute and penetrating Judgment, imagined no∣thing less than a War: and though he was as∣sured otherwise, by something that the English Ambassador had discovered in that Matter; yet because it came not first from the Report of one of his own Interpreters, he would not seem to believe or give credit thereunto, notwith∣standing the strong Probabilities that might per∣swade it.


Indeed, Christian Ministers must necessarily, with much Difficulties, and less Inspection, go∣vern and penetrate Affairs in the Turkish Court than in any other; because access to the great Ministers is seldom privately or familiarly ad∣mitted, from whence wise Men most commonly take their Measures and Observations; but on the contrary, are forced to act all by the Nego∣tiation, of their Druggermen or Interpreters; and as they hear with their Ears, so are they often-times beholden to their Reflections; which how subject they may be to Error, is best known to those Ministers who have practised much and long in that Court.


And in this manner 
Ibrahim
 covered his De∣sign against 
Candia,
 by pretence of making War upon 
Malta,
 to which he had lately recei∣ved so just a provocation.


To this Enterprize, none instigated him more than a certain Hagia, or Tutor, which had ac∣companied him in the time of his Solitude, and had instructed him in the first Principles of the Mahometan Doctrine; he was a subtil and un∣derstanding Man, and one who kept a secret Cor∣respondence in the Christian Courts; for being Master of what Gold he pleased, he paid for his Intelligence with Liberality and Secresy; and though he was no Prophet, yet he pretended to be a Magician, or Conjurer, or one that had a Command or Soveraignty over Familiar Spirits; an Excellency greatly admired and reverenced by the Turks. This Man had for a long Season at∣tended an opportunity to promote a War a∣gainst 
Venice;
 esteeming their Territories very convenient to be laid to the Turkish Dominions, and their Force an under-Match for the Puis∣sance of the Ottoman Empire. And now this Accident provoking the Desire of the Turks to this War, and the Opportunity appearing com∣modious to cover the Design, under pretence of Assailing 
Malta,
 it was secretly resolved to at∣tempt the Island of 
Candia;
 for as its Strength and Situation made it the Key to all the other Isles of the 
Archipelago,
 so it would be the Bull∣wark of the Maritime Countries, from whence the Passage would be short and easy into 
Africa;
 from whence the Gallies might advantagiously relieve 
Cyprus,
 and guard the Fleet from 
Egypt,
 and from thence might be opened a Door to in∣vade 
Sicily,
 and the other parts of 
Italy.
 On these Considerations, War being resolved against 
Candia,
 Reports divulged the Design only against 
Malta,
 and for that end, Orders were issued for building and fitting an hundred Gallies, and as many Ships of War; and Commands sent into 
Barbary
 for assistance of all their Naval Force, and the Day appointed for Rendezvous and De∣parture; all which time the Enterprize was kept secret, and by no more Symptoms suspected, un∣less by the unusual Caresses the Turks at that time over-acted in their officious kindness to∣wards the Venetian Bailo.


The Report of these great Preparations fly∣ing over all Parts of 
Europe,
 was entertained at 
Malta,
 with some Apprehensions, as being the Place on which all the Storm was to refund its Fury.


Whereupon the Cavaliers or Knights of that Place, summoning a Council, resolved to cite all the Fraternity to repair to the Defence of their Capital Seat, and of their Order and Pa∣trimony. Likewise Letters were directed to the several Officers, to prepare and send Pow∣der, Match, and Lead, Iron Buckets, and Tim∣ber to make Carriages for Cannon, and for other Uses; as also Corn, Bisket, Salt, Flesh and Fish, Vinegar, Wine, and all other sorts of Ammunition. They likewise instituted some Officers over the Waters, to see that the Foun∣tains and Conduits should be made clear which were to serve the City; and that those with∣out, that were to remain in the possession of the Enemy, should be carefully and artificially poi∣soned; all the Mills remaining in the Fields were transported into the Town; the Doors and Windows of Wood belonging to the Pea∣sants Houses, were taken down and carried into the City, with all their Utensils, and what else was portable, so that nothing remained but the wide Fields, and an open Air to breath in.


In the mean time, the Venetians being a wise and jealous State, suspected the werst of all E∣vents, and feared what their Minister at 
Con∣stantinople
 could not discover; which caused them to make some Preparations, but yet with that dexterity and secresy, as not to render them diffident of the Turks Proceedings. For to be jealous of a Friend, is sometimes to make him an Enemy; and Distrust always argues Disaf∣fection, which Prudence teaches to conceal from those who are more powerful than our selves. Some were notwithstanding of Opinion, that the Complaints of 
Ibrahim
 were only Artifices to extract the Blood of Gold, which they judged fit to administer, if it were possible to, satisfy the Appetite of those Leeches. Others were of a contrary sense, and would by no means admit it for good Cousel, or Policy, to buy their Peace of the Turk; for, besides that it was disagreeable to the Grandeur of 
Venice,
 it was but a Shadow that they purchased, since their Enemies could on every slight Occasion reassume what they had sold, and make the Menaces of War, and the Sale of Peace, serve them for a perpetual Fountain, an Mine of Gold and Treasure; and that since it was necessary, at one time or other, to cast off this Yoke of Tyran∣ny; the sooner it was done, the Advantage would be the greater, and the Honour more ap∣parent to the World, seeming to make War ra∣ther their Choice, than their last Remedy. How∣soever Orders were given to the Bailo, with all Prudence and Art, to touch gently the Pulse of the Turks, to discover if Mony would redeem the present Quiet of their State.


But the Resentment that the Turks had con∣ceived, was grown apparent in the comportment towards the Bailo; for having one day demanded

Audience, he attended several hours without ad∣mission; yet when the Ambassador of 
Ragotski
 come to the Vizier, he no sooner entred the House than he was received: and at the same time it was told the Bailo, that he might retire, for that there was no Place nor Season at present to afford him Audience. In the mean time 
Ibra∣him
 himself walked often to the Arsenal, to for∣ward and hasten his Preparations, laying an Em∣bargo on all Strangers Vessels in all Ports of the Ottoman Dominions. Orders were likewise dispatched to 
Thebes, Negropont,
 and other Parts of 
Greece,
 for making Bisket; and to the 
Morea
 for cutting and squaring of Timbers, and sacking Wools to fill up Trenches; in all which Rumor and Stir, there are was no other discourse but of 
Malta,
 and of throwing that Island into the Sea with the Shovel and Mattock, and rendring it the most dreadful Example in the World of the Ottoman Rage and Greatness.


With such Preludes as these, began a War of long continuance, maintained with various Suc∣cesses for divers Years; the fatal Issue whereof, we our selves have seen and heard. But it is strange to consider, that an Exploit so Martial as this, should commence in the Reign of a Sul∣tan wholly given up to his Pleasures, and so swallowed in Sensuality, that all those luxu∣rious and wanton Actions which are recounted of 
Sardanapalus
 and 
Heliogabalus,
 are flat and faint Similitudes of that prodigious Effeminacy, in which this Sultan outdid all other Examples of former Ages.


Amber was the common Perfumes which bur∣ned perpetually in the Womens Apartments, and the common Sauce to most of his Viands; not perhaps because it so much pleased his Pa∣late, as that it was a provocative, and incite∣ment to his Lusts.


And this puts me in mind of a Story I have heard of an English Merchant, living then at 
Galata,
 who was Master of a rare piece of Am∣bergriese, which was in form like a Pyramid; the News whereof was told to the Grand Signior late at Night, when the Smoke of the Persumes began to abate: Which so soon as he heard, though it was near Midnight, he dispatched a Messenger to call the Merchant with his Amber∣griese; who being knocked out of his Bed in haste, by the importunity of the Officer, came to the Seraglio Gate two hours before Day; where he attended until it was broad Light, and then, without more words, found a Market for his Amber, and before his departure received 13 thousand Dollars. The Female Court was then extreamly rich and splendid, all 
Italy
 was scarce able to supply it with Silks, and Cloth of Gold; so that the Trade was in those days flourishing above other Times, and gave great employment to English Shipping: and so impatient were the Women for their Gay Cloaths, that so soon as the News of a Ship from 
Italy
 came, and that she was arrived within the Castles of the 
Helle∣spont,
 but there detained by contrary Winds, Gallies were immediately dispatched to bring up their Silks, which they oftentimes forced away without any Account or Price made with the Merchant; of which that worthy Gentleman, Sir 
Thomas Bendysh
 then Ambassador, complain∣ing to the Vizier, and finding no other Relief than good Words, resolved on an Expedient of making known his Cause to the Grand Signior, which was this.


In 
Turkie
 they have a Custom, that when any one receives a notable Injury, or Injustice, from the Chief and Great Ministers of State, they put Fire on their Heads, and running to the Grand Signior, no Man can hinder or deny them access to his presence. In like manner the Eng∣lish Ambassador not being able to obtain Satis∣faction from the Vizier, in return to his many Complaints, drew out all the English Ships in 
Ga∣lata,
 which were then thirteen in number, and drawing in their Guns, and shutting the Ports, put fire on every Yard-Arm of their Ships, and came to an Anchor just before the 
Seraglio.
 The Customer being the first that espyed this unusual sight, immediately apprehended the Reason, and sent to acquaint the Vizier thereof in all haste; the Vizier likewise fearful lest the Complaints should by this means come to the Grand Signior's Ear, sent the Customer aboard with a considerable part of the Mony, and de∣sired that the Fires might be extinguished, pro∣mising faithfully to comply in paiment of the rest; hereupon Consultation being had between the Ambassador and the Merchants, the Ships returned to their Stations, not seeming to have been taken notice of by those in the Seraglio.


And notwithstanding the great number of Women within the Seraglio, all which were at the Devotion of the Sultan; yet 
Ibrahim
 not be∣ing contented herewith, passing one day to 
Scu∣tari,
 had by chance cast his eye on an object which much pleased him: what it was, becomes not the modesty of my Pen to relate; but being re∣turned to his Seraglio, he sent Orders to the Vi∣zier, to seek out for him the biggest, and best proportioned Woman which was to be found in all 
Constantinople,
 and the parts thereabouts. Hereupon Emissaries were dispatched into all Quarters of the City; at length they happily procured a huge tall Armenian Woman, well proportioned according to her height, and a Giantess for her Stature; which being found, she was presently washed and perfumed in the Bath, and as richly Cloathed and Adorned as the shortness of time would permit: There was no great difficulty to perswade her to become Turk, having so high preferment in her pro∣spect. So that being introduced to the Grand Signior's presence, he became immediately Ena∣moured, and was so pleased with her Society, that he preferred her before all the Women of his Court; an Evidence whereof he gave, in that he could not deny her in any request she could make, and particularly about that time the Pashaluck of 
Damascus
 being void, this Wo∣man begged it for her self, substituting another in the Office, who was accountable to her for all the Profits and Emoluments thereof: By these particulars of favour the Queen-Mother becom∣ing jealous, one day inviting her to Dinner, caused her to be strangled, and perswaded 
Ibra∣him
 that she died suddenly of a violent Sickness, at which he poor Man was greatly afflicted.


But not to insist long on these luxurious Pas∣times, we shall return again to Matters of high∣er Concernment: 
Ibrahim
 had now understood, that the Venetians growing jealous of his Pre∣parations, began likewise to Arm, and provide for the worst; which being in no wise pleasing to the Turks, who were apprehensive that their Marine Forces consisted most in surprize, caused 
Ibrahim
 to complain of the Defensive Posture in which they Arrayed themselves, alledging, that Suspicions of this Nature argued no hearty Disposition towards their Friends; nor was any thing more contrary to a good Correspondence, or more disobliging than such like Jealousies, which oft-times beget that Enmity which was never designed; and farther it was judged neces∣sary,

if possible, to disswade the Bailo from a belief of any Hostility designed against his Re∣publick; to inculcate which, none was esteemed so proper an Instrument as the old cheating 
Ho∣gia,
 who was the first Motive to the War; a Preacher who imagined that the excellency of his Religion afforded him a priviledg to falsify, lye, and commit any Act for advantage thereof, though never so contrary to Truth and Morality. This 
Santone,
 with the Testimony of one or two more grand Professors, with many Asseve∣rations and Vows, endeavoured to perswade the Bailo, of the Grand Signior's good Intentions towards 
Venice,
 and his fixed Resolutions to de∣stroy 
Malta.
 And though the Concernment which those godly Elders shewed, and the ear∣nestness they used, whereby to inculcate a Cre∣dence to what they affirmed, were enough to discover their contrary Intentions; and though it is said, that the Venetians could not heartily believe what they so strongly suspected; yet hereby, and by the common vogue of the Peo∣ple, they abated much of their Caution and Heat, which they otherwise had used in due Pre∣parations and Provisions against an Evil so fatal and destructive in the sequel.


The first Act of Hostility was committed by 
Giacomo da Riva,
 who being sent for Sopravedi∣tor to 
Tino,
 was in his way to touch at 
Candia,
 there to deliver Ammunition and Provisions for War; but being encountered by some barbarous Vessels, who assailed him for a Merchants Ship of small Force, were received so warmly that he sunk one of them, with which the rest left him and fled, relating at 
Constantinople,
 that they had been ill treated by the Venetians, and that they gave the first Assault upon them, because they were called to the Assistance and Service of the Grand Signior.


The Fleet and Land Forces being already put to Sea, the Report and Opinion still continued, that the War was designed against 
Mal∣ta;
 wherefore such as apprehended the Hazard, and were acquainted with the Difficulty of such an Enterprize, began to inform the Grand Sig∣nior how impossible it was that this Action should be accompanied with good success. To which Arguments he made no other reply, than by a seeing obstinacy, resolved with the Ot∣toman Sword, to cut all those Knots and Dif∣ficulties which opposed him in the Work. At length one 
Salee Efendi,
 a Preacher, who had obtained some more than ordinary Esteem with the Grand Signior, advised him, That before he commenced a Work of that importance, he should inform himself of the true state of that Place, from a certain Aga, who was lately re∣turned from 
Malta.
 The Grand Signior being very willing to hear any thing of this nature, called the Aga, who related to him how im∣pregnable both the City and Castle were; how the Knights were provided against all Assaults; that the Island it self is only a Rock, not con∣taining Earth enough for an Army to intrench; that the Approaches must be made by the Pick-Axe and Mattock, it being all Stone. In short, it was not a place to be taken in one Summer, and the Winter coming on, it affording no shel∣ter, nor provisions of it self, was not capable of relief in Seas so stormy, and from Countries so remote, without hazards, losses, and frequent Shipwracks. 
Ibrahim,
 who had designed all along to make War upon 
Candia,
 seemed little concerned or moved at this Discourse. The Gallies and Ships which were now all in a rea∣diness, being come forth to the Seraglio point, the Grand Signior entered his Grand Ciosk, situated on the Bank of the Sea; where the Se∣lictar Aga, General, and all the Chief Com∣manders, came to perform the usual Ceremonies of Obedience and Duty before their Departure. At this solemn Assembly the Grand Signior de∣clared, That his Intentions were to make War upon the Infidels, according as every one should understand by his respective Commissions, which should now be delivered unto them: That he expected the highest Demonstrations of Courage in them imaginable, and what was agreeable to the Conductors of the Ottoman Armies: That Reward and Punishment were in his Hands, and that he resolved to dispense them according to their Merits: That they should not doubt of all due Assistance and Succours; for he had so well contrived, and so justly fitted all his Measures, that he was already provided of Men, Timber, Ammunition, and Mony sufficient to maintain and carry on this War for seven Years. At which they all gave a shout, and declared, that they were ready to spend their Blood and Lives in Execution of his Commands. Whereupon every one received a rich Coftan, or Vest, and the General a Scimitar set with Diamonds; who being a young Man of about 26, or 27 Years of Age, had a Council of six graver Pasha's al∣lowed him; and then the Commission for the War was brought forth sealed, with Orders not to open it, until they were past the 
Dardanelli.
 Hereat the noise of great and small Shot from the Gallies and Ships, resounded through all 
Con∣stantinople,
 and the Commanders repairing to their Vessels, the Assembly broke up, and every thing was put in a posture to make Sail.


It was now the last day of 
April,
 1645, old Style, when the Fleet first broke ground, which consisted of 73 Gallies, besides the 8 Gallies of 
Barbary;
 2 Mahons, or Galleasses, one great Gallion called the 
Sultana,
 10 Ships of 
Alexan∣dria,
 2 of 
Tunis,
 and 10 of English and Dutch Ships, which coming to 
Constantinople
 for Trade, were there pressed into the Service, with about 300 Saiks and Caramussals, which carried Soul∣diers, Provisions, Ammunition, and Utensils for War. Their Militia consisted of 7000 Ja∣nisaries, 14000 Spahees, and about 50000 Ti∣mariots, and other Souldiers, with about 3000 Pioniers; these all were to Rendezvous at 
Scio;
 where they arrived the 
7th
 of 
May.
 But before their departure from 
Constantinople,
 the Bailo 
Soranço,
 or the Venetian Ambassador, thought fit, in Complement, and for discovery, to make a visit to the Captain-Pasha, by whom he was received with frank Courtesy, and assurance of Friendship; so that though he suspected the worst, yet could he collect no certain assurances of Peace, or War; however he advised Signior 
Cornaro,
 then Governour of 
Candia,
 that though he could not certainly penerate into the bottom of the Turks Design, yet he apprehen∣ded that the Storm might fall on that Kindom, understanding that the Captain-Pasha was not well inclined towards the most Serene Repub∣lick: wherefore, he ought to be watchful and circumspect, yet with as little demonstration of jealousy as was possible, so that if the Turks should there arrive, he should afford them all conveniencies of Watering, Provisions, and other Refreshments.


The Fleet being departed from 
Scio,
 for 
Na∣poli di Romagnia,
 the Northern Wind so freshned, and blew so hard, that the Gallies were separa∣ted, and forced to put into divers Ports, and the Saiks and Caramussals to Anchor at 
Micono


and 
Tino.
 At the latter of which, belonging to the Venetians, they had licence to Water, and and were refreshed with such provisions as the Island afforded; and now after this flurry of Wind, the Fleet being again united, they were seen off at Sea from 
Cerigo,
 an Island of the Ve∣netians at the Mouth of the 
Archipelago,
 and failing towards the Channel of 
Braccio de Maina;
 and the next day 9 Gallies, a Gallion, and a Brigantine, made towards the Isle of 
Cerigo,
 and sent a Letter a shore by a Boat to the Pro∣veditor, from the Pasha of 
Rhodes,
 demanding their usual present of Coffee and Sugar, which was given them, they assuring all Friendship, and real good Intentions towards the People, and Dominions of 
Venice.


But in the mean time a Satia laden with Arms and Ammunition from 
Venice,
 bound for 
Retimo,
 unhappily falling into the Turkish Fleet, was intercepted by them, and taken, which un∣masked all the Design, and made the Turks ap∣pear in their true Colours, notwithstanding all their religious Protestations, and outwardly fair Comportment, the usual disguise of the Maho∣metan Sincerity.


Towards the end of 
May
 the Turkish Fleet was discovered from 
Carabuso,
 a small Fortress of the Venetians, some distance off at Sea, standing to the Westward, which gave some jealousie to them at 
Candia;
 and being compa∣red with some precedent Acts, as that of sound∣ing the depth of Water about St. 
Theodoro
 with a Brigantine, (which is a small Rock lying off of 
Canea
) which pretended to come from 
Sancta Maura
 with Turky Merchants, afforded unde∣niable grounds of assurance to those in 
Candia,
 that the War was designed against them; how∣soever, the Ottoman Fleet rendezvousing again at 
Navarino,
 a place far distant from 
Candia,
 altered their Apprehensions at 
Venice,
 and else∣where of this War, deeming it now certain, that this Design had no other aim or mark but that of 
Malta.


But this opinion was no sooner entertain'd, than it was confuted by open Acts of hostility; for the Captain-Pasha being arrived at Cape 
Co∣lonna,
 by some called 
Sunio,
 immediately dis∣patched a Brigantine to 
Constantinople,
 with ad∣vice of his Proceedings and Intentions to pass directly for 
Candia;
 whereupon it was thought seasonable to publish the War against 
Venice,
 which was performed with committing the Am∣bassador 
Soranço
 to Prision, and giving Orders through all the 
Archipelago
 to destroy or enslave all the Subjects of that Republick. And here the Turk practised his usual beginnings of War with more than ordinary Caution; for though with other Princes, whose Territories border on him by Land, he usually endeavours to strike at the same time when he gives the Salutations of Peace; Yet here being to contend at Sea, where he is conscious his Forces are inferiour to those of 
Venice,
 he practised all those feigned Artifices, confirmed with as many holy Vows and Pro∣testations, as their Religion hallows, and makes lawful, when they can bring advantage and en∣crease to the Mahometan Faith.


But though the Venetian Republick was so politick as outwardly to demonstrate a Religious Confidence of their potent Neighbour, whom they were conscious not to have provoked by any breach of Capitulations; yet were not so secure of his Faith, and so easie to believe his fair Dissimulations, as not prudently to provide against the utmost Effects of his Power and Treachery. Wherefore, whilst the Turk pre∣pared, they armed likewise secretly, made con∣siderable Levies without noise, commisionated thirty extraordinary Commanders of Gallies, took up seventeen English and Dutch ships into their Service, armed out two Galliasses extra∣ordinary; and when the Turk had unmasked his Design, they then imparted their Condition to all the Christian Princes, craving their Suc∣cour and Assistance to maintain the Common Bulwark of 
Christendom
 againtst the comme Ene∣my. The Galleasses were commanded by 
Giro∣lamo Morosini;
 the Gallies, of which fifteen were made ready, and afterwards put to Sea, all commanded by Noblemen, were under the Con∣duct of 
Antonio Capello. Francesco Molino
 was made Proveditor General, a Person of untainted Justice and Honour, and extraordinary zealous and vigilant in the Publick Interest, whose in∣defatigable Labours and Care of his Country, promoted him afterwards to be Doge of 
Ve∣nice.
 By his Order and Counsel, extraordinary Proveditors were sent to 
Candia, Cerigo,
 and 
Tino,
 as Places most feared, and in danger; and Orders were dispatched to 
Andrea Cornaro,
 then General and Inquisitor in 
Candia,
 to arm out twenty Gallies from the Arsenal of 
Canea;
 and to promote this Design the better, he hired two English, and one Dutch Ship, then in Port of 
Malomocco,
 to carry unto 
Candia
 Timbers fitted, and already squared at 
Venice,
 for building Gal∣lies; besides which he sent Cannon, Corn, and all Ammunition of War, with fifty thousand Zechins in Gold for encouragement of the Mi∣litia, with a recruit of two and twenty Compa∣nies of Foot, formed and collected out of di∣vers Nations.


Intelligence being come of the imprisonment of the Bailo at 
Constantinople,
 the Senate by a common and unanimous Suffrage elected 
Fran∣cesco Erizzo,
 then Doge, General of the Sea; judging, that their Arms would prosper under his Command, which had formerly been success∣ful under the auspicious Conduct of his Ance∣stors; and he, though a Person of seventy four Years, worn out with Age and Cares of the Publick, did yet chearfully consecrate the re∣mainder of his days to the Service of his Coun∣try. But whilst he prepared to crown the end of his Life with the Glory of this important and generous Enterprize, Death terminated all his In∣tentions, leaving him with the honourable me∣mory of his past Actions, and with a Lawrel hanging over his Head, which had his Life con∣tinued, had been planted on his Brows. But that this Accident might not give interruption to the weighty Affairs now in had, 
Molino
 took his place, and proceeded in his Voyage and De∣signs, and arrived with the Venetian Fleet at the Island of 
Corfu.
 In the mean time the Tur∣kish Fleet careened and fitted themselves at 
Na∣varine
 with all Necessaries to assault 
Candia;
 in which interim advice came to 
Canea,
 that the the Bailo was imprisoned at 
Constantinople,
 by a Letter from 
Soranço
 himself; which he had dropped from the Window of his close restraint, and dispatched by one of his Confidents with a Vessel express; which was not sooner arrived, than it was that Night confirmed by all the Bea∣cons or Watch-Towers of the Country; who having discoverd the Turkish Fleet far distant as Sea, gave a general Alarm by the Fires they made.


The next Morning being the 23/13 of 
June,
 they discovered the whole Fleet, near Cape 
Spada,
 which being drawn up in the form of an half Moon, took up a vast tract of

Sea; and sailing slowly with fair Weather, and a smooth Sea, displayed themselves with the greatest terrour imaginable to the Islanders. At length the lighter Vessels began to edge in with the Bank of 
Gogna,
 (which is a place distant about eighteen miles from 
Canea
) and were fol∣lowed by the grosser and heavier part of the Ar∣mata.


And now, before I proceed farther, I should make a pause, and describe the Antiquity, the Geography, and the present State of this famous and renowned Island, but that is already perfor∣med so distinctly and elegantly by other Pens, that it shall be sufficient for me to declare here in brief terms, how this Kingdom became the Patrimony or Possession of 
Venice.
 In the Year 1204, a Sale thereof was made to this Repub∣lick, by the Marquess 
Bonifaccio
 of 
Montferratto,
 by an Instrument sealed the 
12th
 of 
August
 at 
Adrianople,
 and signed, and delivered, in the presence of 
Marco Sanudo,
 and 
Ravano du Vero∣na,
 Ambassadours in the time of 
Enrigo Dandola
 Doge; but the People of this Island not consent∣ing unto the sale, opposed themselves against it, until the Venetians by force of Arms procured their Obedience, and confirmed their purchase by a double Title. Hereupon such noble Citi∣zens as adventured their Lives in his acquisition, obtained the Estates of the Rebellious Greeks, being obliged in proportion to the Lands they held, to maintain Men and Horse at their own Charge, and are therefore called the Feudatary Cavalry. So that the whole Country is divided into three parts; 
viz.
 the noble Venetians or Ca∣valry; secondly, the noble Candiots, or Colo∣ny, which were Infantry that came to inhabit from 
Venice;
 and thirdly, the Greeks or Na∣tives of the Country which never rebelled, but took part with the Venetian State: the first two speak Italian, and are of the Roman Church; the others speak Greek, and conserve the Right of that Religion.


The Ottoman Fleet now touching the Shoar at 
Gogna,
 took Livery and Seizin quietly of that flourishing Isle of 
Candia,
 where they Encamped a while to refresh their Forces, and prepare all things in order to their Conquest. In the mean time, the news hereof alarmed all 
Venice,
 and not only hastened them in the expedition of their Fleet, but warmed their applications to all Christian Princes, from whom they craved help in the general defence of Christendom: which some at first imagined would have been granted, as it was once in the time of the Holy War; or that those whom the Declaration of a com∣mon Crusada, or Devotion, or sense of Religion could not move, yet at least the consideration of their Countries Defence, or the maintenance of a Bulwark of Christendom, might perswade to wage Arms against the Turk, as a Common Enemy: but what cold Apprehensions the Christian Princes entertained hereof, both the faint Supplies and Assistances they administred, and their bloody and vigorous Wars one against another, have abundantly testified, to the fatal loss and ruin of that Country. And though in the beginning there were better hopes, by means of the Pope's earnest intercession with all the Prin∣ces of 
Italy,
 to whom he shewed a fair Example, by uniting his own Gallies with the Venetian Fleet, and amongst the rest prevailed also with the Republick of 
Genoua,
 to employ their Gallies in this Noble Enterprize, which tended to the Glory of God, and the common Safety and Preservation of 
Italy:
 yet that Leaven of vain Punctilio's, which hath so often betrayed the Christian Cause to the advantage of the Turk, gave a stop for some time to these Proceedings. For before they would enter into Arms, they desired the Genoeses, that the right of bearing the Flag should first be determined in favour of their Admiral, before that of 
Toscany,
 or 
Mal∣ta:
 And though the Pope, to take away this occasion of dispute, proposed to have no other Flag worn besides his own, under which all Ita∣lian Princes, without impeachment of their Honour, as Auxiliaries, and Military Adven∣turers might promiscuously wage War; yet this could not appear satisfactory to the Genoeses, who not only took this occasion to demand the precedency before 
Toscany
 and 
Malta;
 to which the G. Duke (who was not inferiour in State, and superiour in Title) and the Malteses (who time out of mind, and by Decree of 
Charles
 the Fifth, claimed Precedency on the Seas before them) would never assent; but also thought fit to avail themselves in this Conjuncture, to obtain from the Pope the Grant of a Royal Court, and that Treatment which is given to Kings, or Crowned Heads. But because these Demands seemed to contain those Difficulties in them, which could not be granted without the manifest displeasure of other Princes, the Pope resolved to afford what assistance he could from himself, and therefore granted a Levy of a thousand Foot out of his own Dominions, with free liberty to buy what Ammunition and Pro∣visions were to be found in the Ecclesiastical State, with imposition of a double Tithe or Tenth on the Goods and Dominions of the Cler∣gy; so that these Succours of the Pope, and the Auxiliary Forces of 
Naples, Toscany,
 and 
Malta,
 under the Command of Prince 
Ludovisio,
 General of the Church, being united to the Ve∣netian Fleet, did speedily compose a most puis∣sant and formidable Force; however, by rea∣son of Dissentions amongst the Commanders, and other Misfortunes derived from thence, to the Christian Arms, nothing succeeded fortu∣nately this Year. For the Turks having gained their landing at first without opposition, over∣threw the Christians in several small Skirmishes, and afterwards forced 
Canea,
 the second City of that Island, which they took with much blood and slaughter of the Christians.


The Turks having made so successful a pro∣gress this first Year, as to possess themselves of one of the most considerable Cities, took Cou∣rage to proceed in their Conquests; in which they had the fortune to make themselves Masters in the next place of 
Retimo;
 in defence of which, the General 
Andrea Cornaro,
 lost his Life by a Musket shot. Nor more successful were the Venetians this Year at Sea; for what with Quarrels among the Commanders, and with their coldness and negligence in their Business, they suffered the Turkish Vessels to pass freely, with∣out giving them that interruption which was very facil to Men resolute and concerned: Nor was the opportunity which presented to ruine the Turkish Fleet made use of, then lying half disarmed, and ill provided, at the Isle of St. 
Theodoro,
 (which is a Rock opposite to 
Canea
) where at that time, it is believed, they might all have been burned, had the occasion been im∣proved, agreeable to that Advantage which then offered: so that towards the latter end of the Year, the General 
Molino
 returning Home, either by reason of some distemper, or by re∣vocation from the Senate, which seemed to be ill satisfied with his ill Fortune, or his ill Manage∣ment of the Publick Affairs; he was dismissed

from his high Charge. And 
Gio. Capello,
 Pro∣curator of St. 
Mark,
 was constituted in his place.


This Year was remarkable for the ruinous Dif∣ferences between Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 Baronet, our King's Ambassador then residing at 
Constantinople,
 and the Turky Company. The Original of which seemed to arise from the Civil Dissentions at Home; for so unhappy were those Times, and so ill affected were English Minds with Rancour and Malice against each other, that this Leaven of Discord could not be confined within the Banks of 
Great Britain
 and 
Ireland,
 but seemed to diffuse it self over the Seas, and as a Conta∣gion, infected the Minds, Goods, and Interests of the English, to what Quarter or Climate soever they were transported.


In the Year 1638, Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 was, with the Consent and Approbation of the Turky Company, dignified by his Majesty with the Ti∣tle and Authority of his Ambassador to the Grand Signior. For Maintenance and Support of which, the said Company were to pay him the yearly Sum of five thousand Zechins, in four e∣qual Proportions, which is above the value of two thousand Pounds 
Sterling.
 And farther, be∣fore his departure from 
England,
 paid him six hundred Pounds 
Sterling
 towards the Furniture of his House, Plate, and other Necessaries; de∣fraying all the Charges expended for Transpor∣tation of his Lady, Followers, and Provisions to 
Constantinople.


Sir 
Sackvile Crow,
 from the time of his arrival at the Ottoman Court, until the end of the Year 1645, managed the Affairs of the Com∣pany to their general Satisfaction, and with the Esteem and Honour of the Turkish Ministers, who considered him as a Person of Courage and Resolution, and in every way qualified for that Employment.


At length Differences arose between this Am∣bassador and the Company, touching the Right and Title to that Benefit which is called
 
Stran∣gers Consulage;
 the first pretending to the same on a Grant made to him thereof by his Majesty, and the Custom of Sir 
Peter Wych,
 and other preceding Ambassadors. The others challenging the same, as the chief and principal Means they had to ease the vast Expences they were at, for maintenance of their Trade and Government; for which they had always contended and strug∣led with the Power of preceding Ambassadors, and which Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 himself seems, by an Article which he had made with the Company to have relinquished to them in these words.


That during the time of his Employment as Ambassador, he would content himself with such Allowance from the said Company for his Pains and Care to be taken in their Business, as is spe∣cified in the said Articles, being 5000 Zechins 
per Annum.


This Right of 
Strangers Consulage,
 is now con∣firmed to the 
Turky Company,
 by virtue of their Charter which his Majesty was pleased, in the Year of his Happy Restauration, graciously to Re∣new, Confirm, and Amplify to them; the which was more easily granted, by the concurrent Assi∣stance of the Right Honourable the Earl of 
Win∣chelsea,
 then designed for Ambassador to 
Constan∣tinople,
 who on some Considerations offered from the said Company, assented thereunto.


But Matters of a higher Nature than this, in∣flamed the Accounts and Differences between the Ambassador and Company. For first, one 
John Wolfe,
 at that time Treasurer at 
Constantinople,
 becoming Insolvent for great Sums of Mony, Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 alledged, that those Debts were National, arising from the late Changes of State Officers, their extravagant Exactions, and Ava∣nious Practices: and therefore to extinguish this Publick Debt, he made a Leviation of one hun∣dred and ten thousand, nine hundred and fifty Dollars on the English Estates at 
Constantinople
 and 
Smyrna,
 detaining the Companies Ships in those Ports, until the aforesaid Debt was satis∣fied and cleared. The Ground and Cause of which, will more plainly appear by this follow∣ing Warrant.




Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 his Order, dated in 
Pera
 of 
Constantinople
 the 
26th
 of 
January
 1645. Directed to all Cap∣tains, Commanders of Ships, 
&c.
 Prohibiting the lading of any Goods or Estate on their Ships.


WHereas by the unhappy failings of some of our Nations here, and at 
Smyrna,
 and through the many late Changes of this State's Officers, and their extravagant Ex∣actions on us in those Difficulties; and by sundry other avanious ways, our Nation is brought into a great Debt: For which We, or those, and that Estate which shall remain on the Place, who, and whatever, in case of Exigent, and force of Paiment, when-ever that shall happen, must (if not otherwise pro∣vided for) in all probability, and according to the rude Customs of this State in like case, look to be made liable unto. There being at present a full and competent Estate of the 
Levant
 Companies arrived here, and at 
Smyrna,
 which as well by the Obligations of their Charter, as by the Laws of 
England,
 the said Companies own Institutions and Cu∣stoms in cases of like Nature, ought as well to bear the said extraordinary as ordinary Charges, and so pay those Debts, which ei∣ther are, or shall be adjudged and declared to belong unto them. We having taken pains in drawing the said Accompts to a Head, and for discovery of the Truth thereof; and (af∣ter a Certificate being directed thereon) for the more formal Satisfaction only of the said Company, being advertised that some of those who with us have had the view, and been pre∣sent at the Examination of the said Ac∣compts, whom it concerns on the Companies behalf to make such Certificate, on our Or∣der; for some private Respects, make scru∣ple to certify the said Debts, as they appeared before us and them: And hearing also that the General Ships here in Port, and that at 
Smyrna,
 prepare, and make haste to be gone: In Providence, as well for own safety in the Premisses, as for that due regard we owe to his Majesty's Honour, and the Publick Inte∣rest for the future, We find it requisite, and hereby order and require, that until the said Debts shall be fully declared, and their pai∣ment setled by Leviation, and the same paid

or undertaken, in, and by some such fitting and secure way, or ways, as in such case is requisite, and by us shall be determined and so declared: That none of the Factors of this Scale, or that of 
Smyrna,
 by themselves, or others whoever, after publication hereof, here and there respectively, lade on Board either of the General Ships, or other Ships whatever, any Goods, Faculty, or Estate whatever, for themselves or other whoever. And that the Captains and Commanders of the said Ships, in the mean time, and until Our farther Or∣der in this behalf, not only forbear to take in, and lade aboard either of their Ships any such Goods or Faculties for any of his Majesty's Subjects, or other Strangers whoever; but al∣so that they abide and depart not, either this Port, or that of 
Smyrna
 Respectively, un∣til our farther Order and Licence in that be∣half: Whereof not only the Merchants, Factors, Masters, and Commanders afore∣mentioned; but our
 Druggermen, and other Ʋnder-Ministers here or there, are to take notice, and observe accordingly; as they, and every of them concerned herein, will answer the contrary at his or their Peril. Dated in 
Pera
 of 
Constantinople
 this 26th of 
Janua∣ry, 1645.


To all Captains, Commanders of Ships, Merchants, Factors, Drug∣germen, and all other his Majesty's Subjects and Ministers whoever, in the Ports of
 Constantinople 
and
 Smyrna.


SACKVILE CROW.




The 
Turkie
 Company was altogether unfatis∣fied with this Leviation, alledging that a great part of this Debt arose from Monies lent by Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 himself to 
Wolfe,
 at a high In∣terest; for securing of which, and of his Prin∣cipal, he had in this manner taxed and charged their Estates. But Troubles and Differences ended not with this Paiment; for still the Con∣troversy about Strangers Consulage was de∣pending, which with other Matters, caused great Heats and Animosities on both sides: So that some of the 
Turkie
 Company, Men of the better Principles, thought it most advisable to Petition his Majesty to constitute another Ambassador, with Letters of Revocation, to recal this; but others, who were the zealous Men of those Times, who had tasted the sweetness of Seque∣strations, and proved it to be the Grand Catho∣licon of all Remedies, perswaded that his Estate should be Sequestred. This, I say, may per∣haps have been the attempt of some few; though the generality of the Company have so far disa∣vowed the Seizure of his Lands and Estate in 
Eng∣land,
 that they declared themselves ignorant of any Estate he had there. Howsoever this Appre∣hension being fixed in the Mind of Sir 
Sackvile Crow,
 he proceeded to strange Extremities against the Company: For he not only caused all the Goods and Monies belonging to them, within the Grand Signior's Dominions, to be sequestred and seized by his Agents, but also imprisoned the Persons of all the English Merchants and Fa∣ctors which were considerable, either at 
Constan∣tinople
 or 
Smyrna.
 The Particulars of all which will appear with more clearness by this follow∣ing Warrant.




Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 his Second Warrant, dated in 
Pera
 of 
Constantinople
 the 
30th
 of 
April
 1646, directed to 
John Hetherington, Lorenzo Zuma;
 Enordering (upon false Pretences) the Sequestration of the Merchants Estates at 
Smyrna,
 according to a Schedule.


WHereas the 
Levant
 Company, some∣time before our coming to this Place, by a Court of their Assistants, thereunto espe∣cially authorized, treated with Ʋs touching a yearly Allowance for our Care and Pains during our residence here as his Majesty's Am∣bassador; to be had and taken in such Parti∣culars as might have relation to their Trade and Occasions: And for a conclusion of such Treaty as aforesaid, did offer unto us the election of any one of their Agreements, for∣merly made with any of our Predecessors in like occasion. And for a further manifesta∣tion of their sincerity in their said Offer, upon our accord thereunto, did, at the Court afore∣said, in publick give into our Hands and Possession the Copies of five of their Agree∣ments, made with our said Predecessors, with Power to chuse which of them we should best like of, to be a Rule and Pattern for an absolute Conclusion and Condition to be drawn up between us and them; thereon also pro∣mising that they would make, grant, and con∣firm the like unto us. And whereas we there∣on, and to the Purposes and Ends aforemen∣tioned, chose and fixed upon that Agreement, which the said Company had made with Sir 
Thomas Glover,
 formerly Ambassador, Resi∣dent for the Crown of 
England,
 with this State: And his Majesty by his Favour, did assure the same unto us, graciously promising to make his Employment of us here, as good and beneficial in all the Allowances and Per∣quisites thereof, as it had been to any of our Predecessors whoever, and we expected no less. The said Company finding themselves mis∣taken in their Offer, (as they pretended) first retired from the same, denying their said Agreement, (though sufficiently proved be∣fore his Majesty); and then by force of Pre∣sents and Mony given under-hand to the Officers of that Time, so prevailed against us, that we could not only not obtain that Right, which since hath appeared unto us, and (as well by their own Agreement, as by his Majesty's Judgment then, Custom, and their former Contracts) was due unto us; but were forced after to other Agreements with the said Company, by which (over and above all such Rights, Priviledges, and Per∣quisites, as then were and should be granted

unto us by his Majesty's Capitulations; and besides all other Gratifications and Allowances accustomed to be given to his Majesty's Am∣bassador, (which in Houshold Provisions only the said Company assured us, were to the va∣lue of 
800
 l. 
per Annum
 Sterling, at least) and over and above such Plate and Houshold-Stuff as they assured us, we should find of theirs here, and hold to our use during our Residence, (of which we found not the value of an Asper) the said Company did cove∣nant with us, (for and in respect of our Pains and Care only therein agreed to be taken by us, in their Affairs and Occasions as afore∣said, for and during all our time as his Maje∣sty's Ambassador with this State) they would pay, or cause to be paid unto us, the Sum of 
5000
 
Chickeens per An.
 to be paid by e∣qual Proportions quarterly before-hand; by their failing wherein (besides our other Engage∣ments for them to a very good Value) twenty and five thousand Dollars or thereabouts, rests at this day due and unpaid unto us: And whereas also after the Agreements aforesaid, upon several Arguments held before his Ma∣jesty, concerning the Rights of that Consu∣lage, which amongst other things is granted by the Grand Signior, and payable by his Ca∣pitulations to his Majesty's Ambassador Resi∣dent at this Imperial Port from Strangers, (to which the said Company could shew no likely or probable Title) the said Company were adjudged to relinquish their Pretences to the said Consulage; and a Grant thereof under his Majesty's Royal Hand and Signet, was thereon made and given to us, for our better support during the time of our Residence here. The said Company (upon Conditions between them and us agreed) did also promise to give us Content therefore; with intent nevertheless thereby to get advantage of our credulity and absence, and to draw us out of suspect of their evil Intentions towards us, which hath since (as well by their several inter∣ruptions and hinderances here in the Collecti∣on thereof, as their practices, and endeavours at Council Table before his Majesty, and by their other Appeals to the Courts of Parlia∣ment, where in these Times of Distractions, they presumed of some better advantage) hath appeared unto us: Whereby, and by suggest∣ing several Ʋntruths against us, and by o∣ther false ways they have endeavoured not on∣ly to deprive us of the Strangers Consulage, and benefit thereof; but under that colour al∣so, and these their Pretences, to keep them∣selves from paying, as us from taking such other Consulage, as was, and is as much our right and due unto us from themselves, by the said Capitulations, and the Grand Sig∣nior's Grant thereon, for all their own Goods traded in: And now of late, but suspecting our just Intentions of making a claim there∣to, (for until this present day we never made any demand thereof, or publick pretence there∣in) to prevent what they suppose we might justly do in our own Right, (for we take God to Witness we knew no other cause): under like unjust and scandalous Pretences, we are certi∣tified, that they not only go about to get us removed from our Employment here, but up∣on false Suggestions, loose and bare Suspicions only, 
have gotten Order
 for the seizure of all our Lands and other Estates in 
England
 into their power; as some of their own Ser∣vants and Factors here have the confidence to report and affirm: and as we 
are assured
 from thence, without hearing of us; nay, so much as intimation to us of the Grounds thereof, or such Matters and Things as they pretend at least to have against us, whereby we might answer for our selves; and so, whilst we are labouring (as for these many Years we have done, with all fidelity) for them and their publick Interest (whereof, as we have proof sufficient in our Actions, so we have him that is Judg of the World for Wit∣ness to our Conscience) they are 
contriving the ruin of us and our Posterity.
 Which manner of proceeding, so 
unjust, horrid,
 and 
odious
 before God and Man (as in all reason we ought) taking to heart, and our se∣rious consideration, and as well that Violence which is offered to the Laws, and his Majesty's Honour and Interest therein, as our Self and our Family; not pretending to extend that Authority which his Majesty hath put into our Hands to unlawful Ends, but only to make a just use of it for the right and lawful de∣fence of our selves and it, in the several Oc∣casions aforementioned; finding by Accompt under the Hands of the Treasurer of the said Company here, that for such Goods as they have brought in and carried out from the Port of 
Constantinople,
 there is due unto us according to the Capitulations, and the Grand Signior's Grants therein, to the va∣lue of Dollars Ryals of 
8/8,
 seventy four thou∣sand: and that for the like in 
Smyrna
 there is due Dollars Ryals of 
8/8,
 one hundred thousand 
in circa;
 and rating that Estate in Land which they have gotten into their power as aforesaid, but at the value we were offered for it, 
viz.
 at ninety seven thousand and five hundred Dollars; in all, two hundred seven∣ty one thousand and five hundred Dollars. Besides, (for ought we know to the contrary) they may else have prevailed themselves upon of ours, and as due to us by Privy Seal to the value of one hundred thousand Dollars; and Leases under the Great Seal to near as great a value more. We hereby enorder Se∣questration of all Monies, Merchandizes, and other Goods and Faculties whatever, within the Dominions of the Grand Signior where∣ever, belonging to the Parties and Members of the said Company, in the Schedule here∣unto annexed, the chief Fomentors, Contri∣vers, and Abettors of these unjust and hor∣rid Proceedings; requiring you, 
John He∣therington,
 and you 
Lorenzo Zuma,
 or one, or both, or either of you, by the help

and means of that Officer sent by the Vizier, and those Commands in your Hands, (being now at 
Smyrna
 on other like Occasions) ac∣cording to your Instructions herewith sent, to board and enter all Ships and Vessels, and to break open, and enter into all and every of the Houses, Ware-houses, Counting-houses, of all and every of the Parties in the Sche∣dule hereunto annexed and aforementioned; and there to Attach, Arrest, and take into your custody and possession; and as arrested and sequestred, to take, carry away, and put into safe custody, all such Monies, Merchan∣dizes, other Goods and Faculties of what Na∣ture soever that you shall discover, find out, and get into your power, belonging to any of the Parties, or under the Marks of the Sche∣dule hereunto annexed; and the same to keep, so arrested and sequestred, for our better In∣demnity, Satisfaction, and Defence, against all Pretences of the 
Levant
 Company before∣mentioned whatever, until we may be heard therein by due course of Law, and till farther Order from us in that behalf; for which this is to be your Warrant. Dated in 
Pera
 of 
Constantinople,
 this 30th of 
April, An∣no. 1646.


To our loving Friends and Ser∣vants,
 John Hetherington, 
and
 Lorenzo Zuma. Sackvile Crow.




To perform and put in execution the fore∣going Warrant, it was necessary to make use of the Turkish Officers Power, and Authority: Wherefore Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 demanding Audi∣ence of the Grand Vizier, and representing Mat∣ters unto him in that manner, as he judged most agreeable to his Cause, was heard by him with a gentle and gracious Ear; and assurances made to him of all Respect, Favour, and Assistance imaginable. For the Turks had now smelt out a Cause in Transaction, which with good im∣provement might be worth them many Purses of Mony; and was of such a Nature, as that their Religion, and Doctrine, obliged them to nou∣rish, having the prospect of gaining Mony, and enflaming Christian Discord. On these Grounds Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 easily obtained Commands from the Vizier, directed to the Kadi of 
Smyrna,
 to act all things according to direction of him the Ambassador; and to enforce Matters with better execution, a Chaous, or Pursuivant, accompa∣nied with 
John Hetherington,
 and 
Lorenzo Zuma
 Interpreter, was dispatched to 
Smyrna,
 with Commands to carry up the Consul and Factors to 
Constantinople,
 and to break open the Ware∣houses, and make seizure on such Estates belong∣ing to the 
Turkie
 Company, as would answer the Demands and Pretentions of the Ambassa∣dor. Accordingly the Consul and Factory were carried up, and with that other of 
Galata,
 im∣prisoned in the Ambassador's House.


In the mean time the Agents at 
Smyrna,
 with assistance of the Kadi, sealed up all the Merchants Ware-houses; but when it came to execution and Seizure, more Difficulties arose; for the Turks, Armenians, and Jew-Merchants, made high Clamours to the Justice, that many of the Goods belonged unto them, some were not yet paid for, others were only Pawns in the English Hands; and all the Town being desirous to fa∣vour the Cause of the Merchants, a great Up∣roar and Hubbub arose amongst the People: The Kadi affrighted hereat, grew more slack and faint in his Proceedings; but the Cordial of 1500 Dollars, and Gratuities to his Servants, overcame the Difficulties, and gave him new Re∣solution; so that at length, being attended with the Principal Officers of the Town, he began first with the Consul's House, making Seisure, and delivering out of the Ware-houses all the Goods found there; with some Caution howsoever, and respect to those Pretensions which Stranger-Merchants made thereunto; as appears by the following Letters.




Joh. Hetherington 
and
 Lorenzo Zuma, 
their Letters to Sir
 Sackvile Crow, 
advising further of their Proceedings, dated in
 Smyrna, June 16. 1646.


Right Honourable,


YEsterday we received your Lordships of the 
4th
 present, being the Copy of the 
3d:
 And to day we received your Lordships's of the 
8th,
 and rejoice to hear your Lordship is in such a readiness for your just Demands, and wish your Lord∣ship less Trouble, and better Success than we this day have had, and we doubt for many days shall incounter here. This morning the Cadie's Son, with his Neipe and principal Officers came; and we be∣gan first with the Consul's House. But be∣fore we began, 'twas spoken in the Kad∣die's own House, and all over the Town, our Design to seize what we could find; about seven a Clock his Son came and en∣tred the Consul's House, and opened all the Warehouses, and took from thence, with 
Elford
's and 
Keeble
's, some four hun∣dred Clothes, and nine Bales Mohairs; we left behind us 38 Bales of Silk, 13 Bales his Servant pretended were sold by his Ma∣ster to Mr. 
Brent,
 to be paid by Bill of Ex∣change at 
Constantinople,
 and when advice came the Bills were paid, the Goods should be delivered; in the mean time they lie in Mr. 
Lancelot
's Warehouse, with some 40 Clothes, 60 Barrels of Tin, which Tin be∣longs to Mr. 
Sainthill,
 and sealed up by the Neipe and us. Before we had ended at this House, the whole Town was in an Uprore, being fomented by Jews, and some of the young Fry left behind, and pro∣claimed in the Streets, that the Town would be undone, the Trade lost and go to wrack, if this was suffered; so that be∣fore the Consul's Door were so many of the scum of the Town, the Streets were packed thick of them. On the other side, a more unruly Enemy threatned worse things, the Master of the Golden Lion, who had before given 
Barnardiston
 9000

Dollars at 
Cambio,
 and had no Goods in his Possession, hearing how it would fare with them, Lands forty Men at 
Barnardistons
's House, and vowed he would have his Mo∣ny or Goods, or swore he would beat down the Town; so likewise the 
Jonas
 got her Sails to Yards, that the Kaddie's Son and the Chiouz, desired to let it alone until a∣nother day, for fear of worse Events: So when they had made an end at 
Lancelot
's House, would stay no longer, but pro∣mised to come another day.. The Estate before mentioned we carried away in spight of Envy, and have put it up in a safe Cane. As soon as this was done, because the Captain would not come ashore, I got 
Jordan
 to go aboard the Golden Lion, and know the Master his Intent, and to ac∣quaint him with the Danger might ensue thereon; all we could urge was nothing, except he had satisfaction for his 9000 Dol∣lars; at last told him, if we knew where his Estate lay, we would endeavour to help him to it; so he found it out, and we delivered it to him, and the Man was ve∣ry well satisfied. And now we hope to find little Impediment, and to morrow Morning the Caddie's Son promiseth to come again, and we doubt not the same day but to make an end. If your Lordship saw the little regard these People bear to the Grand Signior's Commands, the Caddie, or ought else but their private Ends, your Lordship would (as we hope your Lord∣ship will) not blame us if we procured but the half of what your Lordship's Letter mentions. To morrow (if God bless us) we shall send your Lorship more punctual Advice, and for the present crave leave to subscribe our selves,


Smyrna,
 
June 16. 1646.


Your Honours Most faithful, most obliged, and most humble Servants, 
John Hetherington. Lorenzo Suma.






John Hetherington, 
and
 Lorenza Zu∣ma
's Letter to Sir
 Sackvile Crow; 
dated in
 Smyrna, 
June
 19. 1646.


Right Honourable,


OUrs of the 
16th
 advised your Lord∣ship, how with the Caddie's Son, his Niepe, and Chia, we had entred the House of Mr. 
Lancelott,
 and taken into our possession the Goods we found therein, not pretended unto by Strangers; and how by the insolency of 
Nicholas Terrick,
 Ma∣ster of the 
Hopewell,
 (formerly the 
Golden Lion
) we were interrupted that day from proceeding any farther; and how by the means of Captain 
Jordan,
 we had pacified that young, rash, and undiscreet Man; and that we hoped the next Morning to proceed without interruption, but it fell not our so: for the next Morning we went to 
Barnardiston
's House, thinking to make all sure there; and when we had begun, in comes the Master with a Crew of his own, and said, those Goods he had recieved were not sufficient to give him satisfaction, and demanded of us the rest. We answered, We could not give him these Goods we had sealed up before he came into Port, for wat he demanded; but assured him if he knew of any thing standing out, we would endeavour, the best we could, for his Sa∣tisfaction: Upon this, as we understood since, a young Man of the House whis∣pered the Master in his Ear, and told him, if he were not satisfied before the Goods went out of the House, all was lost, he would never have a Penny of it: Upon this, away goes the Master aboard, with this young Man in his company, and loo∣sed his Sails, but threatned nothing. Upon this come in the Jews, and told the Niepe and the Chia, that the Master would shoot down the Town; but for all our perswa∣sions that he durst not, away runs the Niepe & his Company, and leaves us there alone: so we resolved to have done it our selves; but the Merchants had so worked with the Hamalls, that there was not one to be seen; so being alone, and seeing his Boat coming ashore, well mann'd, and fear∣ing a surprize, we presently repaired to the Chiouzes, and desired him to go with us to the Caddies, to see if we could have any better assistance from him. By this time the Town was in a great Uproar, and the People something too insolent; the Caddie, to prevent the worst, present∣ly caused the Shops to be shut up, and im∣mediately sent for all the chief Men of the Town, (who by Presents before we had made our Friends) and there before them all, and a great company of the Townsmen, cause the Commands to be read, and told them how much they were bound to see the Grand Signior's Commands put in execution, and what dishonour it would be for one Ship to command the Town.. So after they had disputed the Bu∣siness, the Caddie sends an Officer aboard (accompanied with the Druggermen to the Nation) to know whether he would hinder the prosecution of the Grand Sig∣nior's Command, or no, and to know his Answer? He presently denied he ever in∣tended to shoot at the Town, only desired his own: So presently after the People were a little appeased, we went to work a∣gain, and so this day have finished all: it being done in such confusion, we cannot give your Lordship that exact Accompt

you may expect within a day or two; for then we will send your Lordship the Par∣ticulars, with the Values; in mean time we stand upon our Guard, having some 20 or 30 of the Souldiers of the Castle to keep watch every night; for (my Lord!) here is no small Hobbub in the Town, and threatning both of us and the Estate, but we will secure both as well as we can. We have sent your Lordship a rough Draught of what we have, and what we have left sealed up, and find it fall short far of what your Lordship expected: the sooner your Lordship disposes of it, the better; for assure your self, there is daily some Design or other hatching: We should be very sorry, after all this, to have it miscarry, therefore pray (my Lord!) dispose of it (to prevent the worst) as soon as you may. Your Lordship was pleased to inorder us to change our Lodg∣ing, being too near the Water-side, and in a Merchant's House; which, as soon as we can get a secure House, we will; but the farther from the Water-side, the more dangerous, if the People of the Country should intend us any ill.


The French, and many others, pretend Debts of many of those People that are gone up, and would know who shall pay them, and pretend to be paid out of their Estates; but we have put them off, telling them, we believe your Lordship will hard∣ly let your Estate go to pay their Debts; nevertheless, shall advise your Lordship of it: so have secured none, only to one 
Hu∣zoone Amet
 Aga, one of the chief Men in the Town here, Mr. 
Lancelott
 having gi∣ven him a Bill of Exchange for 475 Dol∣lars, and the Bill returned unpaid, we were forced to deliver into the Hangee's Hands, for his Security, 10 Cloathes.


We have given the Ships liberty to lade, by reason of their continual grumbling, but fear our Design on the 
Jonas
 will not take; for the Caddie seeing the stubborn∣ness of 
Terrick,
 will not assist us as he pro∣mised. We have not ought to inlarge at present, but to subscribe our selves,


Your Honours, 
John Hetherington, Lorenzo Zuma.




Matters running thus high, and the Breach made so wide, there remained little hopes of an Accommodation: For now the Merchants at 
Galata,
 having obtained their Liberty from the Ambassador's House, by the Vizier's Com∣mand, entred into a Consultation in what man∣ner to govern their Affairs, electing some parti∣cular Men to that Employment, which they cal∣led by the Name of the 
Sealed Knot,
 which much provoked the Anger of Sir 
Sackvile Crow,
 and more, because that deserting his Protection, they made Applications to the Heer 
Coppes,
 A∣gent for the States of 
Holland;
 who readily em∣braced the defence of their Cause, and willingly represented to the Grand Vizier the Aggrievan∣ces, and ill Treatment of which they complain∣ed. The French Ambassador, on the other side, being a great Favourer of Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 and his Proceedings, assisted him both at 
Smyrna
 and 
Constantinople.
 All which will more particularly appear by the following Letters.




The Factors General Letter to the 
Levant
 Company, dated the 28th of 
June, 1646,
 in 
Constantinople.


Right Worshipful,


SIrs, at present we have our Heads and Hands full, and all little enough to pre∣serve your Estates from devouring, and out selves from that Evil Consequence might ensue upon such unheard-of Proceedings and Intentions, as have been long in pri∣vate agitation; but when the Monster came to the Birth, there wanted strength to bring forth; so, in a good hour we may say, the Snare is broken, and doubt not the Devices of the Crafty is frustrate by him, whose Almightiness shews it self most, when we Mortals are least capable to help our selves. We shall, according to our Obligation, give your Worships some account of the last Progressions of his Lorship Sir 
Sackvile Crow,
 whom his Ma∣jesty sent hither Ambassador, and to be a Protector of your Estates, and our Per∣sons; how he hath performed this Charge and Duty formerly, your Lorships have in part heard; what hath happened of late, we shall now chiefly insist upon.


After his Lordship had caused the stay of the Ships in this Port, and at 
Smyrna,
 under pretence of this State's requiring it, in respect of their Wars with the Vene∣tians, the 
Sampson
 and 
Smyrna
 Merchant, having been here almost seven Months, to the great loss and damage of Ships and Goods; he picks a quarrel with the Facto∣ry of 
Smyrna,
 for not complying accord∣ing to his Order, in the paiment of their Parts of the last Leviation-Mony; and hereupon sends down 
John Hetherington
 one of his Servants, a most lewd, debaucht, prophane, riotous Fellow, (yet his Lord∣ship's Kinsman) accompanied with two Chiouzes, two Druggermen, a Janizary, and other Servants, to proceed with those who should refuse to pay their Leviation according to the Instructions he had given the said 
Hetherington,
 and 
Lorenzo Zuma,
 Druggerman: But before the arrival of these Agents, the Nation there had un∣dertaken the paiment by an Obligatory Letter to his Lordship; this would not satisfy, nor deposition of Goods for Secu∣rity, until Answer should come from hence of the paiment of their Bills of

Exchange, which was tendred; but the second day after their arrival, 
Hetherington
 and his Retinue goes to the Caddie's, and thither causes the Consul and all the Nati∣on to come; where it was pretended they had laden the 
William
 and 
Thomas
 with Corn, and sent her away; and therefore, by virtue of an Imperial Command, (ve∣ry privately here procured) the Consul, and six more of the Nation, were deli∣vered into the Hands of the Chiouz, and so brought up hither, not being suffered to return to their own Houses, but put a day and a night into an offensive dark place, the Doors and Windows not only shut, but nailed upon them, not suffering either their Friends or Servants to come at them, or a Window open till the evening, for which also they paid Dollars 100. In this disgraceful manner they were brought hither, where they have been since the 
22d
 of the last Month, Prisoners in his Lordship's House to the 
21st
 present, not∣withstanding they had complied in paying the Leviation Monies in less than a Week after their arrivals; and by fair Promises, put off from day to day, for their dispatch to their Business at 
Smyrna,
 which could not but much suffer by their absence: Their magazines and Counting-houses continued sealed from the time of their Attachments; the Spips not permitted to lade, or depart, though empty; and no Debts due to them would be paid in this their Absence and time of Distraction.


The Leviation Monies being satisfied, (of which Dollars 31000, his Lordship forced into 
Cancellaria
); and we of 
Smyr∣na
 expecting no more rubs in the way, his Lordship, the 
16th
 Instant, calls a Court, and there declared, That of what Monies had been collected, there would not remain much on the old Accompt; therefore pro∣vision must be made for the future growing Charge, for so much as upon this pretended Imbargo, no Ships would come in haste, and he and his must be maintained, which he would provied for: Hereupon, when we could not do otherwise, Dollars 25000 was promised, half by this Factory, for which his Lordship caused us to enter into Bond, as he did those of 
Smyrna
 for the other half; this being effected, which we should not neither altogether have been so ready to have complied in, but thereby to put a period to all other Demands, and en∣able our selves to proceed in our Business for your Worships better Service.


The 
18th
 present his Lordship calls a∣nother Court; and after arguing of some General Matters, with a seeming sadness, tells us how that he had been wronged by false Information from hence and 
Smyrna,
 (but he was so far from proving it, as that he would not discover so much as whom he suspected) and thereupon the 
Levant
 Company at Home had, by means of the Parliament, procured Sequestration of his Estate and Lands in 
England,
 and endea∣voured to surprize his Person; and there∣fore, according to Religion, Reason, and common Policy, he ought to secure him∣self and his Hostages; and thereupon he departed from us, requiring the Nation speedily to resolve of some present Satis∣faction that might secure his Estate at Home, and person here, otherwise he vowed to God, he would suddenly do it himself, with no little disadvantage to our selves and Principals. These strange, unreasonable, and unexpected Demands, filled us with amazement, not knowing what Answer to give to such a groundless demand; we desired the Secretary Signior 
Dominico
 to know his Lordships more par∣ticular Desires therein, that so we might better understand him, and to put his De∣mands into such a moderate way, as he might receive some Satisfaction. He re∣turned us Answer, that we must resolve to satisfy his aforesaid Demands before we went thence: Whereupon the Gates were shut, and also Guards set upon us, that we should not converse with any, or convey so much as a Paper out of Doors. Thus we are all surprized, made close Priso∣ners, and our Counting-house, Ware-house, and Chambers sealed up, to make sure of our Goods and Estates there also. Conti∣nuing in this sad Condition all Night, and finding no Motion to proceed from his Lordship to declare himself farther, four or five of us was appointed by the genera∣lity, personally to crave his Lordship's particular Desires and Demands of us: Whose Answer was, That the lowest va∣lue he could put upon his Lands the Com∣pany had sequestred, was 25000 pounds 
Sterling;
 and for the loss he should su∣stain by being put out of the Ambassador∣ship, which he saith his Majesty hath granted him for his Life; therefore the Strangers Consulage he rates at Dollars 5000 
per Annum;
 which for the clear Gain of seven Years to come, is Dollars 35000; for which he declared that he would not accept of any Personal Security or Obligation whatsoever, but a present disposition of Dollars 160000 in Mony or Goods, into his own hands must be made. And if to this we would not condescend, he told us, That he at the last Sacra∣ment had vowed to God (as he doth now) to sacrifice his Estate, Himself, Wise and Children, for the execution of this his absolute Intent; and till then, neither our Persons, Estates, Ships here, or at 
Smyrna,
 should be free. We told his Lordship, that finding not any of us had heard of any such Things was (or intended to be) done against him by the Company, it would give us great Satisfaction, to shew

us those Advices he grounded this Pretence upon. To this no Answer was then gi∣ven by himself, but dismissed us, leaving it to our last and speedy Resolution, be∣cause he was resolved to strike home. Im∣mediately after he sent us word by a se∣cond, That he could not let his Honour descend so low, as to shew his Advices to any. This empty Reply, gave us too much reason, not only to conclude this to be a feigned Pretence, but made us sufpect his Intention and Aim was at all the Na∣tion's Estate in the Country; and there∣fore we returned him this reasonable and defensive Answer, as your Worships will particularly perceive by the inclosed Pa∣per: whereunto is adjoined his Reply to that our Answer, as he pretended; tho it appears it was intended before, it being dated a day before our Answer. Whilst thus we continued, it happened that those four of us were fortunately absent from Court that day, who hearing of our Con∣ditions, wherefore, and why we were thus detained, and what an ill Period these Proceedings tended unto, if not timely and prudently prevented; they used their best endeavours to free us and your Livelihoods from the Claws of Ty∣ranny and Covetousness; they applied themselves to Signor 
Illustrissimo Coppes,
 the States of 
Hollands
 Agent: who as he was ever a Friend and Favourer of the Nation, so now he gave us good and great testimo∣ny thereof in this our greatest Need and Extremity: and chiefly by his means with a Sum of Mony; together with the Cla∣mors of the Jews, and many other of the Grand Signior's Subjects against this our present Abuse, and destruction of future Trade: The Vizier (whom they had well and sully possessed with the Truth of all Things) after three days Imprison∣ment, sent a Chiouz for us to his Lord∣ship's House, from whence we were car∣ried before the Vizier, who much up∣braided his Lordship, saying, He never gave him Commands for such Proceedings, notwithstanding his Lordship's avaneous Allegations against his own Nation, by saying, an English Ship at 
Smyrna
 was la∣den with Powder, Ammunition, 
&c.
 and there resided for assistance of the Turks Enemies; and other the like Abuses, and destructive Courses against those here; tending not only to the confiscation of Ships and Estates, but the risgo of en∣slaving our Bodies, if not the loss of all or some of our Lives, had his Hellish Plots taken effect. The next day after our ge∣neral Commitment, arrives five more of our fellow Factors from 
Smyrna,
 there seized upon and made Prisoners; and so by his Lordship's Command, in that nature brought to his House, and put amongst us, notwithstanding the advice from, their Correspondents hence was at 
Smyrna,
 (be∣fore their departure thence) that their part of Leviation Mony was all paid in here; yet their Leviation, with one third more in Monies and Goods, was takne a∣gain from them by his impudently impi∣ous Ministers there, and all the rest of their Goods continued sealed up: So the Intent (as your Worships may plainly perceive) was no other than first to get the Monies here paid, then to seize upon their Per∣sons, and next to take away and secure their Estates; thereby to prevent a just, reasonable, and natural Defence; and now it too plainly appears, (because his Lord∣ship's Imployers had taken course no Mes∣sengers should come unto us); Horsemen are daily dispatched unto us by our Friends at 
Smyrna,
 advising us to the 
20th
 Instant, of the unnatural and devouring Progres∣sions they had there made; which was done by the assistance of the Caddie, whom they had well bribed, beginning to act there at the same time as we were here all imprisoned; so there was no intent of staying for our Answer to his extravagant Demands. They first fell upon Mr. 
Lan∣celot
's House, thence proceed all through∣out the Nation; so that they have not on∣ly taken away all the Goods, Monies, and Effects whatsoever they could find in their Houses, at Home or Abroad, but broke open and ransack'd all our Chambers, Trunks, and Counting-houses, which mounteth to a far greater value than his demands of Dollars 160000; and by large Promises to Informers, endeavour to dis∣cover and take what is owing them abroad by People of the Country; and have so threatned our Friends and Servants to de∣liver our Books, and declare where's more of our Estates, that they are constrained to leave our naked Houses to the open World, and betake themselves to the Ships in Port for Refuge. All this it seems contents them not, but are contriving Provisions, by policy and force of some Rogues of the Country, to unlade what Goods the Na∣tion had put on board the 
Jonas.
 For all which, we have not only the advice of our distressed Friends there, but such in∣fallible Information, as your Worships may perceive by the inclosed authentick Co∣pies of Letters from his Instruments at 
Smyrna
 to his Lordship here; by which you will too plainly perceive his Lordship did, and still doth aim at all the Estate the Nation had in the Country; and for that cause he was so much enraged for the de∣parture of the 
Hercules,
 and 
William
 and 
Thomas,
 whose Goods he esteemed as so much loss to him.


We have been now seven days out of his Lordship's hands, and are endea∣vouring to free that Estate they have al∣ready taken at 
Smyrna,
 as also to defend

our Selves and your Estates in future from him, and free the Ships out of Port, (which no question at last will be proved have been detained by his Lordship to this ill pur∣pose) and if possible, to procure the re∣turn of Dollars, 20 in 30000, his Lord∣ship hath unavoidably forced from us in the Leviation Accompt, upon strange Preten∣ces. All which (by the assistance of our obliged and worthy Friend 
Signior Illustris∣simo Coppes;
 together with the expence of Dollars 30 in 40000, to the Vizier and o∣ther Turkish Ministers) we doubt not but speedily to effect; for without this ho∣nest defensive Remedy, we can expect no∣thing but ruin to all your Estate in the Country, which still he threatneth, and endeavours by all his devilish Policy and Means to effect: But the Vizier, and the two Caddeleskiers, who are our Judges, are so possest with the Truth and Reason of our Cause, as well by the People of the Country, as our Selves, that they have given us full assurance, by Promises, Pro∣testations, and sound Probabilities, that our just Demands shall be accomplished; for which we all faithfully and earnestly endeavour Night and Day, and so do hourly expect a good determination of it: and till there be an Issue or Settlement given to this our confused Condition, (which we hope will not continue for many days) no particular Principal must expect Advice from any Factor here, because no private Man can fitly advise any thing, till the ge∣neral Business be better ordered: And as we proceed therein, we shall by all Ways and Conveyances give your Worships a true and exact Account. We do humbly beseech your Worships to acknowledg the good Offices of the State's Agent to their Ambassador with you, and so fully certify him, that Illustr. Sign. 
Coppes
 appeared no ways against his Lordship as Ambassador, or trenching on the King's Honour, but respectfully and modestly for the safety of your Estates.


To particularize all Passages and Cir∣cumstances in this Business, would prove more troublesom than needful to your Worships, so please to accept of this Re∣lation; for this is the present stat
 of yours and our Condition; which though not so well as we could wish, yet better than we could imagine; for the Hand was up, the Match lighted, and a little more time would have blown up all, We need not put your Worships in mind speedily to send us another Protector, seeing the Ne∣cessity of your Occasions craves it too plain∣ly; and in confidence of your speedy Re∣solution thereof, we shall continue, hoping our Desires will be satisfied, and the Estates in better security, by his speedy arrival here, which God in Mercy grant.


His Lordship's Cause is so bad, that Signor 
Dominico
 your Secretary, Signior 
George,
 and all other Druggermen, have not only declined his Lordship, but apply themselves to us, (and especially the for∣mer). In fine, we conceive his Lordship finds his former bad Proceedings have made him uncapable to return into 
Eng∣land,
 and also uncertain of his Residence here; which, together with the improvi∣dent use he hath made of his Golden Time, that he intended to seize upon all He and his unworthy Instruments could catch hold of; for to this purpose he diverted the 
Gol∣den Fleece
's advantagious Design for 
Venice;
 which at first was approved and caused by his own consent; and occasioned her Fa∣ctor here, to whom she was consigned, to let her him to fraight, that so Himself, Fa∣mily, and undue gotten Estate, may be conveyed (as in supposed) into 
France,
 with whose Ambassador, there hath been often a more than ordinary correspondency of late.


Galata of Constantinople,
 
June 28. 1646.




Before the sealing up of our Letter, we have procured an Imperial Command for the recovering of the Estate into our Hands, taken away at 
Smyrna;
 as also for the attaching the Persons, and bringing those good Agents of his Lordships hither, to answer their Proceedings and Behavi∣our: the obtaining of which Command, we are not a little glad of, being our Obli∣gatory Testimony of the Vizier's being our Friend, and ties him thereby to conti∣nue so, which we hope effectually to find, two days hence, when his Lordship is to appear with us before him; but in case he refuseth (as already he hath done) the Vizier will give Sentence against him.


Your Worships may be pleased to take notice, that his Lordship's chief Counsel∣lor, in these his undue Proceedings, is Mr. 
Henry Hyde,
 of whose good Service in your former Occasions at the 
Morea,
 we need not to give testimony; but can assure your Worships, that since his coming hi∣ther, he hath occasioned great Disturbance among the Nation; and now at last (had the Design before mentioned taken effect) mingt have raised his decayed Fortunes, by the ruin of Yours and our Estates; but, thanks be to God, the Counsel of 
Achitophel
 is truned into Folly. And for your late Treasurer 
John Woolf,
 the satisfying of whose Debts hath so mounted the last Le∣viation, he is so far from acknowledging the Courtesies done in acquitting him from his Creditors, that he is become Assistant (though a weak one) to his Lordship in the Proceeding aforementioned: And ha∣ving deserted 
Galata,
 with Mr. 
Henry

Hyde,
 resides at his Lorship's, laying their Heads together in contriving Mischief a∣gainst those from whom they have had their Maintenance.


In case your Worships should not be in a posture to procure an Ambassador so soon as you may desire, that you would please in the interim, and as soon as may be, to obtain a Letter from his Majesty to the Grand Signior, or Vizier, in appro∣bation and acknowledgment of what is done; and that his Lordship be not nim∣bler than your Worships in getting the like against us, which doubtless he will en∣deavour. We shall not farther inlarge at present, but intend shortly, when all things shall be fully and absolutely setled, to write to your Worships again. So we rest.


At Instant a Copy of his Lordship's Letter, with others directed to him, be∣ing come to hand, we send them herewith; and from 
Smyrna
 are advised that the Per∣sons of 
Hetherington
 and the Druggerman are detained aboard our Ships there; and by this time the Command is with them, which will warrant the bringing them up with their Papers, that are also aboard; by which the Plot will more plainly ap∣pear. To morrow we expect his Lord∣ship's appearance before the Vizier, when we have hopes to reward the Trouble he intended others, 
&c.


Kept until
 
the
6th of
 July, 1646.


Your Worships most obliged and humble Servants,



John Wyld,


John Lancelot,


Nicholas Read,


William Ashley,


Thomas Berkley,


Dixwell Brent,


Nath. Barnardiston,


James Moyer,


James Modyford,


Daniel Edwards,


William Chappel,


Roger Fouke,


Gyles Ball,


John Tye,


John Ball,


William Pearl,


John Pixley,


George Hanger,


Samuel Barnardiston,


John Swift,


William Gough,


Thomas Pigot,


John Abney,


Francis Ashwell,


Robert Frampton,


Gyles Davis,


John Plomer,


James Davison,


William Osburn,


Henry Davy,


Richard Strode,


Philip Farewell,


John Erisey,


Jonathan Dawes,


Ralph Gosnold.




Your Worships most obliged, most humble, and faithful Servant, 
Domenico Timone,
 Secretary.








The Factors General Letter from 
Smyr∣na,
 dated the 4th of 
July, 1646,
 to the 
Levant
 Company.


Right Worshipful Sirs,


IT may please you, our last from hence was by the Ship 
William
 and 
Thomas,
 advising his Lordships Proceedings for ano∣ther Leviation, for discharging your Debts at 
Constantinople,
 being then informed that the whole amounted unto Dollars 118109; and how we were resolved to withstand it, until your Worships further Pleasure should be signified unto us concerning the same, for such Reasons as we then presumed to lay open unto you; and that in the mean time we had presented our Grievances to his Lordship's gracious perusal, the Copy whereof went annexed to our said Letter, to both which you may please to have refe∣rence.


The 
24th
 of 
March
 following, our Con∣sul called a Court, and declared his Lord∣ship's Answer to our said Letter, disliking our Proceedings; and by a new Order pro∣hibited the lading of Goods, and receiving them on Board, and the departure of Ships, until the said Leviation were paid, accord∣ing to his former Order, and Schedule now set down, shewing each Man his propor∣tionable part for his Factory of 
Smyrna,
 amounting in all to Dollars 54950, and for the Factory at 
Constantinople,
 to Dollars 56000, is together Dollars 110950. Where∣upon, we generally desired that his Lord∣ship would be pleased to suspend the exe∣cution of the said Order of Leviation, un∣til such time we should receive your Wor∣ships farther Order about it, without which we our selves were like to pay it out of our own Purses, as in the last Leviation; receiving since particular Orders from some of our Principals, not to pay any Levia∣tions, otherwise it should be for our own Accompts, and not theirs.


The 
24th
 of 
April,
 the Consul called another Court, signifying unto us, that his Lorship did require an account for the departure of the Ship 
William
 and 
Thomas,
 and 
Success,
 contrary to his Lordship's Commands, there being an Officer of the Vizier's come down to apprehend Captain 
Tho. Porter,
 and to carry him up to 
Con∣stantinople,
 (which Ships departed at their own pleasures, being not in our powers to stay them.) And that concerning the Le∣viation it was inevitable, and his Lordship was resolved upon it, and therefore would force us unto it, and expect repair of Ho∣nour from the Delinquents. Whereupon fear∣ing his Lordship's farther displeasure, which might beget some greater Inconveniences amongst us, we presumed to yield unto his

Lordship's Commands, by way of a sub∣missive orderly complyance, and conform our selves unto the paiment of our parts of the said Leviation, in proportion to the Estates were received on the last general Ships, 
Hercules, Sampson,
 and 
Smyrna-Merchant,
 according to our particular As∣sessments; as appeareth by our general Letter presented to his Lordship, and entred in Cancellaria, grounded upon the re∣sult of this days Court; desiring his Lord∣ship would be pleased to allow us four Months time for paiment, for such Rea∣sons as we have alledged in the same.


The 
6th
 of 
May,
 the Consul told us he had received other Letters from his Lord∣ship, prohibiting not only the Lading of Goods, and the Departure of any Ships, until the Leviation be setled; but also therein more fully signifies and declares, That until the Grand Signior's Fleet be gone forth, he cannot permit any Ship, either at 
Constantinople,
 or here, to lade or be dispatched; and that accordingly his Lordship is so required of this State. And in like manner hath ordered and com∣manded those whom it concerns, both a∣bove, and in this Port, to observe the same. And moreover farther witnessing, which accordingly (as he said) he was bound to acquaint us, how that the Em∣bargo at 
Constantinople,
 and here, was se∣conded; and his Lordship, to avoid far∣ther Dangers and Inconveniences to the Publick, could not refuse his Consent there∣unto.


The 
10th
 of 
May
 arrived here Mr. 
John Hetherington,
 a Servant to his Lorship, and Signow 
Lorenzo Zuma
 a Greek, one of his Lordship's Druggermen, from 
Constan∣tinople;
 who the next Morning moved our Consul to call a Court for the Nation; where being assembled, the Consul told the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo,
 That their Desires were performed, and there∣fore required them to deliver what they had in Commission from his Lordship: who produced an Order of the 
27th
 of 
April,
 directed to the Consul and Us, for paiment of the said Leviation forthwith, or else to proceed according to his farther Order, Warrant, and Instructions in such behalf; and we to be answerable to such Loss, Damage, and Inconveniencies as may ensue thereby. To which we answered, That the Leviation was subscribed unto, and therefore desired the said 
Hehterington
 and 
Lorenzo
 to stay four or five days, until his Lordshio should return Answer to our Letter of the 
24th
 of 
April.
 The said 
Lorenzo
 told us, He would retire and per∣use hsi Lordship's Commission, and in two hours return, to have a more full and satisfactory Answer from us: which being expired, he declared, That his Lordship's Commission required forthwith ready Mony or Goods, (being hsi Instruction, from which he could not vary). Where∣upon Mr. 
John Lancelot
 first answered, (as he was a Merchant) He could not depo∣sit his Cloth, for his Credit's sake, but would give his Bills for his and Mr. 
Dix∣well Breat
's proportionable part of the Le∣viation, payable at 
Constantinople per
 Mr. 
Thomas Pigot,
 at five days sight, into his Lordship's 
Cancellaria;
 which was refused, unless they would deposit the value in Cloth, and one third part more towards Charges, in the possession of him the said 
Lorenzo;
 which they said again, for their Credits sake (as they were Merchants) could not consent unto; so referred them∣selves unto the said 
Lorenzo
's farther pro∣ceedings, if these Proffers would not be accepted of, being not possible for them at present to procure Monies at Interest, or otherwise.


The like Conditions we all in general proffered for our proportionable parts, but were refused by the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo.
 Whereupon the Consul told them, they had all our Assents for pai∣ment of the Leviation; and if that, with such Reasons and Proffers as propound∣ed, might not be satisfactory, the Consus, and we in general, referred our selves to the said 
Lorenzo
's farther Proceedings.


After this, the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo
 presently repaired to the Cad∣dies, accompanied with a prime Chiouz of the Vizier's, and declared their farther Commissions: After publication whereof, the Caddie sent for the Consul, and all our Nation, where the Capitulations were first taken away by Warrant, and the Con∣sul in a most barbarous manner was laid hold on, with 
Dixwell Breat, Daniel Ed∣wards, John Pixley, Samuel Barnardistion, George Hanger,
 and 
James Moyer,
 and com∣mitted Prisoners into Custody of the said Chiouz and Officers, and transported to a House (taken by them on purpose) where they were violently, and in a for∣midable manner, thrust into a dark Cham∣ber, and at length were forced to present Dollars 300, to have a Window set open to give them Light and Air; the Consul telling the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo,
 before he was surprised, in the presence of the Caddies, That neither he, or the Na∣tion, had any ways transgressed the Grand Signior's, or his Lordship's Commands, and that he did not fear what they could do unto him, no not so much as to die, in performance of his Faith and Trust to the 
Levant
 Company, whom he had truly served; as likewise for his Love and Affe∣ction he bore to the Nation here under his Charge, whom he would never betray, hoping shortly to see his own Country a∣gain, And in two hours after, the said 
Hetherington, Lorenzo,
 and Chiouz, Caddie,

and Neipe, sealed up all the Counting∣houses, Magazines, and some Chambers; and in two days after, transported the Pri∣soners over-land up to 
Constantinople,
 where they were delivered to his Lord∣ship's Power and safe Custody; we in the mean time being left like so many Sheep without a Shepherd, and ignorant where to seek protection.


The next day after departure of these Prisoners, the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lo∣renzo
 sealed up our Cloth in our own Warehouses, for what concerned our pro∣portionable part of the Leviation, at the rate of Dollars 45 
per
 Cloth, and one third part more towards Charges.


The 
18th
 day of 
May,
 at the instance of the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo,
 the remainder of us left here behind met to∣gether, where the said 
Hetherington
 told us we had not brought in our Bills of Ex∣change for 
Constantinople,
 for the parts of our Leviation, and one third part more; unto which we answered, We had com∣plyed with his Lordship's Commands, in all willing and obedient manner, accord∣ing to our present Possibilities, until we should be able to satisfy the same with our ready Monies here, or by our Bills payable in 
Constantinople,
 at five days sight, where∣in we promised to use our utmost Endea∣vours, hoping to redeem our Cloth again, which we had deposited, and they sealed up for our proportionable Parts of the Leviation.


In few days after arrived here one of the principallest Chiouzes of the Grand Signior, with new Commands sent down by his Lordship; by virtue whereof the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo
 seized upon the Persons of 
John Ball, Henry Davey, Phillip Farwell, Nathaniel Barnardiston,
 and 
John Ingoldsby,
 who were committed Prisoners to the said Chiouz, who used them with some humanity, and sent up the next day to 
Constantinople,
 to be deli∣vered unto his Lordship's Power; after whose departure (all Law being set aside) the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo
 by this Command came down, opened all our Warehouses, and by Violence carried all our Goods away into several Canes of the Truks; as well what they had sealed up, for the Leviation, as all other Goods of what nature soever they could find, unless it were such as was sealed up, and be∣longed to Turks, and other of the Grand Signior's Subjects; and left many of us so bare, that we had not wherewithal to af∣ford us a piece of Bread to keep Life and Soul together, only bare Promises. The said Chiouz remaining behind, put us daily into great Fears that we should all be sent up, or clapt up here in Prison, which caused many of us to repair on board the Ship for Succour, here being in Harbour the Ships 
Rainbow, Jonas, Hope∣well,
 and 
Triangle.


In all which time of this Distraction and Sufferings, our Miseries have been much condoled by the chief Turks and Inhabitants of this Place, who seem to sympathize with us in our sad Conditions; and had not the Commands been so powerful, the whole Town would have risen up in our Defence and Protection, who have privately advised of these A∣buses; which as they themselves confess, are like to ruin, not only this Scale, but that of 
Aleppo
 and 
Constantinople
 also, to the Dishonour of the Grand Signior, and ruin of many of his Subjects; and of a profitable and acceptable Friend (our Na∣tion) to become a potent Enemy against them.


The 
28th
 of 
June
 came Letters from 
Constantinople,
 advising the Vizier's Or∣der for rescuing both Factories from his Lordship's Imprisonment, and particular Advice to some of us here left, for appre∣heading the Persons of the said 
Hehtering∣ton
 and 
Lorenzo,
 and to keep them in safe Custodies on board our Ships, fearing (we having no Order as yet to receive our E∣states out of their Possessions) they might convey our said Estates away, or sell them for half their Worth, and so make their private escapes out of Town, ex∣pecting daily a Chiouz to carry up their Persons to 
Constantinople,
 and to free our Goods, hoping all will go well again for us. Hereupon the very same day, the said 
Hetherington
 and 
Lorenzo,
 (without any noise or rumour) were by the Mari∣ners conveyed on board several Ships from the said 
Hetherington
's Lodging, 
viz. He∣therington
 on board the 
Triangle, William Hodges
 Commander; and 
Lorenzo
 on board the 
Hopewell, Nicholas Terrick
 Com∣mander; where now they remain, to the contentment of the Inhabitants here, who daily expect their sending up to the Port, there to answer to such Crimes and Inso∣lencies as shall be objected and proved a∣gainst them.


Thus we have presumed plainly and distinctly (accordingly as we conceive it becomes us) though briefly, to present un∣to your Worships perusal, the whole Pro∣cess of his Lordship's Proceedings against us here in 
Smyrna,
 (since our last) ac∣cording to our experience of the Passa∣ges; by which your Worships may easily conjecture his Lordship's farther Inten∣tions. And for what hath occurred at 
Constantinople,
 your Worships will receive by this Conveyance, advise to both which we pray you to be referred; which being taken into your deliberate Considerations, may afford such future Means of Prote∣ction, and incouragement to enter into a way of setling this Turky Trade in such a

posture, that we hope these Losses may be repaired with advantage.


And so we humbly take our leaves, having given your Worships testimony of our Concordance, in the discharge of our Obligations and Duties; and in conformi∣
y we subscribe, evermore resting,


Smyrna,
 
July 4. 1646.


Your Worships humble and obliged Servants,



Robert Keble,


Thomas Lancelot,


John Wild
 junior,


Lawrence Chambers,


Will. Oxwieck,


Arnold White,


Daniel Bassano,


William Whetcombe,


Robert Dawes,


Samuel Browning.






But not to insist long on a Subject so ungrate∣ful, as the Difference was between the Ambassa∣dor and his Merchants; the Conclusion, and Is∣sue of all was this. After Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 had spent at the least seventy thousand pieces of Eight of good ready Mony, and the Turky Company two hundred thousand; the Turks finding the Ambassador's Exchequer to be almost exhausted, for that Presents and Purses of Mony came not in so plentifully as at first; and on the contrary, feeling the Spring of the Levant Com∣panies Treasury still to run fresh and quick, their Inclinations towards the Ambassador grew more cold and faint, his Agents were not admit∣ted so readily to Audience as formerly, nor his Petitions and Addresses received with that can∣dor, as when Mony and Interest made their en∣trance easy; in the mean time, the Merchants were heard with great patience, their Cause and Complaints esteemed reasonable; and in short, Sir 
Sackvile Crow
 was dismissed from 
Constantino∣ple,
 in a manner not usual for Ambassadors, nor agreeable to that Quality and Character: and was succeeded by Sir 
Thomas Bendysh,
 who was Authorized and constituted in that Embassy, by Commission from his Majesty King 
Charles
 the First of ever blessed and glorious Memory.


Gio Capello
 being constituted General in the place of 
Molino,
 as we mentioned at end of the preceding Year, departed from 
Venice
 ear∣ly in the Spring, having under his Command fifty Gallies, six Galleasses, and forty Ships of War, and four Fire-ships, besides other Ves∣sels, which are necessary Attendants on so great an Armata; which grand Preparations raised the Minds of the Christian World to ex∣pect the abatement of the Ottoman Pride, and other Effects equal to the magnificent Ostenta∣tion, and triumphing Glory of this mighty Power: But God, who gives not always Success to the Powerful, nor the Battel to the Strong, was not, it seems, so well satisfied for the Sins of Christendom, as to judge it worthy to be delivered from the Scourages of its Grand Op∣pressor.


Whilst 
Capello
 remained with the best part of the Fleet at 
Candia, Tomaso Morosini,
 Admiral of the Ships, shewed himself in a Bravado with twenty two Sail before the Castles of the 
Helle∣spont,
 called the 
Dardanelli,
 defying the whole Turkish Power, with Colours flying, and Drums beating: nor did they dare to answer the bold Challenge, until in a dead Calm, some few light Gallies presented themselves in a seeming Bat∣tel, with whom, for want of Wind, the Ships were on the disadvantage, and rather received Prejudice than gave it; so that both sides were contented with the Action.


Morosini
 withdrew from that Station, and re∣turned to his General at 
Candia;
 to whom having joined his Forces, he earnestly perswad
d him, together with the Proveditor 
Grimani,
 to engage the Turkish Fleet, which they assured him was much inferior to them, both in num∣ber of Vessels, and in Skill and Courage of the Combatants; and that the Success of this Year consisted in the cutting off the Enemies Suc∣cours, which was their sole Relife and Depen∣dance, without which they could not longer maintain the Ground they possessed, but must deliver up that and themselves to their pleasure. But the cautious General would not assent to this Resolution, judging it over-rash and preci∣pitate; for that the Fortune of 
Candia,
 and o∣ther Isles of the 
Archipelago,
 was not to be ha∣zarded on the Success of one Battel.


During which Dispute, and irresolution of Affairs, the Turkesh Fleet, consisting of three hundred Sail, arrived at 
Canea,
 where they landed forty thousand fighting Men, which tur∣ned the Scale of the War, and rendred the Turks so powerful, as not ever more to be ex∣pelled, or their Off-spring extirpated from the Confines of that Island. By this time the Pope's and 
Malta
 Gallies were come to their Assistance, and united with the Venetians; so that 
Capello
 setting sail from the Port of 
Suda,
 resolved to en∣gage the Enemy at St. 
Theodoro;
 which was ef∣fected accordingly, though with little Success, for the Turks had fortified themselves, and se∣cured their Gallies with that advantage, that they could not be assaulted without great hazard of the Christians; and when they endeavoured to burn them, their four Fire-ships took fire too soon, and proved of more fear and astonishment to the Truks (to whom this Invention was as yet unknown) than of real dammage. After this the Venetians returned again to 
Suda,
 where having intelligence that thirty Turkish Gallies, with Men and Provision (which they had col∣lected in several parts of the 
Archipelago
) were on their Voyage to 
Canea, Capello
 preparing to intercept them with a Force of Galleasses and Gallies, and leaving 
Grimani
 and 
Morosini
 to com∣mand the main Body of the Fleet, he in person bent his Course towards 
Cerigo.


In the mean time 
Mustapha
 Pasha departed from 
Canea,
 in order to his return to 
Constanti∣nople,
 with fifty seven light Gallies, two Ships, two Galleasses, and many Saiks; but meeting in his Passage with a hard storm of Northerly Winds, he lost seven of his Gallies, and several other Vessels, so that he resolved to divide his Fleet, and send part of them to 
Scio,
 and him∣self with the other part to make for 
Negropont.
 This Fleet was followed by some other Vessels under the Command of 
Mahomet Celebee,
 Bro∣ther of the Pasha of 
Algier,
 who being as far in his way as the narrow Streights of 
Andra,
 he was there stopped by the Fury of the Northern Winds, (which are the Master-Winds of those Seas) and by the impetuous rage thereof, was carried to the Island of 
Zia;
 where having gi∣ven Licence to the greatest part of his Souldiery to Land, they carelesly strayed abroad, and without suspicion of Surprize, merrily passed their time in eating and drinking. In the inte∣rim, advice hereof being carried to 
Tomaso Moro∣sini,


then with some Ships in the Port of 
Mi∣lo,
 he immediately, without loss of time, ap∣plied himself to assault the Turks; and being followed by the Proveditor 
Grimani,
 he took two of their Ships, whilst 
Mehmet Celebee,
 with about two hundred of his Men, betook them∣selves to the weak shelter of an old demolished Fort, and afterwards surrendred themselves to the discretion of the Conqueror.


Morosini
 and 
Grimani,
 encouraged with this Success, resolved to pursue the Enemies Fleet; in order unto which, 
Morosini
 first putting out to Sea, was instantly carried away by a fierce gale of Wind towards 
Ambro,
 and separated from the rest of his Fleet, and thence again was tossed by the impetuosity of the Storms unto 
Rafti;
 of which 
Mustapha
 Pasha having Intelli∣gence, made haste to attack this single Vessel, with forty Gallies; giving order to the Bey of 
Rhodes,
 to lay him aboard with fifteen Gallies, the strongest and best armed of all their Squadron: 
Morosini
 nothing dismayed, bearing the same constancy of Mind in the midst of his Enemies, as at a distance, boldly shewed himself on the Quarter Deck, encouraging his Men with his words, and by his Example, to Actions wor∣thy their Religion, Faith, and Country for which they contended. The Turks continued for some time to batter the Ship at a distance with their Cannon, but with little dammage to the Chri∣stians; who returned their Shot to better ad∣vantage. Hereby the Turks perceiving that Blows given so far off did little Execution, re∣solved to Board the Vessel, and subdue Her by force of Arms, and being come to the side of the Ship, the Souldiers were fearful to enter, suspecting some trains of Powder to blow them up, until 
Emurat,
 one of the Captains, struck off the Head of one or two of his own Men, whom he perceived backward in the Assault, which affrighted the rest into the greater danger, and forced them to enter the Ship, who were soon followed by the Gallies of the Bey of 
Rhodes,
 of 
Milo,
 of 
Mehmet
 Bey, and others; so that now two hundred of the Enemy were Com∣bating with Swords and Half Pikes upon the Deck;
 in which storm, 
Morosini
 fighting amongst the thickest, was shot through the Head with a Musket Bullet, and so gloriously finished his Days in the Service and Defence of his Coun∣try; gaining to himself a Laurel, and an Im∣mortal Name of Glory and Renown.


The Christian Souldiers little regarding all this time the fall of their General, stoutly maintained their Fight, in which they received encouragement from the prospect they had of two Galleasses making haste to their Succour; at whose nearer approach, the Turks desisted from their farther Attempt; being unwilling to purchase a Victory at the dear rate it would cost them.


The Body of 
Morosini
 was transported to 
Venice,
 and his Obsepuies Celebrated in a man∣ner more Triumphant than Funebrous; the Pro∣veditor 
Grimani
 was likewise declared Captain General in the place of 
Capello;
 who having, as it were, Besieged the Castles at the Mouth of the 
Dardanelli,
 taken several places in the 
Ar∣chipelago,
 and put the Enemies Fleet often unto flight, he thereby, and by other Acts of Va∣lour, rendred him justly renowned through all Chrstendom.


These were the chief and most memorable actions by Sea, performed this Year; Those by Land were acted chiefly in 
Dalmatia,
 where the Turks poured in their Forces on the Venetian Dominions, but were bravely repulsed by 
Leo∣nardo Foscolo,
 who took 
Ali
 Bey Prisoner, the Commander in Chief of the Sangiac of 
Licca,
 and slew his Son; besides which, he took 
Sac∣covar, Polissano, Islan,
 and other Fortresses and Castles, full of Arms and Ammunition, which were the Magazines of the Country; he also recovered 
Novegrade
 out of the hands of the Turks, which was afterwards demolished by Order from the Senate; which Victories were followed with other Successes; nothing being able to oppose the Valiant and Prosperous Arms of 
Foscolo;
 for besides the taking and sacking of several other Forts and Castles in 
Dalmatia, Obraozzo, Carino, Ottissian, Velino, Nadino, Ʋ∣rana, Tino,
 and 
Salona,
 in the Confines of 
Croa∣tia,
 and 
Bosna,
 became a Prey to the Venetian Arms.


But to this successful Progress of the War, a stop was given for some time by the sickness of 
Foscolo;
 in which interim, the new Pasha of 
Bosna,
 called 
Mahomet Techli,
 a Circassian born, a Person both Generous and Valiant, with an Army of forty thousand Men, besieged the strong Fortress of 
Sebenico;
 but was bravely repulsed by the Valour of the Inhabitants, the very Women exceeding the imbecillity of their Sex; and Children and old Men, with the weak∣ness of their Age, strengthened themselves with Resolution against their Enemies, and so valiantly behaved themselves in defence of their City, that the Turk was forced to raise his Siege, having gained nothing but the loss and slaughter of many of his People, and the best of his Souldiery; whereby he gained an assu∣rance of the Invincible Strength of that place, and the Valour of the Inhabitants.


Foscolo
 in like manner recovering his Health, continued the un-interrupted course of his Victo∣ries, and thereunto added the taking of 
Scar∣dona;
 so that in 
Dalmatia
 the Venetian Affairs ran so prosperously, that nothing could be de∣sired to render them more happy and glorious. For the Turks not only were expelled from the Confines of 
Dalmatia,
 but likewise that Pro∣vince became more quiet and secure than ever it had been in the Times of Peace.


But the joy of these Successes was very much allayed by the unhappy Fate of a great part of the Venetian Fleet, at the Island of 
Psara;
 which being lanched from 
Candia
 with inten∣tion to assault the Turks within the 
Dardanelli,
 unfortunately were driven by contrary Winds to that unsecure shore; where contending with a most furious Storm, a great part of the Fleet was cast away, and the General 
Grimani
 him∣self drowned. About which time, the Turks, for the greater Terror of the Christians, laid close Siege to the City of 
Candia,
 and made many and various Attempts thereupon, carry∣ing on their Assaults with the height of bra∣very and Resolution, the Particulars of which require a distinct History; but by the invincible Fortitude and Courage of the Christians, they were repulsed with that slaughter, and with the loss of so many Men, by Sallies and other Stra∣tagems of War, that the Turks were at length constrained to raise their Siege with dishonour and confusion; during which time many of the Nobility and Persons of Quality lost their Lives; amongst which, the principal were, 
Vicenzo della Marra,
 Governour General of the Arms of 
Candia,
 and Count 
Remorantino,
 natural Son of the Duke of 
Loraine,
 Comman∣der in Chief of the Forces that came from be∣yond the 
Alpes.




General 
Foscolo
 encouraged by the many glo∣rioes Enterprises that he had obtained, resol∣ved to consummate all by taking the strong and famous Fortress of 
Clissa,
 scituate in the Con∣sines of 
Dalmatia,
 and Borders of 
Bosna,
 on the top of a sharp and craggy Mountain, invironed with Rocks and unaccessible Passages; the diffi∣culty of the attempt rather inflamed than abated the Courage of 
Foscolo,
 so that he Valiantly Be∣sieged and Assaulted that Place; during which time, the Priest 
D. Stephano Sorich.
 Captain of the Morlachs, intercepted the Succours which were sent thither, and 
Georgio
 the Proveditor, overthrew 
Teccbeli
 Pasha in a Field Battel; so that the Inhabitants desparing of Relief, surren∣dered up themselves to the mercy of the Ve∣netians; and thus 
Clissa
 being taken, the Se∣nate Commanded that it should be more regular∣ly Fortified.


And here the Christian Arms met some inter∣ruption. For the Morlachs desirous to cast off the Turkish Yoke, and return to the protection of the Venetians, designed to surprize 
Scutari;
 and at the same time the Arch-bishop of 
Duraz∣zo,
 with seven thousand Albanians, was to seize upon 
Croia,
 and 
Alessio;
 but the Design being discovered by the traiterous practices of some false Brethren, before Matters were ma∣turely grown, or the time of Execution, it had certainly cost the Life of all the Morlachs, and seven hundred Venetian Souldiers joined with them, had not the increase of the Waters hin∣dered the speedy March of the Turks, who re∣solved to cut them all off without mercy, who re∣gard to any; so that having time to disperse themselves, and take refuge in the Mountains, the most of them preserved their Lives from the Cruelty of their Enemies; only some certain Ecclesiastical Persons falling into their Hands, they imputed unto them the cause of the Rebel∣lion, and in a barbarous manner impaled them on Stakes.


The Turks enraged for the loss of 
Clissa,
 dispatched 
Dervis
 Pasha into the parts of 
Bosna,
 with a potent Army, threatning to Assault 
Spa∣latro;
 whom to divert, 
Foscolo,
 together with Priest 
Sorich,
 Captain of the Morlachs, entered into the Enemies Country; spoiling, burning, and destroying wheresoever they came. The Morlachs more greedy of Prey than ambitious of Glory, divided themselves into small Parties to rob and pillage; in which interim they were assaulted by the Turks, but being scattered, were so far from making a stout resistance, that they committed themselves to a shameful flight, in which great numbers of them were miserably Butchered; nor could the valour of 
Sorich,
 nor of the Governour 
Possidaria,
 reduce them by their Examples into any Order: whilst to∣gether with some few valiant Dalmatians, and Morlach Captains, they endured the shock of all the Enemies Fury; in which Skirmish the Turks lost seven Agas, and about seventy Soul∣diers: On the Christians side were killed four hundred, some few Slaves, and about seventy Ensigns taken; amongst the rest the good Priest 
Sorich
 scorning to turn his back, had the mis∣fortune to fall into the Enemies hands, whom they flead alive, and afterwards impaled; and though they subdued his Body, yet he was still master of his mind; bearing the same constan∣cy in his Torments, as he had shewed Magnani∣mity and Courage in the Face of his Enemy.


Whilst these Martial Affairs were transacting, with the Blood and Life of many thousands on both sides, Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 like a stout Souldier of 
Venus,
 waged another War in the Elysiums of 
Cupid;
 and casting aside all thoughts of 
Candia,
 remitted the sole care and management thereof to the Vizier and Pashas of the Divan; following a Life so lascivious and sensual, as can neither be imagined with a chast Fancy, or described by a modest Pen.


A principal Instrument of his Delights, and Engine to compass his Amorous Designs, was a certain cast Wench of his, which he named 
She∣chir Para,
 which signifies a little piece of Sugar; for it seems she was so complaisant and dulcid in her Humour and discourse, as merited that apt Name to express the sweetness of her Con∣versation; this Woman having the conve∣nience to visit all the Baths in Town, took notice of every Woman which she saw of more than ordinary Features and Proportion, and having enquired her Condition and Dwelling, presently reported the same with all advantage to her Sul∣tan, who having heard the Beauty described, be came passionately Enamoured, and could find no repose in his Fancy, until his Instruments, either by fair words or violence, had seduced her, or forced her to his Bed. But growing now ex∣travagant and over-wanton in his Amours, he fell in love with the Sultana, or Widow of his Brother Sultan 
Morat:
 To win her Affections he had recourse to his Dear 
Shechir Para;
 who used all her Arts in this Service: but her pretty wheedling Terms could prevail nothing on this Lady, who answered her in short, That at the Death of her Lord Sultan 
Morat,
 she had resol∣ved upon a perpetual Widowhood, for that the memory of him was still so lively in her, that she could not entertain the thoughts of admit∣ting any new Embraces. This repugnancy and opposition inflamed the heat of 
Ibrahim
 like a Feaver, so that he resolved to assault her himself one day by force, and took his time just as she came out of the Bath; but she being a bold Wo∣man, and disdaining the wandring loves of 
Ib∣rahim,
 laid her hand upon her Dagger, (which Sultana's and great Ladies usually wear) threat∣ning to wound him in her own defence; the noise and brawling hereof being over-heard by the Queen-Mother, called her from her Retire∣ments, and concerned her in the Quarrel; who whilst she reproved her Son, for the rape he in∣tended on his Brother's Wife, gave opportunity to the Sultana to escape; and so delivered her out of the hands of this Satyr. But 
Ibrahim
 mad with love, and fuming with disdain to be checked and opposed by his Mother, Command∣ed her immediately to the old Seraglio, where he confined her to several days Imprisonment, during which time he understood in what man∣ner she had treated his large-siz'd Armenian, of whom we have already spoken; whereof the Queen-Mother being conscious, submitted her self with all humility to her Son, begging his Favour and Pardon; and so well acted her part by those who carried her Addresses, that she over came quickly his easy Nature, and was again restored to his Grace, and her Lodgings in the new Seraglio.


In the mean time 
Shecher Para
 travelling over all the Baths in Town, to discover new delights for her Master, at length had the fortune to cast her Eyes on a Daughter of the Mufti, a Maid of Incomparable Beauty and Features of Counte∣nance, and proportion of Body, which she re∣ported to 
Ibrahim
 so sensibly, as if she her self had been in love; and after she had praised every Part and Member of her, she concluded in sum, that she was the most Excellent and admirable

Piece that ever Nature framed. The Sultan had no sooner heard the Story, but according to his usual Custom, fell most desperatly in love, and had immediately, without farther consideration or counsel, dispatched his Emissaries; or with∣out other Preamble, Ceremony, or Courtship, to have fetched her to him; had not the sense of the late Rebuff he had received from his Bro∣ther's Wise, made some inpression of fear in him; and the apprehension he had of the Power of the Mufti, created in him a certain Caution and Respect in the treatment of his Daughter: wherefore he rather resolved to send for the Mufti, with whom he treated of honourable Terms concerning Marriage; promising to take her into his Bosom, and prefer her in Honour equal to any other of his Sultana's.


The old Man who was tender of, and doated on his Daughter, knowing well the wandring humour of the Sultan in his Amours, intended rather to marry her to some great Personage, with whom she might be more happy, than in being a Soltana: for he considered, that 
Ibra∣him
 having already other Sons, her Issue would either be Sacrificed for security of their Bro∣thers, or else spend their days in a Prison, and become Grey-headed, whilst they breath in a 
medium
 between Life and Death, and are sad Recluses in the Grave of their unhappiness. These considerations were well imprinted in the mind of the Mufti: but because he durst not deny his proposal, he dealt with him as Inferi∣ours usually do with their Lords and Superious; that is, he returned him thanks, expressing infi∣nite Obligations, that he would vouchsafe to cast his Princely Eyes on the unworthiness of his Family: however he advised him, that accor∣ding to the Canons of their Law, of which he was the Expositor, and obliged to be a severe and precise Observer; it was great Impiety in a Father to impose on the Affections of his Child; so that though he could heartily wish that his Daughter would embrace this Honour, to which he would exhort her with all the ear∣nest Perswasions of a Father; yet if she proved refractory thereunto, it would not be becoming his Power to force her; and therefore hoped his Majesty would believe, that in proceeding thus far, he had performed that Duty which be∣came him, both as a Father, and a Loyal Sub∣ject.


Ibahim
 supposing that by this Concession he had gained his Design, thanked and imbraced the old Man, whom dismissing with plenary satis∣faction, he remained now with an impatient ex∣pectation, and hopes of enjoyment. Next Morn∣ing the Mufti returned early to the Grand Sig∣nior, and having first sufficiently instructed his Daughter to refuse the Sultan's Proffers, told him plainly, that he had used all his paternal Au∣thority and interest with his Daughter, that he might induce her to accept this mighty Fortune, which cast it self upon her; but that it found not that ready acceptance with her as he expect∣ed; what could be the reason he knew not how to conjecture, since Women are commonly ir∣regular, and unreasonble in their Affections.


Ibrahim
 being in this manner disappointed, and more angry to encounter any boundary or re∣straint to the imperious violence of his Lusts, than opposition against the puissance of his Arms; dismist the Mufti with some neglect and disdain, whom he resolved to treat with Rigour, and his Daughter with Courtship. In order to the first, he banished him the Count, and forbad him his presence in any other place; grew sullen and unsatisfied at all his administra∣tions of Justice, intending thereby to induce him to a resignation of his Office, there being nothing more irksome to an ingenuous Spirit, than to serve and not to please. On the other side he dealt with the young Lady in a different manner, by the crafty and flattering insinuations of his trusty 
Shechir Para,
 who so forcibly man∣naged her Tongue full of curious Words, mix∣ed with Threats, representing the Storms and Fury of the Sultan's Rage; and again, the Glo∣ry, Splendour, and Happiness of the Seraglio; where she should Reign as Empress and Sove∣raign of the World: all which she expressed with that passion, and lascivious enticement, as would have shaken a firmer Constancy, than the Vertue of a Turkish Maid: but she being well admonished by her Father, remained obstinate in her Denial: but to quiet the importunity of this Seducer, she begged her not to sollicite her Father in this Request, but rather that she would intercede in her behalf with the Sultan spplica∣ting him with all humility to pardon her Childish refusal, and to leave her unto her unto her own Liberty and Choice, and a single Life: to ob∣tain which favour from her, she produced a Dia∣mond of considerable value, desiring her to ac∣cept of that from her, and to become her Friend, her Assistant, and Protectress. 
Shechir Para
 be∣ing overcome by her Maiden Modesty, could no longer resist such forcible Entreaties; and having her Eyes obscured with the lustre of the Jewel, promised to change her Note, and ex∣cuse her refual with the advantagious and compassionate Terms possible; and so taking her leave with a courteous farewel, repaired to the Sultan, to give an account of her Negotia∣tions.


Ibrahim,
 having with more doubtful Fear at∣tended the Issue of this last Conference, than he did the Success of his War with 
Venice;
 re∣ceived his 
Shecher Para
 with exceeding joy, who being come in, began to recount all the Particu∣lars that had passed: but the sum of all was, that this silly Maid was sufficiently sensible of the honour of being a Soltana, of being Cour∣ted by his Majesty, of the Joys, Delights, and Glory of the Seraglio; but that when she re∣flected, how that she was to bring forth Chil∣dren to die by untimely Deaths, and to end their Days by Poison, or the Bow-string, or at least to live miserable Lives separated from Man∣kind, and immured within Walls, and Intombed whilst they breathed; she could not but trem∣ble with some horrour, and judg, that all the blandishments of Worldly Fortune were but a transient Paradise; which could not possi∣bly recompence, or out-weigh the sense and tenderness she conceived for the misery of her unfortunate Off-spring. Howsoever she so cou∣ched her Discourse, that she gave 
Ibrahim
 some hopes to overcome at length; by which she ap∣peased a little his Fury and Despair, and ex∣tracted some Jewels and Gifts in reward of her past Labour, and encouragement for her future Service. In this manner 
Ibrahim
 had patience a∣while, expecting something farther from the in∣dustry of 
Shecher Para;
 but finding no effect of all his expectations and gentleness, at length re∣solved to break through all Considerations of Respect, either to the Father as the Mouth and Oracle of the Law, or to the simple and foolish innocence of the Maid; and therefore ordered the Great Vizier to cause a Watch to be set on the Girl, either going in, or coming out of the Bath, and without farther Ceremony to bring

her unto him. This Order being executed ac∣cordingly, and the Maid hurried to the Serag∣lio; 
Ibrahim
 possessed and enjoyed her for some days, but with those Tears, Reluctancy, and Sullenness, as tood off from the edg and appe∣tite of Enjoyment; so that he returned her back again with scorn and contempt unto her Father; who at first dissembled the injury with the same Countenance as he did before, when he was interdicted the Sultan's Presence; sup∣pressing his revenge like a concealed Fire, which bursts out afterwards with more violent Flames. But though the sense of Obedience and Duty to∣wards his Prince allayed much of the choler he conceived against him for the Rape of his Daugh∣ter, yet he knew not how to pardon the Great Vi∣zier, whom he termed no other than a Ruffian or Pandor; the Minister of his Master's Lusts, and not of his Laws, and of Justice.


Thus full of indignation he applyed himself, and made his complaint unto one 
Mahomet
 Pasha, a principal Member of the Divan; one of great Wisdom and Practice in the Conduct of Affairs, and one with whom he had a particular Friend∣ship and Intimacy. Nor less interest had he with Janisar-Aga, or General of the Janizaries; to both whom, with tears in his Eyes, and with such words as the sense of his injuries suggested, he railed at the Vizier, and aggravated the Ra∣vishment of his Daughter with all the circum∣stances of Villany and Violence.


These two Friends heard the Story with a sensible remorse, and immediately concluded, That for the Honour and Security of the Em∣pire, it was necessary to depose Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 and for the same Reason to cut off the first Vi∣zier; agreeing amongst themselves that 
Maho∣met
 Pasha should receive the Seal and the Office. To effect which, they deemed it necessary to draw the Qneen-Mother into the Conspiracy, being a Woman of great Authority, and having, as it were, the Reins of Government in her Hands, by reason of the weak Judgment of her Son. But because it was difficult to perswade the tenderness of a Mother to the ruin of her Son, the wise Mufti resolved first to sound her Inclinations and disposition towards this Design: and being well informed of her fierce Circassian Nature, and the Jealousy and Anger she con∣ceived against 
Shechir Para,
 obtained Licence to be heard by her, as if he would beg her Inter∣cession with her Son in his behalf; and being admitted to discourse with her, he thereby plain∣ly discovered her most inveterate hatred and displeasure against her Son; not only for this, but for many other Actions of like nature.


This discovery which the Queen had made, gave him the boldnesd to propose the confine∣ment again of 
Ibrahim
 to his old Prison; not that he should be absolutely laid aside and depo∣sed, but only corrected awhile, and being put in remembrance of his past Condition, might be tanght Wisdom, and instructed for the future, what moderation and justice Sultans are obliged to exercise in the Administration of Govern∣ment; and so subtilly did he insinuate his Dis∣course, that the Queen-Mother assented to the Proposal, and that the Seal should beconferred on 
Mahomet
 Pasha; for she had conceived an irreconcileable hatred against 
Achmet
 the Grand Vizier, by whose Counsel she was sent to the old Seraglio, and was united in Confederacy with the detested 
Shechir Para.


The Mufti greatly satisfied to have gained so considerable a Conspirator to the Party, com∣municated the whole Business, with the Pro∣gress of it, to the two Kadileschers, or Lord Chief Justices of 
Romelia
 and 
Anatolia;
 who ap∣proving thereof, and promising their utmost assi∣stance, the 
7th.
 of 
Angust
 was the Day appointed for the Insurrection of the Janizaries, who being all in a readiness on that day, went in a tumul∣tuary way to call the Mufti, the Kadileschers, and other Officers and Ministers of the Law, whom they seemingly forced to accompany them to the presence of the Grand Signior, of whom they demanded, that the present Vizier 
Achmet
 should be deprived of his Office, and that 
Ma∣homet
 Pasha should be constituted in his place. The Grand Signior at first refused their De∣mand, but being perswaded by his Mother that it was necessary to content the Militia in that tumult; he consented thereunto, and having called 
Achment,
 he took from him the Seal, and conferred it on 
Mahomet
 Pasha, and therewith the Office of Grand Vizier. 
Achmet
 trembling at the consequences hereof, resolved to commit himself to the Mercy of the Mufti, and there∣fore hastned to his House to attend his return, hoping to find him his Protector, under whose Shadow and Roof he fled for Sanctuary.


The Souldiery having thus obtained the first-fruits of their Insurrection, accompanied the Mufti unto his Home, where finding the depo∣sed Vizier 
Achmet,
 the Janisar-Aga immediately Commanded him out of Doors, from whence he had no sooner drawn his Foot, than that he was seized upon and strangled, and his Body thrown before the Gate of the new Mosch.


The next day being the 
8th
 of 
August,
 1648, the Janizaries again arising in the like Tumult as before, came to demand of the Mufti, Whe∣ther that according to their Law, Sultan 
ibrahim
 as a fool, and a Tyrant, and unfit for Govern∣ment, ought not to be deposed? To which the Mufti giving Answer in the Affirmative, sent to cite Sultan 
Ibrahim
 the day following to appear in the Divan, to administer Justice to his Soul∣diers and Subjects, who expected it from him. But 
Ibrahim
 supposing that he had sufficiently satisfied the Souldiery, by putting the Vizer out of Office, laughed at the Summons which the Mufti made him; which being seconded by a Fetfa, which is a point of Law resolved by the Mufti, who is the Mouth or Oracle thereof, 
viz.
 That the Grand Signior being called to ac∣count, is obliged to appear before the Justice; the Sultan in high disdain tore the Paper, threat∣ning the Head of the Mufti: but it was now too late he having already sufficiently fortified himself with the Power and Strength of his Rebellious Companions. This Fetfa was immediately se∣conded by another of a higher nature, which declared, That whosoever obeyed not the Law of God, was not a true Mussulman or Believer; and though that Person were the Emperor him∣self, yet being become by his fithy Actions a Kafir or Infidel, was 
ipso facto,
 fallen from his Throne, and no farther capable of Authority and Government. This Fetfa being seen by 
Ibrahim,
 he tore it in pieces, commanding the Grand Vizier instantly to put the Mufti to Death, as guilty of Treason against his Prince: but having now lost his Authority, his Commands were not longer regarded, nor any reverence had of his person: For the Janizaries being again assembled about five a Clock in the Afternoon, came with their usual tumult to the Gates of the Seraglio.


And now Sultan 
Ibrahim
 losing all Courage at this third attempt, fled into the Arms of his Mother, begging her Assistance and Protection.

She being a bold and subtle Woman, employed all her Rhetorick and Eloquence to perswade the Souldlery not to offer Violence to the Person of their Lord and Master; promising that he should relinquish the Government, and retire himself with a Guard into his old Lodgings. 
Ibrahim
 comforted a little, that he should save his Life, shrunk himself willingly into his old Shell, wherein he had so long conserved his Life.


In the mean time the Conspirators taking forth his eldest Son Sultan 
Mahomet,
 set him on the Throne of his Father, and planting the Sar∣gouch, or Imperial Feathers on his Head, salu∣ted him for Emperor with loud Acclamations. 
Ibrahim
 continued his Imprisonment for some days with great patience, but at length growing desperate and furious, often beat his Head a∣gainst the Wall, until at length, he was on the 
17th
 strangled by four Mutes.


In this manner Sultan 
Ibrahim
 ended his Days, which puts me in mind of the saying of a wiser and a better King than he, 
That there is little di∣stance between the Prisons and the Graves of Prin∣ces.
 And this Example made a great Officer understand how King 
Charles
 the Glorious Mar∣tyr was put to Death. For he, I think it was the Great Vizier, falling into Discourse with the Chief English Interpreter at 
Constantinople,
 not then calling to mind the Fate of Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 demanded, How, and when King 
Charles
 was put to Death? Sure, said he, Your King must have no Power, or your People must be more Rebel∣lious and Mutinous than other Nations of the World, who durst commit an Act so horrid and vile as this. See, said he, How our Emperor is revered and observed; and how submissive and obedient half the World is to the Nod of our Great Monarch. To which the Interpreter re∣plyed, that to recount unto him the History and Occasion of this prodigious fact, would be too long and tedious for him to hear: but that the time it happened, was some Months after the Death or Murder of Sultan 
Ibrahim;
 which was an 
Item
 sufficient to give him a perfect under∣standing of what he required.


Sultan 
Ibrahim
 having in this manner ended his Days, the Government was committed into the hands of the Grand Vizier, and the old Queen-Mother (which is she whom we call 
Kio∣sem
 in the Ottoman State) and of twelve Pa∣shaws; who were to manage all Affairs with su∣pream Power, during the Minority of Sultan 
Mahomet,
 who now Reigns.


Ibrahim
 was the fifth Son of Sultan 
Achmet,
 born of the same Mother with Sultan 
Morat,
 Educated like the other younger Sons of the Otto∣man Family; within the Walls of an obscure and unhappy Prison; so that 'tis no wonder, if wanting the advantages of seeing and practi∣sing in the World, he should neither have stu∣died Men, nor been experienced in the Art of Government. Nor less strange is it, being na∣tural to humane Infirmity; for Men who have lived under Restraint, Affliction, and fear of Death, to become licentious and immoderate in all kind of Pleasures, whensoever they pass on a sudden from the depth of Misery to some transcendent degree of Happiness and Prosperi∣ty; which as, I say, all Men are naturally sub∣ject unto, so more especially those whose Religion indulges them all kind of sensual Carnality in this Life.


Ibrahim
 was in his own Nature of a gentle and easy Temper, of a large Forehead, of a quick and lively Eye and ruddy Complexion, and of a good Proportion in the Features of his Face, but yet had something in the Air of his Coun∣tenance, that promised no great Abilities of Mind. And giving himself up to all kind of Effeminacy and Softness, attended not unto the Government of his Affairs; and therefore it was his greatest misfortune to be served by wicked and faithless Officers to whom he trusted, and to whom he gave Credence, wanting in him∣self the Talents of Wisdom and Discretion to discern their Malice.


The continual apprehensions that he enter∣tained of Death during his Imprisonment, had so frozen his Constitution with a strange frigi∣dity towards Women, that all the dalliance and warm Embraces of the most inflaming Ladies in the Seraglio, could not in a whole Years time thaw his Coldness; which was the occa∣sion at first of that Report, which spoke him to be impotent towards Women: during which time he attended to his Ministers of Justice, and to a management of the Affairs of his Empire, which in the beginning of his Reign gained him a Credit and Reputation, and raised a great ex∣pectation of his goodness and Care of his Sub∣jects Welfare; and evidence of which, he gave in his Charge to the Great Vizier, that he should put no Man to Death unless for Capital and Enormous Crimes. But at length losing him∣self in Lusts and Sensualities, he forsook the Helm of his Regency, committing the guidance of his Empire to other Hands: and as he was ignorant of War, so he foolishly sported in the Calms of peace; and suffering himself to be guided only by Fortune, felt the Stroke thereof in his last Unhappy Fate.










THE REIGN OF Sultan MEHMET, OR MAHOMET IV. THIRTEENTH EMPEROR OF THE TURKS.




ANNO 
1649.


SUltan 
Ibrahim
 perishing in this manner, by the mutinous Violence of the Soul∣diery, his Son 
Mehmet,
 or 
Mahomet,
 be∣ing a Child of seven Years of Age, suc∣ceeded in the Throne: During whose Minori∣ty, (which was to continue for the space of ten Years longer) his Mother, who was the first 
Sultana,
 assisted with the Counsel of twelve Pashaws, took upon her self the Regency, and in the first place resolved to continue the War against the Venetians, which 
Ibrahim
 intended to conclude, having engaged himself far in a Treaty of Peace with the Bailo or Ambassador, which resided at the Port for that Republick.


Whilst these Matters were transacting, and Preparations making to prosecute the War; the Malignant Humours of the Empire began to fer∣ment unto that degree, as affected the Body Politick at first with unnatural Heats, which soon afterwards proceeded to a Feaver, and then to a dangerous Convulsion. The ill-af∣fected Part was the Militia, which is the Heart and Principal of the Life of that Government. For the Spahees and the Janisaries, being the Horse and Foot, entred into a desperater Con∣troversie.


The first judged it their Duty to revenge the Death of their Soveraign, Sultan 
Ibrahim;
 and in order thereunto demanded the Head of the Great Vizier, as the Chief Author and Con∣triver of the Death of his Lord and Master. The others being conscious to themselves of ha∣ving, by their Arms, carried on the Conspira∣cy, not only declared their Resolutions to de∣fend the Vizier, but owned that what he had acted was by their Order, and at their Request and Instigation.


The Spahees being highly provoked with this Declaration, swelled with Anger and Malice against the Janisaries; and both sides being equally proud and rich, could not bear each others Reproaches. The Spahees being Men of Estates in Land, looked on themselves as the Gentry, and to have the greatest Share in the concernment of the Empire. The Janisaries living regularly in their Chambers, or Martial Colledges, looked on themselves as the better Souldiers, and the more formidable Party; and the truth is, both of them were proceeded to that height of Command and Authority in Go∣vernment, that had they not been suppressed by the cruel Hand, and bloody Disposition of 
Ku∣perlee,
 as shall be more largely related hereafter, this Empire was then in danger of falling into as many Divisions, as there were at that time Pashaws, or great Captains. The cause here∣of

proceeded from the warlike disposition of Sultan 
Morat,
 who being the most Martial Man of his Age, preferred none but Men of great Courage, and such as had signalized their Va∣lour by undoubted proofs; And such Men as these he loaded with Honour, and raised them to the highest and most 
minent Charges in the Government.


But 
Morat
 dying soon afterwards, these Great Men had time to enrich themselves during the gentle and easie Reign of Sultan 
Ibrahim;
 which being seconded by the Minority of this Young Sultan, their Pride knew no bounds, either of Modesty towards their Commanders, or Reve∣rence towards their Sultan. Hence it was that the Souldiery dividing, so great a Sedition arose amongst them, that at last they came to Blows, resolving to decide the Controversy by the Sword. But the Quarrels of Turks amongst themselves not being Commonly of long du∣rance, the Care and Vigilance of the Magistrates prevented all open defiance in the Field; but yet could not so pacisie their Animosities, but that several Skirmishes, or Rencounters, passed be∣tween them in the Streets, wherein the Spa∣hees were always worsted, and at length were forced to abandon the City, scarce daring for some time to own the Name of Spahee within the Walls of 
Constantinople.


These Disturbances gave the Venetians some hopes to accommodate their Peace with better Advantage; but the Reply to this Proposition was more fierce and positive than ever, and so ill resented that the Bailo going from his Au∣dience, was on the 
27th
 of 
April
 seized on, and with all his Retinue. clapped into Prison and Chains; being sent to those Castles which are s
ituate on the 
Bosphorus,
 in the middle way between 
Constantinople
 and the Black Sea. But this furious severity, by the intercession of other Christian Ministers, continued not long, before the Bailo received more gentle Treat∣ment, by the Sacrifice which the Turks made unto themselves of 
Grillo,
 his Interpeter, who being called down from the presence of the Bailo, was immediately, by two Officers, strangled, and his Body thrown out at the Window of the Castle; the which act, though it may seem unjust and barbarous to us, hath yet been frequently practised amongst the Turks, being to this day their common use to threaten the Druggermen, or Interpreters; which is the cause that they often mince, or wholly alter the sense or meaning of their Masters, on those Occasions, when words are spoken by them un∣grateful to the Turks.


The Turks bearing this Disdain to the Ve∣netians, laboured to re-enforce their Armies in 
Candia,
 and supply them with Ammunition and Provisions; and thought the Venetians lay be∣fore the Mouth of the 
Dardanelles
 to intercept all Succours which might be carried thither; yet the Turks, notwithstanding their Divisions, having recruited their Fleet with forty Gallies, and ten Great Ship, broke through the Vene∣tians, and in despight of them, convoyed five Gallies laden with Souldiers and Ammunition, and landed them safe at 
Canea;
 and about the same time six Gallies, and ten Ships of 
Barbary,
 entered into the Port of 
Suda.


The General which commanded in Chief was named 
Chusaein
 Pasha, a Person of great Cou∣rage and Experience; he had for some time besieged the City of 
Candia,
 but for want of Men and Ammunition was forced to rise from that Place, and retire to 
Canea
 and 
Retimo,
 whilst in the mean time the 
Candiots
 received re∣cruits of Men, and supply of Provisions, impro∣ving their leisure-time to fortifie their Town with such Works as rendred it almost impregna∣ble, and made it become the Wonder and Dis∣course of the World after some Years succeed∣ing.


Nor was the War only carried on in 
Candia,
 but also in 
Dalmatia, Morea, Bosna,
 and 
Al∣bania.
 For 
Foscolo,
 the General of 
Venice,
 de∣signing to force some Corn from the Parts of 
Castel-nuovo,
 he landed some Men there, but was so ill received by the Turks, that he was forced to retreat unto his Vessels with great disorder, and no less dishonour. But he had better fortune in the Parts of 
Bosna,
 where he repulsed the Enemy to the very Gates of 
Sarsay,
 the Capital City of that Province, and took upon composition the Fortress of 
Risano,
 which is scituate between 
Cataro
 and 
Castel-nuovo;
 but at length the Turks receiving an additional Aid of sifteen or sixteen thousand Men, the Veneti∣ans were forced to quit their new Conquests, and retire into their own Country.


During the time that these Affairs were in agi∣tation, the young Emperor was proclaimed, and his Inauguration celebrated with the usual Ceremonies, but with Rejoicings, and hopes ex∣traordinary; who being yet scarcely arrived to eight years of Age, many Mutinies and Trou∣bles arose in divers Parts of the Empire, as in 
Damascus, Syria, Anatolia,
 and other Countries, where the Pashaws refused to pay in the custo∣mary Taxes and Tribute, declaring, That they would keep the Mony in their Hands during the Minority of the Grand Signior; and that when he came to Age of Government, they would be accountable to him both for the Prin∣cipal and for the Improvement.


The Turks in 
Hungary
 making incursions in∣to the Territories of the Emperor, were over∣thrown by the Count 
Forgatz,
 near 
Buda,
 where the Pasha was taken Prisoner, and his Son slain.


Nor better fortune had they in the Assault they made on the Fortress of 
Clissa,
 where ha∣ving lost five thousand Men, they were forced to retire with great dishonour.


The 
Cossacks
 also in this Conjuncture grew more bold, so that they covered the Black Sea with their Boats, doing great damage to the Saicks, and other Vessels, which traded in that Sea; and at length came up the 
Bosphorus
 above 
Therapea,
 giving a great Alarm, with much Fear and Confusion to all 
Constantinople.


Amidst these Misfortunes, and intestine Trou∣bles, new Disorders, arose in the Ottoman-Empire; For, as commonly, all the blame of miscarriages and ill successes in 
Turkie
 are cast upon the Head of the Commander in chief; so the Enemies of the Great Vizier took the ad∣vantage in this conjuncture to reproach his ill Government, and carried the accusation so far, as to depose him from his Charge and Office; in whose place the Aga, or General of the Ja∣nisaries, succeeded.


The Spahees in 
Asia,
 being displeased with this Election, assembled in a Body of seven or eight thousand, and marched towards 
Con∣stantinople,
 pretending to revenge the Death of Sultan 
Ibrahim;
 their Numbers daily encrea∣sing, the Divan very much feared lest the Party which favoured the Spahees in 
Constantinople,
 should join themselves to the Asian Mutineers; to prevent which it was judged good Reason and Policy, to anticipate the Justice they de∣manded,

by taking away the Life of the depo∣sed Vizier; which being easily assented unto, and without much hesitation performed, gave some little stop to the Fury and Heats of the Spahees.


Notwithstanding all which, as the Divisions which the Turks entertain amongst themselves, were never so great as to afford the Christians any Advantage thereby, so the Venetians did not reap any Benefit from these Quarrels; but on the contrary, the Turks studiously attended to their Affairs in 
Candia,
 passing thither with sixty Gallies, thirty great Ships, and twenty five other smaller Vessels, laden with Men, and all sorts of Provisions and Ammunition for War; so that in this Year 1649, the Affairs of the Turks remained in that Island in this happy and hopeful posture. Amongst these Ships were thirteen English, which the Turks took up at 
Smyrna,
 and forced into their Service. For though the Ambassador, Sir 
Thomds Bendysh,
 then Resident at 
Constantinople,
 opposed the En∣gagement of these Ships what was possible, and also the Commanders and Seamen were very un∣willing and dissatisfied to undertake the Design, yet the Turks with Menaces, and Promises of Reward, forced them to carry Men and Ammu∣nition to 
Candia;
 so that, making a Virtue of Necessity, they complied with that which they could not resist.






ANNO 
1650.


CHusaein
 Pasha, Governour of the Island of 
Candia,
 having received these Succours and Recruits, resolved to besiege the Chief City of 
Candia;
 to which intent, drawing out from the Ships, and Garisons of 
Retimo
 and 
Canea,
 what Men he was able, he formed an Ar∣my of thirty thousand Men, with which he marched, and pitched before the Town. He was provided also with twelve Pieces of Cannon, four thousand Sacks of Wooll, three thousand Ladders, and with a good quantity of Grana∣does; with this Force he attaqued the City in two places, 
viz.
 on the Forts of 
Martinengo,
 and 
Mocenigo;
 and pressed so hard on the latter, that notwithstanding the generous re∣sistance of the Defendants, he won the Fort, and there planted the Ottoman Colours; for∣tifying it with more Cannon, and a good num∣ber of Men.


Count 
Coloredo,
 Governour of that Place, was then sick, the Garison very weak, and things reduced to the last terms of extremity; when General 
Balbiani,
 Admiral of 
Malta,
 ar∣rived with six Gallies, and there landed six hun∣dred Men, and sixty Kingts; which with great Courage mounted the Guard of the Fort 
Mar∣tinengo,
 which was the place of most Danger and Honour. The Turks excited with a desire to welcome the new Guests, made three despe∣rate and furious Assaults on this Fort, but were with equal Valour repulsed by the Defendants; at which Disgrace and Foil being highly enra∣ged, they resolved on a fourth Attempt, which they pursued with that Courage and Success, that the Venetians were forced to give way to their Violence, with the slaughter almost of all those which defended this Fort; until the Ca∣valiers of 
Malta,
 who having no greater Glory, nor readier Will, that to spill their Blood for the Christian Cause, rallied all the Force they were able, and made so prosperous an At∣taque upon the Fort, that they recovered it a∣gain, with the Blood and Destruction of all those who defended it; but they enjoyed it not long, before the Turks regained it with the like success and slaughter: which variety of Fortune the Venetians being sensible of, and that they could not bear such costly Interchanges with the Turks, had recourse to their ultimate Remedy of Mines, which succeeded so happily, that the whole Fort was carried into the Air, and therewith two thousand good Souldiers of the Turks; with which Destruction, and other Repulses in divers places, they were so weak∣ned and discouraged, that they raised the Siege on the fifth of 
October
 new Stile.


In this Interim, the Tartar 
Han,
 called the 
Krim,
 demanded the Guardianship of the young Sultan, as of right belonging unto him; but the Council answered hereunto, That their Master was already in better Hands than those into which they desired to transfer him; and that his Grandmother, and the Divan, wanted nei∣ther Wisdom nor Fidelity to direct his Affairs: with which answer the Tartar being forced to remain satisfied, was able to revenge himself no farther, than by exciting the Cossacks to in∣fest the Seas; which gave some diversion to those Arms, which otherwise had all been em∣ployed against the Venetians.


But these Designs from 
Tartary
 did little trou∣ble the Council, in comparison of that Spirit of Discord which was arisen between the Spahees and the Janisaries; for both Parties being emu∣lous of each others Greatness, endeavured on all Occasions to elevate their Chief Comman∣ders to the highest and most profitable Places of the Epire: which Dissention touching the principal Ministers of State, who were all en∣gaged on the one side or the other, administred great Troubles, and retarded the execution and success of all the grand Designs of the Empire. Nor was it of less importance and dishonour to the Divan, that their Fleet was hindred passage by the Venetians, who blocked up the Mouth of the 
Dardanelles;
 whereby all intercourse with 
Candia
 was interrupted: but being resolved to remove this Obstacle, they commanded the Cap∣tain-Pasha to force his Passage; which he accord∣ingly performing, was so warmly received, that he quickly lost two Gallies, and after much Blood, and loss on both sides, was forced at length to retire again within the Streights. But what was of worse consequence to the Turks, was the inveterate Discord between the Spahees, and Janisaries; who having been unadvisedly embarked promiscuously together, came often∣times to Words, and then to Blows; which ended not without the Bolld and Death of di∣vers of each party. These mischiefs increased the rage which the Turks at 
Constantinople
 con∣ceived against the Venetians; who were all thereupon (not excepting the Bailo 
Soranzo,
 nor his Secretary 
Ballarino
) interdicted the Territories of the Grand Signior; and sent back into their own Country.


The Captain-Pasha, that he might be in a capacity to make a second Attempt to force his passage, sent to 
Constantinople
 for new Recruits: when News came that the Siege of 
Candia
 was raised, and that the Turks had lost the Fort of St. 
Theodoro;
 which so angred the Spi∣rit of the Queen-mother against the Vizier, that she immediately deposed him from his Charge, and therewith had taken away his Life, had not hte Faction of the Janisaries protected him in this Extremity.


The Pasha of 
Buda
 was introduced into his place, a Person of a turbulent and ambitious

Spirit, who to increase his Favour with his Mis∣tress the Sultana, evidenced his Heat and Zeal against the Venetians, and to that end sent im∣mediately express Orders to the Pasha of 
Bosna,
 to invest 
Clissa
 with all the Power he was able; and therewith he presented him with a Cimeter, and a Halter; the former to be his Reward in case of good Success, and the latter to be his Punishment in case of Misfortune. But this furious Vizier continued not so long, as to ex∣perience the Issue of this Command; for he was in a few days laid aside, and 
Chusaein
 Pasha, the General of 
Candia,
 was placed in his stead; howsoever his Orders were to remain with the Army, by which means, much Emulation and Contest was prevented, which might otherwise have happened between the Spahees, and Jani∣saries, at the Election of a new Vizier; and thereby all excuses taken from the Souldiery of absence from the War, who could now pretend nothing of Reason to withdraw themselves, on score of attendance on the Vizier's Person; and to supply his Authority at the Regal Court, a Chimacam was substituted to administer Justice in place of the Vizier, which is usual on such Occasions.


Notwithstanding all which, Affairs succeeded not extraordinary well for the Turks in 
Candia;
 for being straitned for Provisions in 
Canea,
 by the near approach of the Christians, the Turks were forced to make a Diversion, by appear∣ing in great Troops before 
Candia;
 which they were enabled to do, by the Supplies they had lately received, with the arrival of their Fleet of Gallies; for the Winter Season approach∣ing, the Venetians were constrained to abandon their station before the 
Dardanelles,
 and to leave the Passage open for the Enemy. And so this Year ended, rather with Advantage than Dis∣grace to the Christians.






ANNO 
1651.


WIth these great Succours and Supplies sent to 
Candia
 by the Turks, Affairs must necessarily have succeeded prosperously to their Designs, had not intestine Discords at Home interrupted their proceedings; which arose from a Jealousy and Emulation between the Grand∣mother and Mother of the young Sultan. For each of them pretending to the tuition or guar∣dianship of the Emperor, during his Minority, divers Parties and Factions formed at 
Constanti∣nople,
 from whence all that Trouble and Com∣bustion arose, which we have at large related in the third Chapter of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire.


So that now it was no time to talk to the Souldiers or People of a War in 
Candia;
 For the first thought themselves engaged to contrive a Settlement and Determination of Disputes at Home: and the latter being irritated with a new Tax laid on them, for want of Mony in the Treasury, exclaimed, and talked loud, and at length, instead of paying, broke out into open Rebellion; which by assistance of the Soul∣diery, was appeased, under no less Terms than the Death of several principal Ministers of State.


During these Divisions, the Venetians had time to arm out a very considerable Fleet for defence of 
Candia; Foscolo,
 who had been Ge∣neral in 
Dalmatia,
 being sent thither with title of 
Generalissimo
 in the place of 
Mocenigo:
 But these Dissentions amongst the Turks, according to their usual Custom, lasting not long before they came to a Conclusion, by the entire de∣struction of one of the Parties; the Chief Mi∣nisters began to reassume again the thoughts of prosecuting the War in 
Candia,
 and to send Recruits to reinforce the Army under the Com∣mand of 
Chusaein
 Pasha, who was returned with new Forces and Courage to assault the City of 
Candia.


At this time a certain Greek, pretending to be a Person of Quality, and discontented with the Turks, fled from them to the Christians, where being received with all kind and obliging entertainment, he had thereby liberty of seeing and visiting all the Fortifications of the Place. After he had observed and discovered as much as he desired, this traiterous Fugitive fled again to the Turkish Camp, where he revealed what places were most strong or best fortified, and where the Town was weakest, and most easily to be assaulted. The Venetian General being awakened at this Discovery, and considering the numbers of his People to be few, in respect of the Enemy, and that the Outworks could not be maintained without a more numerous Gari∣son, he resolved to destroy some of those Forts; and accordingly blew up with Mines four Basti∣ons, which being at a distance could not be re∣lieved without much danger. The Turks here∣by making conjectures of the weakness of the besieged, cheerfully assaulted the Fort of St. 
De∣metrio,
 thinking to carry it without much trou∣ble; but contrary to their expectation, they en∣countred so bold a resistance, that they lost three thousand Men on the Place.


At 
Constantinople
 they were still so intent to carry on this War, that having prepared, and laden on the Fleet great quantities of Grana∣does, Bomboes, and Mortar-pieces, with other Fire-works, the Captain-Pasha, with hopes a∣greeable to his Force, set forth to Sea, with eleven hundred Sail, consisting of Gallies, Ships, Galleasses, Saiques, Brigantines, and smaller Vessels, with resolution to engage the Venetian Fleet, whose Commanders also were equally de∣sirous and ready to consent with them to a Bat∣tel.


On the 
7th
 of 
July,
 the Venetians being at an Anchor in the Port of St. 
Ermina,
 discovered the Turkish Fleet, to which, as they were much inferiour in number, so they were superiour to them in the agreement and experience of their Commanders. The Turks having passed for∣ward on their way, the Venetians pursued them, and the better to draw them to a Battel, 
Moce∣nigo
 ordered two Ships, commanded by 
Barbaro
 and 
Dolphino
 to cross the Turks at the point of the Island; and his Vice-Admiral, 
Bataggio,
 with four Ships to engage the main Body of the the Turkish Fleet; to whose assistance many other Vessels coming in, he so rudely treated several Gallies, that they were forced to seek harbour in the Port of 
Chios,
 now 
Scio,
 with the loss of 
Mahomet,
 Pasha of 
Anatolia,
 who was sent to succeed in the Office of 
Chusaein
 Pasha, the General of 
Candia;
 but Night coming on, the rest of the Fleet retreated to the Isles of 
Naxia
 and 
Paros.


On the tenth day the Turks having watered their Fleet, gave a signal of defiance to the Ve∣netians, by discharge of two pieces of Cannon; and the Venetians accepting the Challenge, both Fleets gave a furious charge one to the other; but the Turks were not able to withstand the Courage and Skilfulness of the Venetians; for the Captain-Pasha having lost many of his Men, and the Poop of his Gally being carried

away with a Cannon-shot, the whole Fleet was put into Disorder, and then unto flight, so that the Gallies began to employ themselves in toaing the Ships. But one of their Mahones being se∣parated from the rest, was assaulted by two Gal∣leasses, and some Ships, and finding none to come in for Succour, the Captain was killed, with four hundred Souldiers, and two hundred were taken Prisoners.


In the mean time 
Mocenigo,
 the General, gave chase to the Gallies, which two to a Ship were toaing the heavier Vessels as fast as they could; but being hardly pursued, were forced to cast off the Hauser, and shift for themselves as well as they were able.
 The Turkish Ships seeing themselves thus abandoned, fired whole Broad∣sides upon the Enemy; but the Venetian Gallies leaving their own Ships astern, that they might pursue their advantage, 
Querini
 boarded a Great Galleass, called the 
Soltana,
 upon which were three hundred Souldiers, who offered to surren∣der upon promise of Quarter for their Lives. But the Christian Souldiers heated with fight, and not then understanding any thing of Con∣ditions, desperately boarded the Vessel, where∣by the Turks being reduced to an extremity of despair, gave fire to the Powder, and therewith carried, as well the Vanquishers, as the Van∣quished, into the other World.


According to this example four other Vessels burnt themselves, one of 60 brass Guns, and three others of 40 to 44. Fifteen Vessels of the Starboard Wing saved themselves by good sail∣ing. Of the Larboard Wing, Captain 
Nicolo,
 a Renegado, with his Ship, was taken by the Admiral of the Galleasses, likewise another Great Vessel by 
Lazaro Mocenigo,
 and another by Proveditor 
Melino.
 In short, there was not one Vessel which remained in sight of the Vene∣tians, which was not either taken, sunk, or burnt. Notwithstanding all which, considering the Vessels which were escaped, and the 3 thou∣sand Men which the Turks had landed at 
Naxia,
 in order to their being transported unto 
Candia,
 the Victory seemed to be very imperfect; wherefore the Venetians attending another en∣counter with the Turkish Fleet, did happily meet them in a few days after; and being en∣couraged with the late Success, as the Enemy was low in their Spirits and Resolution, they bravely attaqued the Turks, and took 39 Gal∣lies, 23 Ships, three Galleasses, together with the three thousand Souldiers which were then embarked from 
Naxia:
 Those which escaped took Refuge in the Port of 
Rhodes.


After this great loss, the Turks entertained no great Designs of the Conquest of 
Candia;
 but only to conserve 
Canea,
 and the footing that they had won in that Island: nor did ever the Turks after this, dare to stand a formal Battel with the Venetians at Sea, but rather contriving to escape than to fight, did ever af∣ter build light Gallies, for transporting of Men and Ammunition, with intention to wage their War only at Land, and not at Sea; it being a saying ever after common in their Mouths; 
That God had given the Sea to Christians, and the Earth to the Turks.


To these ill Successes abroad, were added great Dissentions at Home; for the mutinous Spahees in 
Asia,
 having united into a strong Body, marched towards 
Constantinople,
 to join with their other Brethren in those Parts. The Janisaries on the other side, not less diligent to oppose their Enemy, to revenge the Outrages committed on their Brethren, whom the Spa∣hees had ill-treated, having cut off the Noses and Ears of several of them; besides all which, they proceeded to that height of Insolence, as to demand the Heads of the Great Vizier, and of the Aga of the Janisaries; and being now by their numbers rendered formidable to the Court, it was judged agreeable to the present Con∣juncture, to satisfy in some measure these Muti∣niers, by discharging these two Officers of their employment, which did in some degree for the present quallfy and appease these Tumults.






ANNO 
1652.


THE Seditions at 
Constantinople
 were scarce quieted, before advice came of a Rebel∣lion of the People of 
Grand Cairo
 and 
Damas∣ous,
 who both at the same time conspired, as if they intended to cast off Subjection to the Ot∣toman Family; the which Mutiny and Distur∣bance arose to that Head, as gave great cause of fear to the Divan; and employed all their Counsels and Contrivances for this whole Year, in what manner they might reduce this People to their Duty and Obedience. During which time, the Christians in 
Candia
 had time to breath, and opportunity to provide themselves with all Ammunition and Provisions; and to repair their old, and add new Fortifications to their Town.






ANNO 
1653.


BUT these Troubles being with time com∣posed, the Grand Vizier desired greatly the Conquest of 
Candia,
 which being by experience proved to be with difficulty guined by the Sword, he endeavoured to win it by fairer Terms; and to that end wrote a Letter to the Republick of 
Venice,
 in Letters of Gold; wherein he decla∣red, that it seemed strange to him, that the Se∣nate had not dispatched their Ambassador to him with the surrender of 
Candia,
 in regard that thereby they might assure themselves to purchase a certain Peace, which they vainly re∣tarded by such delays. Howsoever in these Let∣ters no mention was made of the Causes, or Reasons, why Signior 
Capello,
 who was an emi∣nent Person, being Procurator of St. 
Mark,
 and sent thither for Bailo, was so ill treated with Im∣prisonment at his Arrival, notwithstanding the permission and encouragement which was given for his kind reception, obtained at the instance of the French Ambassador; but this Restraint continued not long upon him, before he was released with a daily Allowance (which con∣tinued for some time) of 1200 Aspers a Day; and afterwards the Court returning from 
Adria∣nople
 to 
Constantinople,
 he was permitted to lodg in the Palace which belongs to the Bailo's of 
Venice.


The Venetian Fleet being Victorious at Sea, made it their work to keep the Mouth of the 
Dardanelles
 always blocked up, whereby they hindered all Succours from 
Candia:
 notwith∣standing which diligence, the Venetians being sometimes forced, for the sake of Water and Provision, to abandon that Station; the Turks took hold of the opportunity to escape forth; but being eagerly pursued by the Venetians, they were forced to take Sanctuary in 
Rhodes,
 where being again blocked up, the affairs in 
Candia
 suffered much, and the Complaints from thence were loud at the Court. So that Orders were sent, and often repeated unto the Captain-Pasha, that he should spend no longer time in

Rhodes,
 but that in despight of all Difficulties, he should immediately proceed to 
Candia,
 and fight through the Venetians in case they remain∣ed in the way to interrupt his passage; but the Captain-Pasha notwithstanding these Orders, and Menaces which accompanied them, could not perswade himself to the Hazard of a Bat∣tel; till at length, the season of the Year spend∣ing, and being wearied in the Port of 
Rhodes,
 he resolved to adventure abroad; but instead of going to 
Candia,
 he plundered the Islands as he passed, and returned to 
Constantinople,
 with 40 Gallies, where he hoped with the Booty he had plundered to appease the anger of the Di∣van against him: but this Sacrifice did not much avail, for he was not sooner arrived, than his Person was seized, and Goods sealed up for the use of the Grand Signior; the which Seal his Sons broke open, and taking with them the richest and most considerable part of their Fa∣ther's Estate, laded it on one of the Gallies, and fled therewith into Foreign Parts, little re∣garding that danger in which they had left their Father to perish. During which time the Ve∣netions still maintained their Guards on the Coasts of 
Candia,
 not suffering any Recruits of Men, or Provisions for War, to be transported thither; so that if the Turks designed to pro∣secute this War, it must be by new Forces, and such as were able to encounter the Marine Power of the Enemy; the which being resolved upon by the Council, a heavy Tax was laid on the people to carry on the Design, which they not willingly supporting, made a publick Insur∣rection in the City; and at the same time also the ancient Quarrel between the Spahees and Jani∣saries, began again to ferment; which Trou∣bles being added to a Rebellion raised by the Pasha of 
Aleppo,
 who increasing in strength and number, came marching towards 
Constantinople,
 put that great City into a horrible Fear and Confusion.






ANNO 
1654.


THE Venetians judged that these Troubles would naturally produce some Advantage to them, and much facilitate the Peace which they had long desired: but as Seditions amongst the Turks are always too violent to continue; so these Discontents evaporated in a short time, and new Resolutions were taken to prosecute the War in 
Candia;
 for notwithstanding that 
Mon∣sieur de Ventelay,
 Son to the French Ambassador, mediated with agreeable prudence to compose Matters in order to a Peace, yet his Endea∣vours were all insignificant; for neither had Sig∣nior 
Capello
 Audience granted him, nor that li∣berty which was promised before his Arrival; the Turks still insisting on the Surrender of 
Candia,
 would not understand any Terms which did not entirely invest them in that Conquest.


To effect which by Force, which could not be performed by Composition; the Pasha of 
Buda
 was Elected for Captain-Pasha, or Commander in Chief of the Seas; and Orders given to equippe a new Fleet of Ships, and Gallies, for transporting the Succours of Men and Provi∣sions to 
Candia:
 where 
Chusaein
 Pasha the Ge∣neral, being wearied with his long Siege of the Town, withdrew his Men at some farther di∣stance for their better refreshment; for they wanting all Conveniencies in their Trenches, began to Mutiny, and to refuse the perfor∣mance of their Duty, until the General satisfy∣ing their Pay, and dispensing liberally Larges∣ses to the Officers, gave them new Encourage∣ment and Satisfaction; with which, being a little enlivened, 
Chusaein
 sent a Herald, with a defiance to those in the City, challenging them to fight a pitcht Battel with him: but the Chri∣stians refused the Offer, thinking it more pru∣dence not to accept, than loss of Honour to de∣ny an Answer to the Challenge. Then the Turks sought some means to effect their Design by Treachery; to which end, they treated with a certain Captain for delivery of one of the Gates of the City; which he promised to do unto the Turks, but gave Advertisement unto the Governour. The Pasha the night following advanced with some Troops, hoping to find one of the Gates opened to him; but instead there∣of, the Defendants having prepared a Mine to receive them, sprang the same so opportunely, that it carried away the most of those who were engaged in the Design, and therewith their hopes of becoming Masters speedily of that im∣pregnable Fortress. Wherefore they resolved for a while to repose, and attend those Suc∣cours which were now preparing at 
Constanti∣nople.


The Fleet being put into a readiness, the Souldiery departed with their usual hopes of Success; but meeting with their Enemy again at the Mouth of the 
Dardanelli,
 the Fight was fu∣rious and hot for a long time between them, but concluded to the disadvantage of the Turks, who there lost 6000 Men, two Gallies, three Ships, and a Mahone: howsoever they broke through the Venetians, and landed 12000 Men in the Isle of 
Candia.
 The News of this defeat, and the Confirmation thereof, by the wounded Men which were landed at 
Constantinople,
 made a great noise amongst the people. Howsoever the Turks persisting constant to their Intentions of prosecuting the War, sent Orders to the Captain-Pasha again to fight the Venetians so soon as the Fleet was refitted, and restored to a condition to engage in another Battel; but the Venetians scarce gave them the leisure to repair, before they attacked them again, whereby they put them to such disorder, that they were forced to take refuge in the first convenient Port; where having attended a favourable Wind, they hastned to 
Constantinople;
 and from thence were dispatched into the Black Sea against the Cos∣sacks, who very much infested those parts.


The Captain-Pasha being arrived, extolled his own great Services and Adventures, and on the contrary vilified the Great Vizier, dispara∣ging all his Actions, as mixed with weak Coun∣sels, and prosecuted with Cowardise, or want of true Resolution: the which took such deep impression in his absence, having none to an∣swer for him; that all being given for granted which was alledged against him, Orders were dispatched to 
Candia
 by an Officer to take off his Head, in whose place this Captain-Pasha suc∣ceeded.


Amidst of all these Combustions of War, the mediation of Peace was carried on by the French Ambassador: For though Signior 
Capello
 was actually Resident on the Place, qualified with the Character of Bailo for the Republick of 
Venice;
 yet the Turks would scarce vouch∣safe to Treat personally with him; and indeed his sufferings by Imprisonment, and other bar∣barous Usages, had affected him with such a me∣lancholy, as rendred him uncapable for some time of administring publick Affairs; for ha∣ving lost his Reason, by giving way to sad and black Thoughts, he laid violent Hands on

himself, by wounding himself in two or three places of his Belly; but the Wounds proving not Mortal, he was in a short time restored again to a sound Estate both in Mind and Body; as I shall some few years after have occasion to re∣late from the words of his own Mouth, which he was pleased to utter to me on his Death-bed, the day before he departed this Life.






ANNO 
1655.


THE Great Vizier after all his evil Insinuati∣ons against 
Chusaein
 Pasha, fell very sick and infirm; so that the Court considering him as a Person uncapable of farther Service, cast their eyes on the Pasha of 
Aleppo,
 who being a daring Martial Man, was esteemed to be the better Chief in such a hazardous War, which for be∣ing on the Sea, was unusual and displeasing to the Turks. Against him nothing could be objected besides his Rebellions and Contrariety to the Government; but hereunto it was pre∣sently answered, that the extravagance of his humour proceeded only from his Ambition of being Great Vizier; which when he had attain∣ed, that thirsty desire of Glory, which he exer∣cis'd for acquiring this Office, would be busied in thoughts to advance and improve his Honour in Actions beyond his Predecessors.


Letters being arrived at this Pasha's hands, which called him to Court to accept this Charge, did secretly please the humour of his haughty Spirit; howsoever, he remained for a while in some suspence and irresolution, not being assured whether some Deceit might not be concealed under this specious appearance of Preferment: But considering, that the way unto Gains and Advantage was by daring Adventures, he reso∣lutely accepted the Proffer, and put himself in his March towards 
Constantinople,
 with a glori∣ous Equipage of forty thousand Men, thinking therewith to make good his Retreat, and secure his Person in case that Deceit were discovered which he rationally suspected. Being arrived near unto 
Constantinople,
 he received from the Great Signior several Messages of Kindness, and a good welcome; and was accordingly received into the City, and invested in the Office, with all the Circumstances of Favour and Honour imaginable.


Having thus taken possession of his Charge, he promised the Grand Signior that he would employ all his Endeavours to restore the decayed Estate of Affairs, and reform the Government. And as an earnest thereof, he began to remove such Ministers from the Court which were sus∣pected by him; and to render himself the more Absolute, he cut off several others, whom he imagined might in any wise disturb or controul him in the management of his Affairs.


After which he dispatched his Orders to all Maritime Towns of the Empire, to fit and make ready what Gallies and Ships were possible to be provided, intending thereby to set out the greatest Fleet that ever was seen in the 
Levant:
 but to compleat this Work, two great Diffi∣culties arose; The first was, to find a wise and well experienced Commander: and the next, was in what manner to perswade the Spahees and Ja∣nisaries to embark; for they having heard and seen in what manner their Companions had pe∣rished in this miserable War, absolutely refused to go; and though the Animosities of these two orders of Souldiers were irreconcileable one to the other, yet in this common Cause being uni∣ted, they raised so horrible a Sedition, that they assaulted the Mufti in his very House, and pur∣sued him within the Gates of the Seraglio with a thousand reproaches and injuries, as an Au∣thor of evil Counsels, and a Disturber of the common Peace and Quiet of the Empire. Nor was it possible to appease this Tumult, but by anticipating to them four months Pay; with which their Minds being made more pliable, they gently yielded to Obedience, and suffered them∣selves to be embarked for 
Candia.


Zarnozau Mustapha
 was made Captain-Pasha; or General of the Fleet, which was very nu∣merous, and well equipped, consisting of sixty Gallies, eight Mahones, thirty great Ship of War, and sixty one Gallies belonging to the Beys. After having remained three days at the mouth of the 
Dardanelles
 near the Castles, they went out in this Order; The Bey's Gallies were the first, then followed the Ships, next the Ma∣hones, and the Rear consisted wholly of the Grand Signior's Gallies. The Van of the Fleet being the Bey's Gallies, which are always the best manned, and provided, were ordered to attack the main Body of the Christian Fleet, for that, being seconded with the Ships, they would be able to sustain the Shock until the Ma∣hones could come up, which were directed against the Starboard Wing of the Enemy, com∣posed of Galleasses. The Venetians, though much inferior in Number, yet as great in Cou∣rage, gave evident Signs of their desire to fight, with hopes, by God's Blessing, to obtain a Victo∣ry. The Venetians whilst the Turks passed, remained still with their Anchors apique, which the Turks interpreting as a token of their Cou∣rage and Boldness, were so daunted, that they began to ply toward the Coast of 
Greece;
 but being forced to pass 
 the Guns of the Ve∣netian Admiral, they 
 so ill treated by his Broadsides, that they were discouraged from making a second Charge. The Ships, and o∣ther Vessels fared little better being forced to pass under the Guns of the Enemies Fleet. The Captain-Pasha attempted to pas
 
 Coast of 
Anatolia,
 with his lighter Gallies, but being hindred by a strong party of the Enemy, he was forced to follow the rest of the Fleet, taking his Course with them by the Coast of 
Greece.
 In this Charge one of the Turks Mahones was sunk, and two disabled: But the greatest Fight happened between a Squadron of the Turks Ships, and four of the Venetians, which had been hard put to it, had not the Captain 
Moce∣nigo
 come in to their Assistance; howsoever, the Venetian Captain of the Ship, called the 
Crown,
 was slain by a Musket shot.


In short, the Christians boarded the Turks with so much Vigour and Resolution, that they took several of their Ships, and mixing with the thickest of their other Vessels, they put ma∣ny Ashore, and others escaping in their Boats, left their Slaves and Gallies to the disposal of the Enemy; so that the Venetians obtained that day a hundred brass Guns, with a signal Victory, having had no other important Loss, unless the Ship called the 
David
 and 
Goliah,
 which being overpowered, was burnt by the Turks.


The People of the Turks, who were in daily expectation to receive intelligence of a Success, agreeable to so great Preparations, were much troubled to hear the News of the Defeat gi∣ven to their Naval Forces; of which Miscar∣riage, the World dividing it self into different Conjectures, the most part, especially those of 
Constantinople,
 attributed the Misfortune of all

to the ill Government, and want of Experience in the General. Wherefore to appease the Peo∣ple, especially the Merchants, who were weary of this Marine War; from whence they reap∣ed nothing but Losses of their Ships and Goods; It was thought fit to enter into a Treaty with Signior 
Capello,
 the Venetian Bailo, concerning a Peace; but he having his Commission taken from him, for the Reason before related, his Secretary 
Ballarino
 supplyed his Office; and in Order to an Accommodation, had two Audi∣ences with the Great Vizier, to whom, and to others of the Divan, he made Presents of rich Pieces of Cloth of Gold, in the Name of the Republick. Howsoever the Turks thinking it dishonourable to accord unto other Terms, than the intire Resignation of 
Candia,
 proceeded in their Preparations as formerly; at which the Merchants and Tradesmen at 
Constantinople
 re∣ceived such matter of Discontentment, that in Tumults they cryed out for Peace at the Gates of the very. Seraglio; and behaved themselves with that Insolence, that the Janisaries were called to drive them from thence by force of Arms; howsoever this Tumult and Riot of the People ended not without the Life of the Great Vizier, to whose fury he was made a Sacrifice. And though his Son appeared at the Gates of the City with forty thousand Men, to demand Justice on the Murderers of his Father, yet the People were so far from being dismayed thereat, that their Fury and Rage encreased to a great∣er height, and required the Authority of the Divan to keep things from running into the In∣conveniences of a Civil War.






ANNO
 1656.


THese Disorders induced the chief Ministers to enter into another Treaty with 
Ballari∣no,
 proposing to withdraw their Forces from 
Candia,
 and make a Peace, upon the paiment of ten Millions for the Charge of the War: And to incline the Venetians hereunto, the Turks gave severe Orders to their People living about 
Corfou,
 to molest the Inhabitants of that Island with all Acts of Hostility imaginable: and far∣ther published, That their Intentions were to set out a more numerous and stronger Fleet, than any which from the beginning of this War had sailed on the Seas; and in order therein∣to, great Numbers of Slaves, consisting of Cossacks and Moscovites, were bought of the Tartars, and transported to 
Constantinople.


The Venetians were not in the least affrigh∣ted at these Boastings of the Turk, but on the contrary, knowing that their Affairs in 
Candia
 were well secured and provided, gave Orders to 
Ballarino
 to desist from farther Treaties, and to procure his Licence to depart. And the Turks, to evidence their intentions to prosecute the War, entered into 
Canea
 with twenty eight Sail, laden with Arms and Provisions, on which also were fifteen hundred Men. By this convey∣ance was sent a Janisar-Aga with Orders from the Grand Signior, to constitute 
Chusaein
 Pasha in the place of Captain-Pasha, or Admiral of the Seas; but he judging this to be a Design, or Lure, to draw him from his Post, or Office, where∣in he was more strong and secure, acknowledged the Honour of the Employment, but framed Excuses to continue his Seat and Place of Resi∣dence, which the Chief Ministers were forced to accept; it being a Conjuncture more seasona∣ble to dissemble, than to resent his refusal.


Whilst new Preparations were making against 
Candia,
 so horrible a storm of Mutiny and Se∣dition arose at 
Constantinople,
 as constrained the Grandees of the Council to quit for the pre∣sent all thoughts of providing for the War against the Enemy, that they might defend and save themselves from the Fury of their own People; For the Spahees and Janisaries join∣ing together, pretended to reform the Abuses of the State; to perform which, in a furious Tumult, putting themselves in Arms, they ran to the Divan, where they deposed the Great Vizier,
 and discharged divers other Officers of their Employment; The Mufti was constrain∣ed to fly to 
Jerusalem,
 and the Queen-Mother scarce remained secure in her old Seraglio. And to so great a height their Rebellion proceeded, that they proposed even to dethrone the Grand Signior himself. And having thus cast off all Respect and Duty to their Prince, they entred the Imperial Palace, and forcing the Guards, broke up the Treasury, and carried two millions from thence.


Amidst of this horrid and affrighting Confu∣sion, Merchants and well-meaning Citizens re∣mained in the most astonishing apprehensions imaginable; for all Laws being broken, and Justice unregarded; the whole City laid open to be pillaged and sacked by the licentiousnefs of an unbridled Souldiery. For several days the Offi∣ces both of the Mufti, and Great Vizier re∣mained vacant, by reason that the two Facti∣ons of Janisaries and Spahees could not agree upon the Election. At length the most seditious amongst them wearying out the others with Quarrels and Contests, advanced a Fellow of no Understanding or Reputation to the eminent degree of Great Vizier; in which condition he remained not long. For the Fire of the mul∣titude being with time quenched, and the po∣pular Heat abated, this new Vizier was displa∣ced, all things returning to their usual Channel, and Authority to its Fountain.


And that Matters might more easily be re∣stored to their ancient order, the Grand Signior called for the Pasha of 
Damascus
 to receive the Dignity of Great Vizier; for he being a Per∣son of eighty Years of Age, and of long Ex∣perience in Affairs, having managed the most weighty Charges of the Empire, was looked on by all as the most proper Person to com∣pose and heal these great Distempers in the State; and this was that famous 
Kuperlee,
 who was Father to him who succeeded him in this Office. The Pasha of 
Silistria
 was also consti∣tuted Captain Pasha, and 
Chusaein
 was confir∣med in his Government of 
Candia.


And now the bright Beams of Justice and Government having dissipated the Storms and Fury of popular Sollevations; the Grand Sig∣nior in Person mounting his Horse, accompa∣nied with his principal Ministers of State, vi∣sited all the Parts of 
Constantinople,
 where ma∣king Inquisition for the principal Leaders and Fo∣menters of this Rebellion, he seized on some, and without further process, boldly executed them in the Face of the People.


But before things were reduced to this con∣dition, four Months were spent in this horrid Confusion; and what is most strange, this Great Empire for so long time remained without a Pilot, tossed on the Waves of popular Commo∣tions; all which served to give ease and respite to the Venetians in their War, but not to ope∣rate towards a Peace; so resolute were the Turks in their Design of making an entire Con∣quest of 
Candia.




Far having again Equipped a most formida∣ble Fleet, consisting of sixty light Gallies, twen∣ty eight Ships, and nine Galleasses; they attemp∣ted to make their way for 
Candia,
 and there∣with to fight the Venetians in case they should oppose them in their Voyage, to which they were the more encouraged upon sight of the Venetians, who appeared at the Streights of the 
Dardanelli,
 with no more than twenty nine Gallies, and some Boat, or Brigantines; how∣soever the Turks were not so confident in their numbers, but that they judged it requisite to fortify themselves with two Batteries; one on the Coast of 
Anatolia,
 and the other on the European shore; whereby they imagined, that they might cause the Venetians to give way, and open a Passage to their Fleet.


But notwithstanding the continual shot which the Turks made upon them,
 they still kept their Station from the 
23d
 to the 
26th
 of 
June;
 when the Wind coming about to the North, which was favourable for the Turks to Sail out, and to bring them nearer to their Enemies, they began gently to approach; and the like the Chri∣stians endeavoured, being desirous to join Bat∣tel; at which firmness of Resolution, the Turks being a little startled, became willing to avoid the Fight, and to creep under the shelter of the point of 
Babiers,
 which locks in one of the Bayes between the Castles and the Mouth of the 
Dardanelli.
 But the Wind on a sudden turn∣ing favourable for the Venetians, the Prior of 
Rochelle
 with his Squadron, and 
Mocenigo
 with three Ships under his Command, made up to∣wards the Castles, with design to cut the Turks off from their Retreat; the others valiantly assailed the Turks, who defending themselves like those, whose chief security consists in their Arms, there ensued a most miserable slanghter on one side,
 and the other; at length the Suc∣cess of Victory happened to the Venetians, who were animated by the couragious Example of their General 
Marcello,
 though he having Boarded, and become Master of a great Ship called a 
Soltana,
 with the Gally which attended her, was shot in the thigh with a Cannon Bul∣let, and thereby gained the glory to die Con∣quering, and Triumphant.


After whose Death, the Proveditor taking upon him the Command of the Fleet, prose∣cuted the Victory so close, that excepting four∣teen Gallies which escaped with the Captain-Pasha, and four Gallies of the Bey's; all the whole Flect was either taken, sunk, or burnt. The Venetians not being able to man all the Vessels that they had taken, set many of them on fire in the Night, excepting only twelve Gal∣lies, four Ships, and two Galleasses, which they reserved for a Demonstration or Evidence of their Victory. With this glorious success five thousand poor Christians obtained their Free∣dom, and had their Chains and Shackles knock∣ed off. What number the Turks might have lost is uncertain; but as to the Venetians, it is re∣ported, that besides their General, there were not above three hundred Men in all killed and wounded.


The Venetians being encouraged by this Suc∣cess, attacked the Island of 
Tenedos,
 and in the space of four days became Masters of it; as also in a short time afterwards of 
Stalimene,
 an∣tiently called 
Lemnos;
 the which shameful Los∣ses and Overthrow, so irritated the Mind of the Grand Signior, that he gave Orders to car∣ry the War into 
Dalmatia,
 intending the next Summer to go thither in Person; and in the mean time Commanded by the Pasha of 
Bosna,
 that the City of 
Ragusa
 should be put into a readiness to receive his Troops, being judged a convenient Place for the Seat and Magazine of Arms for those Countries.


But the poor Republick greatly apprehend∣ing this Misfortune, than which there could be no greater Mischief, nor Ruin to their Country; dispatched certain Deputies with their yearly Tribute to the Port, with Instructions, that in the way thither, they should supplicate the Pa∣sha to intercede with the Grand Signior in their behalf, representing to his Majesty, that they paying their annual Tribute for Protection, ought not in justice to be exposed to the licen∣tiousness of an Army, which their little Ter∣ritories were not capable to receive, nor pro∣vide with convenient Quarters: at which Mes∣sage the Pasha being highly incensed, answered rudely, and imprisoned them; threatning to strangle them, in case their Government did not obey the Commands of the Sultan.






ANNO
 1657.


BUT the chief Ministers at the Port, taking into their consideration the present State of Affairs; that the City of 
Constantinople
 was full of Discontents; the Persian on one side, and the Moscovite on the other, ready to invade di∣vers parts of the Empire; that there were De∣signs to depose the Grand Signior, and set one of his Brothers on the Throne; besides a mul∣titude of other Dangers; the resolution of the Court's removal, and of the Grand Signior's March into 
Dalmatia,
 was suspended; his Pre∣sence and Authority being esteemed most requi∣site in such a conjuncture of Troubles at the Heart and Center of his Empire. After which, the appearance of the Grand Signior in Publick was less frequent; for that he might hasten the departure of the Spahees and Janisaries for 
Can∣dia,
 he deferred his Journey to 
Adrianople
 for some time; but they being averse to this War, refused to march, until first they had received all Arrears which were due to them; the which audacious Proposal so incensed the Grand Sig∣nior, that he caused the Heads of two of the most forward Mutineers to be cut off in his presence.


This unseasonable rigour rather provoked the Spirits of discontented Men, than abated them; and the continual Prizes which the Venetians made on the Turks, and stoppage of Provisions, which did usually supply 
Constantinople
 from the 
Archipelago,
 raised the price of Bread, and of all Victuals in that populous City; so that the People murmured and exclaimed, as if they had been reduced to their last Extremity.


The Grand Vizier considering that the loss of 
Tenedos
 was the cause of all these Inconviences; promised the Inhabitants of 
Constantinople,
 that he would regain it in a short time; in order to which, he set forth a very numerous Fleet to be∣siege that Fortress; but contrary Winds, and bad Weather, forced them into a Neighbouring Port, where they attended the conjunction of the Bey's Gallies with them.


The General of the Venetians having received advice herof, put to Sea, that he might hinder these two Fleets from joining; and was no sooner in the Channel of 
Scio,
 than that he met with ten Sail of Barbery Men of War, convoy∣ing a great number of Saiques, and other Ves∣sels, of which fourteen were laden with Provi∣sions, carrying also with them two hundred

thousand Crowns, which was the Tribute of 
Rhodes:
 These the Venetians assailed with such Courage and Success, that they burnt the ten Ships, and many of the Saiques; killed a thou∣sand Turks, took four hundred Prisoners, deli∣vered three hundred Christians; with the loss only of an hundred killed, and three hundred wounded.


This and other Losses augmented the Discon∣tents at 
Constantinople
 so that the Grand Vizier, to hold up the Spirit of the People, resolved to go in Person to 
Tenedos;
 and accordingly equipped a Fleet of eighteen Ships, thirty Gal∣lies, ten Galleasses, with an innumerable Com∣pany of Saiques, and other Vessels, whereon he embarked twenty thousand Horse, and eighty thousand Foot; with which Army the Vizier sai∣led out of the 
Dardanelli,
 on the 
17th
 of 
July,
 having first received Intelligence, that 
Mocenigo
 was not returned from the 
Morea,
 where he had been for some time in chase of certain Ships. Howsoever the Turks found not the Passage so clear, but that they encountred with a Squa∣dron of eighteen Sail of Men of War, under the Command of Signior 
Bembo;
 the which seem∣ing an inconsiderable number to the Turks, they assailed them with undoubted hopes of Victory. The Admiral and Vice-Admiral of the Turks, with five other great Ships, charged the Vene∣tian Admiral, who defended himself so bravely, that for three hours they lay Board and Board; the rest of the Turkish Fleet assailed the other part of their Enemies Fleet so close, that the Fight became terrible and bloody, both for one and the other, until at length the Turks being worsted, were put to flight, and in the pursuit, a great Turkish Sultana was put ashore near 
Troy;
 one of their Galleasses was disabled, two of their Ships sunk, and the rest were chased as far as 
Metylene,
 being put by the Island of 
Tenedos.


In this Interim, the General 
Mocenigo
 was on his Voyage towards the 
Dardanelli;
 and being come within the noise of the Cannon, he ha∣stened with more diligence; and arrived so sea∣sonably to the assistance of 
Bembo,
 that at his appearance most of the Turkish Gallies began to turn their Sterns, and make towards the Shore of 
Anatolia,
 with such disorder, that of twenty eight Gallies, and two Galleasses, there were but five only which kept company with the Bastard Gally of the Captain-Pasha, and en∣tred with him under the defence of the Castles. The rest of the Fleet was chased by 
Mocenigo;
 but the Turks being to windward, the Christi∣ans were not able that day to come up with there. The next day the Wind being more fa∣vourable, a Council of War was held aboard the Venetian General; during which Consulta∣tion, they espied five Gallies making towards the Point 
Baba,
 there to secure themselves under the Shore: and thereupon resolved, that whilst the Captain General, with a Squadron of 
Mal∣ta,
 attempted those five Gallies, and others which had taken the same place of Refuge, the rest of the Fleet should keep firing at those without.


Accordingly the Captain-General made to∣wards the Point 
Baba,
 where passing within Musket-shot, and under the reach of five Batte∣ries, an unfortunate Shot in the Powder-room blew up the Ship, and therewith ended the Days of this valiant 
Mocenigo,
 who died full of Ho∣nour and Glory; his brave Actions continuing his Memory in all the Histories of 
Venice.
 The Proyeditor succeeding in his Command, prose∣cuted the same Design; and as if he would imi∣tate the ancient Funeral Piles, he celebrated the Obsequies of his General, by burning the Ad∣miral Gally of the Turks, and thence retired towards 
Tenedos.


After the Turks had refitted their Vessels, and put their Fleet in a reasonable posture, they de∣parted from 
Metylene
 the 
28th
 of 
July
 at Night, and on the 
30th
 were on the Coast of 
Tenedos;
 where immediatly landing five thousand Men, and great numbers approaching ready to set their foot on Shore, the Defendants of the For∣tress summoned a Council of War; at which all agreeing that the Island was not tenable against so great a Force, embarked their Men, Ammu∣nition, and Artillery, and resigned their place to the disposal and command of the Enemy. After which Success the Turks in like manner landed ten thousand Men on the Island of 
Lem∣nos;
 where, having laid a formal Siege to the Castle, they made a general Assault, but were repulsed with the loss of five hundred Men, leaving their Scaling-Ladders to the Besieged. They made afterwards divers Attempts, but in all were beaten off with considerable loss; so that they had abandoned the Enterprize, had not the greater fear and apprehension of the Divan at Home, confirmed their Courage a∣gainst the Enemy; until at length the Christians being wearied with two Months Siege,
 without hopes of Relief, were forced to a Surrender; which was performed on Articles, That they should depart with Arms, Baggage, and have free liberty to embark themselves for 
Candia.


These two important Places being regained by the Turks, were the Subject of great Joy to the Court, and of Courage and Satisfaction to the Inhabitants of 
Constantinople:
 So that the Grand Signior apprehending that by these Suc∣cesses, the Seditions and Mutinies of the City were appeased, he took his Journey to 
Adriano∣ple;
 where to evidence his Grandeur to the Bai∣lo 
Capello,
 and the Secretary 
Ballarino,
 he made his entry with an Army of twenty thousand Men, besides the ordinary Attendance of the Court, and usual Concomitants of the Ottoman Train.


After which Ostentation, the Grand Signior encharged 
Ballarino
 to write to the Senate, That though he was able to over-run all their Country, and take from them their Capital City, yet such was his Clemency, that he was contented to grant them Peace, on Conditions that they sur∣rendred to him all the Island of 
Candia,
 with the Fortress of 
Clissia
 in 
Dalmatia,
 and paiment of three Millions of Gold for the Dammages of the War.


But these seemed to the Senate to be such un∣reasonable Propositions, and so prejudicial to their Honour, that they resolved to maintain the War, and to defend themselves more vigo∣rously than ever.






ANNO 
1658.


NOtwithstanding the Designs of the Turks against 
Dalmatia,
 they were not less intent to their Affairs in 
Candia,
 designing to try their Fortune once again in the Siege of the principal City of that Name, for that falling into their Hands, the whole Island would quickly be re∣duced, and with that Conquest an end would be put unto the War.


The Venetians, on the other side, attended to their Business with all diligence, not neglecting any Provisions which might secure their Interest

in that Country; and that they might regain what they had lost, they held Intelligence with some Persons in 
Canea,
 hoping by their means to surprise the Town; but the Turkish Gover∣nour, being very vigilant, reinforced his Gari∣son with five hundred Men: and 
Chusaein
 Pasha coming to his Assistance with thirty Gallies, dis∣appointed the Venetians of landing at that place.


The Rendezvous of the Army which was to march into 
Dalmatia,
 was ordered to be at 
A∣drianople,
 where the Brother-in-Law of the Pa∣sha of 
Aleppo,
 who was Commander of the Forces of that Place, arriving later than the day prefixed, was for that reason put to death by the Great Vizier.


This Severity so enraged the Pasha, that im∣mediately he raised an Army of forty thousand Men, and marched towards 
Scutari,
 threatning 
Constantinople
 it self, unless the Head of the Great Vizier were given him by way of repri∣zal for that of his Brothers. The Divan being startled hereat, returned him a gentle Message, neither denying nor granting his Demand, as if they intended to amuse him with Hopes: But he interpreting this Delay for a Refusal, did not only perfist in requiring the Head of the Vizier, but of four other principal Counsellors, whom he judged to have concurred in the Sentence for his Brother's Death; and in farther prosecu∣tion hereof, he burnt and spoiled all the Coun∣try about 
Constantinople;
 and the Plague raging at the same time in the City, affected the Inhabi∣tants with such Sadness and Discontent, that the chief Ministers apprehended more Evil from thence, than from the Enemy without.


The Army of the Pasha daily increasing, and being grown from forty to sixty thousand Men, caused the Vizier to abandon all other Thoughts and Designs but those which tended to the de∣struction of the Pasha, and his Complices; so that there necessarily followed a Revulsion of the Forces from 
Dalmatia;
 the Vizier himself diverting them from thence and 
Transylvania,
 marched with the whole Army towards 
Constan∣tinople.


Yet before the Great Vizier departed from 
Adrianople,
 he perswaded the Grand Signior to set the Bailo 
Capello,
 and the Secretary 
Ballarino
 at Liberty, that thereby he might give some jea∣lousy to the Rebels, as if he designed to make a Peace with 
Venice,
 to have more Power, and better leizure to make his War against them. This Counsel, though prudently given, had yet little Influence on the Humor of the Pasha, who continued his March, fortifying himself in the most advantageous Passes of the Country: But what was most bold of all his Actions, and rendred his Pardon beyond the Clemency of his Soveraign, was the proclaiming a Youth of twenty Years of Age, then with him in his Ar∣my, to be the Son of Sultan 
Morat,
 and conse∣quently the lawful Heir of the Crown; and that in right of him, he had taken possession of a great part of 
Asia,
 and was marching towards 
Constantinople,
 with resolution to dispossess Sul∣tan 
Mehmet,
 and exalt this lawful and undoubted Heir on the Throne of his Ancestors.


This and other Rumors from 
Persia,
 that that King taking the advantage of these Disorders, was making Preparations to regain 
Bagdat,
 or 
Babylon,
 and revenge himself of all those Cruelties which the Turks had inflicted on his Subjects and Country, increased the Fears and Cares of the chief Ministers of State.


Notwithstanding which, 
Chusaein
 Pasha pro∣secuted his Business no less in 
Candia
 than for∣merly, in hopes to put an end to the War there before the end of the Summer; and in order thereunto, he received a Recruit of five and twenty thousand Men from the 
Morea.
 But the daily increase of the Pasha's Forces, and his ap∣proach towards 
Constantinople,
 as it was a Mat∣ter of the highest Consequence, so it required the most prudence and caution in the manage∣ment.


In the first place therefore by 
Fetfa,
 or Re∣solve from the Mufti, the Pasha was declared a Rebel, and guilty of High Treason against the Sultan; notwithstanding which, a Chaous was dispatched with Letters of Pardon, if now re∣penting of his Fault, he would disband his Ar∣my, and return to his former Obedience, he should be received into Grace and Favour. The Pasha received the Chaous with the same Cere∣mony and Honour, as if he had been an Ambas∣sador, being willing to consider him under that Character, rather than under the Notion of a Pursuivant, or Officer sent to affright him into his Duty; and in Answer to the Message, re∣plied, That it was not in his power to condes∣cend to any Conditions, for that since he had assumed the Cause of this Youth, who was the Son of Sultan 
Morat,
 concealed to that Age by his Mother, for fear of the Power of his Uncle, he could not assent to any Terms or Conditions less than the Exaltation of him to the Ottoman Throne. And so carrying this Young Man with him, as a Property, whereby to cover his Rebel∣lion with the Guise of Justice and Duty, he maintained a Court for him after the Ottoman Fashion; and causing the Tagho, or Standards, to be carried before him, he permitted him to give Audiences, send Dispatches, and to take on him all the Royal Marks of Empire.


The Army of the Pasha was by this time en∣creased to seventy thousand Men, one part of which he sent towards 
Scutari,
 and another to∣wards 
Smyrna,
 which alarm'd all the Countries round about, and gave the Grand Signior such cause of Apprehension, that he tried divers Means, and made many Propositions of Ho∣nours and Benefits to the Pasha, whereby to al∣lure him to Obedience: One while he offered to him the Government of 
Grand Cairo:
 but that being rejected, he endeavoured to raise Men in 
Asia
 to oppose the progress of his Arms; of which some numbers being got into a Body, and perceiving the formidable Force of the Pa∣sha, revolted, and joined themselves to his Party.


This Extremity of Affairs, caused the Grand Signior not only again to proclaim the Pasha a Rebel, but to give liberty to his People to de∣stroy him and his Souldiers in any parts where they should encounter them. In pursuance of which License, a Village in 
Asia
 having killed twenty five or thirty of the Pasha's Men, which came thither to refresh themselves; the Pasha was so enraged thereat, that he caused his Souldiers to put Man, Woman, and Child to the Sword throughout the Village. And in this manner the Affairs of the Turks remained in the greatest Confusion imaginable through the whole course of this Year 1658.






ANNO 
1659.


NOR did this Year begin with better Omens of Success, for to the other Dangers, was added a Report, that the Persian had taken the Field with two hundred thousand Men, for re∣covery

of 
Bagdat,
 or 
Babylon,
 which was the ancient Patrimony of his Forefathers; so that the Grand Signior being rendred thereby more willing to agree and accommodate Affairs with the Pasha, proffered to him the Government of the Province of 
Soria
 for ever, paying only a yearly Homage of an hundred thousand Sulta∣nees, in lieu of three hundred thousand, which that Country always yielded. But the Pride of the Pasha scorned a Proffer of so mean a Consi∣deration, having nothing less in his Thoughts than the entire enjoyment of the Empire, or at least to partake an equal share thereof with the Sultan.


For the Hopes of the Pasha encreasing with his Army, which was now grown to eighty thou∣sand Men, he took up for some days his Head∣quarters near the Fortress of 
Tocacaia,
 within the days march of 
Smyrna;
 and thence ap∣proaching towards 
Constantinople,
 the chief Mi∣nisters concluded, that there was no other Safety but in their Arms; and that the Pasha was not to be reduced to any terms of Gentleness or Moderation. Accordingly the Great Vizier pas∣sed into 
Asia
 with a numerous Army, and spee∣dily joined Battel with the Pasha, which conti∣nued for some Hours with great slaughter on one side and the other; but at length the fortune of the Day turned in favour of the Pasha; and the Vizier's Army being routed, he lost all his Can∣non and Baggage, and he himself was forced to save himself in the Neighbouring Countries; where not being pursued by the Pasha, he had time again to collect his torn and scattered Troops. The News hereof multiplied the Dis∣orders and Confusions at 
Constantinople,
 to which being added the Motion of the Persians, and that they were to join with the Pasha; as also some Troubles in 
Transylvania,
 caused by the unquiet Spirit of 
Ragotski,
 together with the ill Humour of the Male-contents in the City, made all things appear with equal or greater Danger at Home than Abroad.


Wherefore, as the ultimate Remedy of these imminent Dangers it was resolved, that the Grand Signior should go in Person to the War, on supposition that Reverence to his Royal Per∣son would produce that awe on the Spirits of his Subjects, which was not to be effected by Violence, or force of Arms. According to this Resolution the Grand Signior passed into 
Asia,
 and joining his Forces with those of the Vizi∣er, composed an Army of seventy thousand Foot, and thirty thousand Horse; with which marching boldly towards the Enemy, the Heart of the Pasha began to fail him; so that calling a Council of his Officers, he proposed his In∣clinations towards Terms of Agreement, rather than to hazard all on the Uncertainties of a Battel; the Spirits of the Souldiery being now become tractable by the appearance of so great a Force, assented to the Proposition; and there∣upon Articles being speedily drawn up, were sent to the Grand Signior for his Approbation; who, though he would not seem to refuse any thing therein contained, yet declined a perso∣nal Treaty, as being a Matter too mean for his Imperial Person to capitulate with his Vassals; and therefore ordered, that 
Mortaza
 Pasha should Treat in his behalf, promising to confirm whatsoever Act 
Mortaza
 Pasha should conclude in this Matter.


Mortaza
 being thus made Plenipotentiary, re∣fused to treat with the Pasha, until such time as he had retreated with his Army at a distance of some days March from the Grand Signior's Camp; which being performed near a Town called 
Alexandria,
 he foolishly suffered himself to be separated in a private Place from his Ar∣my, on pretence that Peace was more aptly concluded in a free Retirement, than under the constraint and force of the Souldiery. Here 
Mortaza
 meeting the Pasha, forcibly strangled him, with seventeen of his Complices, whom he had brought with him for Witnesses to his Capitulations with the Grand Signior. With the news hereof the Army of the Pasha soon disbanded, every one with shame and silence shifting for himself, retired to his own Coun∣try and Home. And herewith easily ended this Civil War almost in a moment, which but now threatned the Extirpation of the Ottoman Race.


The cruel Vizier retained his thoughts of Re∣venge, which we shall shortly hear in what manner he vented on the great Spahees and rich Men in 
Asia,
 who had joined themselves with the Pasha in this Rebellion. This good Service promoted 
Mortaza,
 and rendred him more con∣siderable to the Grand Signior; so that he was employed in the Assistance of the Tartars, against 
Ragotski
 in 
Transylvania,
 and afterwards preferred to the important Charge of 
Bagdat,
 or 
Babylon,
 of whose Success, and Fate, we we shall hear in the Sequal of a few Years.


But as yet the Commotions of 
Asia
 were not so wholly extinguished, but that the Nephew of the Pasha of 
Aleppo,
 in revenge of the trea∣cherous Death of his Uncle, took up Arms, and was followed by the People of the Territories depending on 
Aleppo.
 To his Assistance came in also the Son of 
Chusaein
 Pasha, late General in 
Candia,
 whom the cruel Vizier had put to death, notwithstanding the merit of his late Services, which might seem to atone for his former Misfortunes, and make satisfaction for non-compliance with Instructions; but this Vi∣zier, who never pardoned any Person, would not begin with an Act of Clemency towards one who was none of his Creatures or Confi∣dents depending on him.


To these joined the Bey of 
Torgue,
 who cast∣ing off his Obedience to the Pasha of 
Cairo,
 entred into the Cabal with ten thousand Horse; so that a formidable Army being composed by this Union, gave a new subject of Fear and Ap∣prehension at 
Constantinople.
 But the Great Vi∣zier so dextrously managed his Affair, by sow∣ing Dissention between the Chiefs, and bestow∣ing Largesses on the Souldiery, that the Army unsensibly mouldred away, leaving their Gene∣rals, and Commanders to shift for themselves, and exposing them to the Justice of a Vizier, who was unacquainted with Mercy, and never pardoned any who was either guilty of a Fault, or supected for it.


Towards the end of this Year, the Vizier built the lower Forts, which are scituated at the entrance into the 
Dardanelles,
 commonly called by the name of the Queen-Mother's Castles. And dispatched a Chaous to the Pasha of 
Ca∣nea,
 to put all things in a Readiness for the Siege of 
Candia;
 Orders were also given to the Pashaws of the Inland Countries to prepare them∣selves for the Wars against 
Dalmatia,
 and 
Tran∣silvania.






ANNO 
1660.


THE Rendezvous of the Army being ap∣pointed at 
Belgrade,
 the Vizier hastened thither in Person to quicken the Preparations,

and March of the Souldiers, which were flock∣ing thither from all parts. This Vizier 
Kuper∣lee,
 though aged, was yet very active and vigo∣rous, by which he created so much confidence of himself in his Master, that he acted nothing in all the Government but by his Counsel and Direction: which being always jealous and bloo∣dy towards those who had any Power in the Empire, he for that Reason cut off the Casir of 
Damascus,
 who though he was a good Go∣vernour, and a faithful Servant, yet because he was a Favourite of the Queen-Mother, and con∣served the State of his Affairs in a laudable po∣sture, he grew jealous of his Power, and there∣fore sacrificed his Blood to his own Security and Bloody Disposition.


The which act of unjust Cruelty so enraged the Queen-Mother, that she for ever after bore a mortal hatred to this Vizier, and continued the same to his Son, which was the famous 
Kuperlee;
 but his Moderation and Discretion was so well tempered with respect towards her, that She at length not only pardoned the Sin of his Father in him, but became his Friend, and relished the Services which he performed for his Master.


The Venetians having about this time received considerable Succours, namely four thousand French Foot, which his most Christian Majesty, after the Conclusion of Peace at the 
Pyrenean
 Treaty, had most generously Spared to that Re∣publick, were enabled to attempt some notable Enterpaize; and thereby so hardly pressed the Pasha of 
Canea,
 that he earnestly wrote to the Grand Signior for Succours; assuring him, that without present Relief, he should be forced to surrender his Town to the Mercy of the Ene∣my. The Grand Signior promised him speedy Relief, and for his better encouragement sent him the Present of a Sword and a Vest of Sa∣bles; in the mean time the Venetians took three Forts, 
viz. Calamo, Calegro,
 and 
Epicarno,
 and proceeded to lay Siege to 
Canea;
 but the Ene∣my having received a Supply of three thousand Men into the Town, the Christians quitted this enterprize in hopes of beating the Turks out of new 
Candia;
 which was lately built near to the old 
Candia,
 with design to keep that Town straitned by perpetual Alarms, and by the vi∣cinity of so bad a Neighbourhood.


The Grand Vizer being very Aged, was subject to many Infirmities, and falling sick at 
Belgrade,
 he was advised by the Physicians to change the Air, as the best Remedy for his Disease; and indeed they were all careful to give him the best and safest Counsels, for that he often threatned them, if he died of that Sickness, he would send them all to the next World before him. The Vizier following the Advice of his Physicians, returned to 
Adrianople,
 where ha∣ving in a good measure recovered his Health, he sent Orders to 
Hali
 Pasha, then General of the Forces in 
Hungary,
 to hasten the Siege of 
Wara∣din,
 being esteemed by the Turks an advantagious Fortress for carrying on their Conquests in that Country; of the taking of which Town, and of all the Trouble in 
Transylvania,
 caused by the ambitious humour of 
Ragotzki,
 we shall treat at large in the following History. For being come to that time, in which Providence allotted me a charge at 
Constantinople;
 I was thereby somewhat elevated on a rising Ground, whereby I could with my own Eyes survey the Transactions of that great Empire; and for that Reason I call them my Memoirs; which for being Matters transacted in my own Time, I have thought fit to introduce them with a short Advertisement to the Reader.




















THE MEMOIRS OF Sir Paul Rycaut, Containing the HISTORY OF THE TURKS, FROM THE YEAR 1660, to the YEAR 1678. With the most Remarkable Passages Relating to the ENGLISH TRADE In the space of Eighteen Years.










TO THE READER.


Courteous Reader,


THIS following History is some part of those fruits arising from my vacant hours of eighteen Years residence in 
Turky,
 seven whereof I compleated at 
Constantinople,
 in quality of Secretary to the Lord Ambassador; and for eleven Years I exercised the Office of Consul at 
Smyrna.
 In the first times of which, I had great advantages to observe, and make my Annotations; having for the most part been acquainted with the persons as well as with the affairs of those concern∣ing whom I write; and indeed the incumbence which was then upon me, obliged me to a know∣ledg both of persons and business. My latter time, which was that of being Consul, con∣strained me to an attendance on matters relating to the government of our Trade; and there∣fore it is not to be expected, that at that distance from the Court, I should lay down Transacti∣ons so positive, and particular, as in the preceding Years; yet the acquaintance, and corre∣spondence I afterwards continued at Court, and the care I took to inform my self of what oc∣curred, qualified me in some measure for an Historian; at least put me into a condition to make a Breviate, or Collection of certain Observations occurring in the Turkish Court.


When I first entred on this work, I was carried with a certain emulation of 
French
 and 
Italian
 Writers, of whose Ministers few there were employed in the parts of 
Turky,
 but who carried with them from thence, Memoirs, Giornals, or Historical Observations of their times. In which our Nation hath been so defective, that besides some scattered and abrupt Papers, without coherence, or method, adjoined to the end of 
Knoll
's History of the 
Turks
 (which is an excellent collection from divers Authors.) one shall scarce find five sheets of Pa∣per wrote by our Countrymen in way of History. At which omission having often wondred, I resolved from my first entrance in those Countries, to note down in a blank Book what occurred in that Empire, either as to Civil, or Military affairs; with what Casualties and Changes befel our Trade, that so both one and the other might serve for Examples and Precedents to future Ages; the which after some years afforded me materials to compose and frame this following Discourse. In which, having by Gods assistance thus far proceeded; As it may be an Example to my Successors, to spin and draw out the thread of this History through Ages to come; so it will be a good part, and office, of those who reside there at present, by a more diligent enquiry to correct, and amend what I have mistaken, or misunderstood.


For next to the immediate attendance to the Charge and Trust imposed upon me, I judged it a chief duty towards my Country, to denote and Record certain Transactions relating to Trade, which is the grand Interest that hath engaged 
England
 to a Communication and Cor∣respondence with these remote Parts: nor doth the World perhaps expect much less from me, than that I should add something to the History of the 
Turks
 in our time; which howsoever imperfectly I may perform it, yet the Offices which I have exercised, and the impartiality with which it is wrote, may gain it some credit and reputation in the World. For in the wri∣ting hereof, I cannot be taxed with animosity to any person; nor am I to be esteemed as posses∣sed with affection, or partiality to any side; which is a point of sobriety, and good temper, necessary for all Historians: For we who lived in those parts, were little concerned for the House of 
Kuperlee,
 or for the Favourites of the Court; nor was it of any moment to us, whether the Faction of the 
Spahees,
 or 
Janizaries
 prevailed; or whether the Courtiers, or the Soldiers, ruled the Empire: only we esteemed it our duty, to speak best of that Govern∣ment under which our Trade thrived most. And tho the times of 
Sultan Ibrahim
 were the golden days for Merchants, which employed our Navigation beyond the memory of any times, either before, or since; and consumed of our Manufactories (tho not in greater quantities yet) perhaps with better advantage and profit to our Nation: Yet I ought not to be so injuri∣ous, or ungrateful to 
Sultan Mahomet
 the Fourth, as to accuse his Government of Oppression, or Violence towards us, or of any breach of Articles, and Priviledges, which he had granted to his Majesties Subjects; but shall rather applaud, and be ready to own that Justice which our Complaints have found, and met at the Ottoman Court, under the protection of those worthy Ambassadors sent by his Majesty to stand Centinel on the Guard of their Country.


For whereas in the time of 
Sultan Morat,
 when the Military men bore the sway; Injustice and Violence, which mingled in all the actions of Rule, had an influence also on the English

affairs: And when in the time of 
Sultan Ibrahim,
 that the Female Court had gained the predominancy, and that vast Treasures were expended in Riot and Luxury; the prodigality of great persons made it necessary to be rapacious and unjust: But in these more moderate times of this present Sultan, when neither excessive Wars abroad, nor Luxury nor immode∣rate expence at home, exhausted the Coffers; We may easily imagine, that the disorders of State did not drive the Rulers to a necessity of exercising unjust Arts, which are always most certain Symptoms, either of a bad Government, or a vicious incliuation in the Prince.


The English Trade, according to the Chronicles of Sir 
Richard Baker,
 was first introduced into the Country of the 
Turks,
 in the Year 1579. but 
Sagredo
 an 
Italian
 Writer, accounts only from the Year 
1583.
 perhaps before that time Overtures were only made for a Trade, which might be so inconsiderable, as that until then it was not esteemed worthy to be adorned with an Ambassador, or to be opposed by the Ministers of Foreign Princes. For so soon as an Ambassador from 
England
 appeared at the Ottoman Court, with Credential Letters from Queen 
Elizabeth,
 the 
French
 and 
Venetian
 Ministers took the Alarm, and opposed his re∣ception, especially the 
French,
 who (as 
Sagredo
 reports in his History of the 
Turks
) re∣presented unto the G. Vizier, how much this new Friendship with the English would obstruct that ancient Alliance which was made with his King, and would impeach and lessen the Pri∣viledges and Trade which they enjoyed in those parts: To which the Vizier answered, ac∣cording to their usual phrase and stile; That the happy Imperial Seat where his Master re∣sided, was called the 
Port,
 because it was free and open to all such who desired to take re∣fuge and sanctuary therein, and therefore the English without just reason ought not to be ex∣cluded. That the Sultan ought not to be denied that freedom of love and hatred, which was common to all Mankind; and that he was as well resolved to chuse and cherish his Friends, as to prosecute and destroy his Enemies. Whereunto the French Ambassador urged, That since it was the pleasure of the Grand Signior to admit the English; that at least they should be obliged to enter 
Constantinople
 under the French Colours. But the English Ambassador replied, that his Mistress who was so potent, scorned all Dependencies on other Nations, and would rather abandon the Friendship of the Sultan, than admit the least diminution of her own honour: And embellishing his Discourses (as 
Sagredo
 proceeds) with the representa∣tion of that advantage and profit, which the English Trade would bring to the Ottoman Em∣pire; he so ensnared the hearts of the Turks, that they preferred the admittance of new Guests, before the Alliance of ancient Friends. Since which time our Commerce and Trade with the Turk hath been in its increase, and being governed by a Wise and Grave Company of Experienced Merchants, hath by Gods blessing brought an inestimable Treasure and advan∣tage to the English Nation, which that it may still continue, increase, and flourish in all Ages and times to come, is the hearty desire, and Prayer of him, who is a true, and faithful Ser∣vant to that worthy Society, and a sincere Wellwisher to his Country.


Farewel.












THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROUR OF THE TURKS, Beginning in the NINTH YEAR OF HIS REIGN.




The First BOOK.


Anno Christi, 
1661.
 Hegeira, 
1072.


IT was now the beginning of this Year, when the Earl of 
Winchelsea
 arrived at 
Constantinople,
 the first Embassadour sent abroad from His Majesty of 
Great Britain, Charles
 the Second, after his happy Re∣turn to the Glorious throne of his Ance∣stors, to 
Sultan Mahomet,
 the Thirteenth Em∣perour of the Turks; it being judged fit, that amongst other Alliances which were to be con∣tracted with Foreign Princes, and States, this of 
Turkey
 should not be omitted, but rather in the first place considered: In regard, that as the flourishing Estate and Prosperity of 
England
's richess depends absolutely on her Foreign Trade, so on none more particularly than on that of 
Turkey,
 which consumes great quantities of her most staple and substantial Manufactures, and makes returns in whatsoever Employs, and gives Bread to the poor and industrious of the Nation.


But before we come to treat of the Successes of this Ambassador, and the various Transactions in the 
Turkish
 Affairs; we shall relate some ac∣cidents which befel us in our Voyage by Sea to 
Constantinople.
 The Earl of 
Winchelsea
 and his Lady, with a numerous Retinue being embark∣ed on the 
Plymouth
 Frigat, commanded by Sir 
Thomas Allen,
 and accompanied with a Catch and two Merchants Ships, the 
Prosperous
 and 
Smyrna
 Factor for 
Turkey,
 set sail from the 
Downs
 on the Twentieth of 
Octob.
 1660. And proceeding with a favourable Gale, and fair Weather, until we were come to the heighth of the Norward Cape, or Cape 
Finisterre;
 we then contended with so severe a storm, that we were forced to bring our Ship under a main course, to fasten our Helm, and lye, and drive. In the Twenty nineth about Five in the Morning, our main Tack flew, which shook and strained our Mass so violently, that it was shivered in two places between Decks: The danger hereof might have proved of ill consequence, had the Mast gone by the Board; for in all probability it would have carried up our Decks, unfixed both our Pumps, and laid us open to the Sea; but the Providence of God, and the diligence of our

Seamen was such, that we soon struck our Top Mast, boared our main Yard, and so fished the Mast it self where it was defective, that with the help of our sore-Sail, and the benefit of bet∣ter Weather we safely arrived on the Thirty first in the Port of 
Lisbon.
 The Match being then in Treaty between 
Charles
 the Second our Dread Soveraign, and 
Catherine
 the 
Infanta
 of 
Portugal,
 now our gracious Queen; all the concernments of 
England
 were extreamly acceptable to the Court of 
Portugal;
 and particularly the Person of the Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 a Peer of 
England,
 qualified with the Character of Ambassadour Extraordi∣nary to the 
Ottomon
 Port. For at our first arri∣val there, I being then Secretary to the said Earl, was employed to carry a Letter to the King, which was received by the Councel of State then sitting: After the Letter had been read and con∣sidered, I was called in, and an answer given me by the 
Marquis de Nissa,
 and 
D. Gasper Faria de Sevarin
 then Secretary of State, to this purpose. That they were glad, so grateful an opportu∣nity presented, whereby they might Demon∣strate their warm and real affections towards the King of 
England,
 by serving his Ambassadour in so necessary a piece of Service as that which was required: That Orders were given to fur∣nish the Ship with a Mast, and what she wanted, out of the Kings Stores; and that both his Ex∣cellency and Lady, with all their Retinue should be welcomed a shore, with due regard to their Quality and Condition. The Day following his Excellency was complemented from the King, by a 
Maestro de Campo
 sent to him on Ship∣board; and being come ashoar, and lodged at the House of Mr. 
Maynard
 the 
English
 Consul, he was visited by 
D. Francisco de Melo,
 (who had besore, and was afterwards employed Ambassa∣dour into 
England
) and by 
D. Antonio de Saousa
 and others. After Eight days his Excellency had Audience of the King, and the Queen Mo∣ther, and was received by both, with many de∣monstrations of a hearty desire to contract a firm Alliance with 
England.
 He was after∣wards invited by the 
Conde de Odemira
 Governour of the young King, and Chief Minister of 
Portu∣gal,
 to a 
Quinta,
 or Garden-house at 
Bellain:
 where were present the Duke of 
Calaval,
 the 
Visconde de Castel Blanco,
 and 
D. Francisco de Me∣lo;
 the entertainment was very splendid, with variety of Dishes, and Wine, corresponding ra∣ther with the inordinate Tables of 
English,
 than with the frugality, and temperate Diet of 
Spa∣niards.
 Our Ship being in this interim refitted, we returned aboard on the Twelsth of 
Novem∣ber;
 the Earl of 
Winchelsea
 being presented by the King, with several Hampers of sweet-Meats, Vessels of Wine, and other Provisions for his Voyage; and his lady by the Queen Mother, with a Jewel of considerable value, and with diverse boxes filled with Purses of persumed Leather, and Amber Comfits.


On the Thirteenth we set Sail, being design'd by Order of his Majesty for 
Algier,
 to settle a Peace with that unsetled People; where arriving on the Tewenty second day about Three a Clock in the Afternoon, we came to an Anchor about Two Miles distant from the Town, which we saluted with Twenty one Guns, but re∣ceived none again in answer thereunto; it being the custome of that People, not to acknowledge Civilities, but to repay injuries, and not requite benefits. We found that they had already be∣gun to break the Peace: Having brought in thi∣ther an 
English
 Ship, which lay between hope and fear of freedom, or seizure: So soon as we had dropt our Anchors, a Boat came from that Ship, acquainting us of the State of 
Algter,
 and how near Matters were to a Rupture with them; by this Boat my Lord Ambassadour sent a Letter to the Consul, appointing him to come aboard; who the next Day, being the Twenty third, ap∣peared accordingly; to whom his Excellency imparted the Instructions and Orders from his Majesty to renew the Peace on the former Ar∣ticles; and particularly to insert a Caution, That the 
Algerines
 should on no terms search our Ships, but that the Passengers, and goods there∣on, whether of 
English
 or Strangers, should be free and exempted from all seizure, and Pyracy whatsoever. I being appointed to assist the Con∣sul in this Treaty, accompanied him ashoar, and in the first place we applyed our selves to 
Rama∣dam Bullock-bashee,
 then the Chief of their Di∣van, and Head of their Government; whom we acquainted, that on the Ship in the road, was an Earl of 
England,
 sent Ambassadour by his Ma∣jesty our King to the Grand Signor; and in his way thither was appointed to touch at 
Algier,
 and to inform the Government of that place of the happy Restoration of his Majesty to the Throne of his Father, and to confirm the same Peace which was before concluded with usurped Powers, and so delivered him the Letters from his Majesty, which were superscribed in this manner:


To their Excellencies the Aga, Jiabashees, and rest of the Honourable Council of State and War, in the City and Kingdom of
 Algier.


Ramadam
 answered us, that he was well satis∣fied with the Proposal; that there was a Peace already with the 
English,
 and that they were Brothers; that the next Day was appointed for a general Divan of great and small, at which we might freely open our breasts, and declare whatsoever was committed to us by our King and his Ambassadour.


But for the better understanding of the State of 
Algier,
 at this time, we must observe, that for many years before, this government was com∣posed of a Divan, the Chief and Head whereof was a Pasha sent every Three years to preside there, and had so continued, until that some few Months before this time one 
Halil
 a poor Fellow, who had no better Estate than the Sixteenth part of a Vessel, but bold and desperate, complained one Day in open Divan against the Pasha, ac∣cusing him of many miscarriages, with which he so affected the Divan; that he rudely threw him from his Seat, drubbed him, trampled on him, and plucked the Hairs out of his Beard, which is the greatest mark of ignominy and contempt that any Person can offer to another; and ha∣ving committed him to Prison and Chains, he with the Divan took upon himself the unlimited Power of an Arbitrary Government: And thus for the space of Six or Eight Months this Mis∣creant tyrannized, and ruled without controul: Until an obscure and contemptible Moor, an ordinary Jerbin or Countryman, instigated (as was supposed) by the Aga, or General of the Souldiery, approaching near him in the Streets, under pretence of kissing his Vest,
 struck him with a long Knife between the Ribs; which bold∣ness of the Moor so astonished the Attendants which were about him, that none had power to lay hands on the Murderer, but suffered him to depart, and fly unpursued: Of this wound 
Halil
 dyed in Two days, in which time be no∣minated 
Ramadam
 his Kinsman to be the most Proper, and fit Person to succed him in the Go∣vernment;

and this recommendation so prevailed on the Divan, that he was elected for their Chief: A Person of a most sordid, and Mercenary Soul, immersed in Covetousness, and Gluttony, guided by his Lust and Interest, unless some times restrained by the Authority of the Divan, and the fear of popular Insurrection.


This 
Ramadam
 according to his Promise be∣fore recited, summon'd us the day following, being the Twenty-fourth to the Divan;
 which consists in all of Twenty-four Bulluck-bashees, who are Offi∣cers of the Souldiery, each commanding Twenty-four Souldiers under him,
 Twenty-four Jia∣bashees, and Eighteen Ancients or grave Seniors: Though for that present, there appeared no more than Forty-five, the others being at Sea, or abroad; 
Ramadam
 was placed in the Chair, or in a Seat at the upper end, and the Aga sate by him, the others stood on their feet, and put themselves into Two Files, or Ranks; and then 
Ramadam
 began with a loud Voice to cry, The 
English
 are come to treat a Peace with you, and have brought Letters from their King, and from their Ambassadour now aboard going for 
Con∣stantinople;
 which very words every one distinct∣ly pronounced, and repeated them, carrying the Voice from the lower to the upper end; I fan∣cied, that it was after the manner of our repeat∣ing Syllogisms in disputations, that so no mi∣stake might be, and that the Respondent might have time to consider and weigh the argument. Then 
Ramadam
 demanded, whether they were pleased to enter into Treaty with the 
English;
 which words being repeated as before, and an∣swered in the Affirmative, the Letters were read in the 
Turkish
 Translation; with the Ar∣ticles of Peace proposed, which were as follow∣eth:



I. 
THat the
 English 
shall be obliged to protect all Passengers belonging to
 Algier, 
aboard their Ships, to the utmost of their power, against any of their Enemies. And in like manner all forreign Passengers, Merchants and others, their goods, and Estates embarked, and laden on
 English 
Ships, shall pass free, and be protected from the Ships of
 Algier, 
and be suffered to pass with∣out molestation.


II. 
No Shipwrack of
 English 
on the coast of
 Algier, 
shall become prize, nor their goods forfeited, nor their men made Slaves, but the People of
 Algier 
shall do their best endeavour to save both them and their goods.


III. 
That neither the Consul, nor other
 Englishman, 
shall be obliged to satisfie the Debts of another
 Englishman, 
unless he hath been bound, or become Security for him.


IV. 
That no
 Englishman 
in matter of dif¦ference shall be subject to any Judgment, but that of the Divan.


V. 
That the
 English 
in differences amongst themselves shall be subject to no determination, but to that of the
 English 
Consul.


VI. 
That either side are to furnish men of War with all necessiries their Ports afford, at the Market rates, without paying custom.


VII. 
If any grievance happen, neither par∣ty shall break the Peace until satisfaction be denied.




These Articles being read, were all approved except the first; for they declared, that they would have a Liberty to search our Ships, and take out the Goods and Persons of Strangers; for that otherwise, we having this priviledge, might carry away the Trade of the whole World in our Shipping; and that 
French, Spaniards, Italians, Dutch,
 and all other Nations, had no need of other protection and safeguard for their Persons and Goods, than to put them under the 
English
 colours: And that then their men of War might rove the Seas to no purpose, their City become poor, and their Souldiers starve, when they re∣turned home. We on the other side, being sen∣sible how prejudicial and dishonourable such an Article as this would be, and how ruinous to our Navigation, and having his Majesties Command to the contrary, absolutely refused to assent, or agree thereunto. Whilst we were thus arguing, a great fat 
Turk
 appeared with two young men his Slaves, one a 
Frenchman,
 and the other a 
Dutch∣man,
 requesting 
Ramadam
 to recommend him to us for passage to 
Smyrna;
 and having performed his request to him by kissing his Hand, 
Ramadan
 made it his request to us in behalf of that his Kinsman, recommending him to our care and protection, and conjuring us thereunto, by that Sacred league of Peace that was between us: We readily as∣sented thereunto, and at the same time took hold of the Example to represent the reasonableness of that Article on which we insisted. For shall we (said we) protect your People, and will you re∣quire, and impose it upon us as a matter Just and Sacred? And shall not the greatness of our King have a Liberty to dispence the like Pri∣viledge to other Nations, his Neighbours, and Allies, governed by Kings and Princes, who are Christian, and of his Kindred, and near Relations? But neither this, nor any other argument was Reason, or Sence to them; nor did they care to answer it by other arguments, than that of their own disadvantage thereby; and that if they as∣sented thereunto, their Ships might better rot in the Mould, than to venture them out at Sea with expectation of booty. They told us also stories of 
English
 Ships which had delivered some 
Algerines
 to their Enemies; and one particularly, who had sold a Hundred 
Turks
 to the 
Venetians.
 In answer hereunto, we assured them, that upon complaints and proofs made hereof to our King; his Justice was such, as that he would not suffer a piece of such Treachery to escape unpunished. And as to that argument, which they urg'd, that in this Case none would be employed be∣sides 
English
 ships; we largely represented the ne∣cessity of employing 
French,
 and 
Dutch,
 and the Ships of other Nations. But these People being Deaf and Blind to any Reason, but that which agrees with their interest, we concluded nothing; for after a long and loud discourse, and repeti∣tion of the same things over and over again, we at length told them, that it was not in our Commissi∣on to conclude on these terms; but that we should inform the Lord Ambassadour of their desires, and resolution, and that we would return the next Day with his peremptory Answer; not but we knew, that the Instructions from his Majesty extended not so far; but that we might have oc∣casion to leave matters, as it were in suspense, and part fairly from them, at the present. For

as to my own particular, I did not like to re∣main with such Company, not knowing how far the perfidiousness of that People might transport them to a Barbarity against the Laws of Reason and Nations.


The wind blew all this day so hard at West, that our Ship drove, and a great Sea went; so that there was some difficulty for me to get aboard; howso∣ever in regard it was necessary to render his Ex∣cellency an account of the proceedings of that Day, I eased the Pinnace of all Provisions, and unnecessary Company, and so by God's Provi∣dence got safe, though wet, aboard that Evening. I did not fail immediately to render an account most exactly, how every thing passed, to the Lord Ambassadour, letting him know, what fruit was to be expected by a farther Treaty with this People. Wherefore it was thought fit rather to keep the business in suspence, than to come to an open rupture with them; and rather than to use long discourse to them, or perswasi∣ons to little purpose, to write them this short Letter, the superscription of which was to 
Ramadam
 their Governour in Chief, and to the rest of the Divan.




WE are sorry that there should be still one diffe∣rence in our Treaty,
 relating to the search of Ships, and delivering up Merchants Forreigners, and Strangers goods. This is an Article which the King my Master did not think you would have insisted Usurpers, and his Subjects, and therefore did not impower me to conclude with you in it. Howsoever, I shall acquaint the King my Master of your earnest Desires, and Resolves in this Business, and doubt not, but what is Just and Reasonable, will be assented unto. Wherefore in the mean time we must desire you, whilst his Royal assent is expecting to your pro∣posals, that the Peace may continue on the same Terms that it now stands. Let your Friend and Kinsman come aboard, (as is desired) and he shall be welcome, and we shall protect him to the utter∣most of our power. And on this Promise and word of ours, you may rely on, as of a Christian, and a true 
Englishman.
 Our desire also farther is, that the Lord 
Obryan
 may remain in the Consuls House until such time as his Ransom comes. And so we wish, that a hearty and long Peace may be continued between the two Nations. 
Given aboard the
 Ply∣mouth 
Frigat,
 November 
25. 1660.


Winchelsea.




Upon delivery of this Letter, it was conclu∣ded, that the former Articles should stand in force; only that difference about searching our Ships should remain in suspence, and be specified, as not fully agreed on: Howsoever they would search our Ships, and it should not be accounted a breach of our Capitulations, until the King should intimate his dislike thereof. And that when Notice should come from his Majesty to 
Algier,
 that he approved not thereof, then it should be lawful for both sides to break into Acts of Hostility. This moderate course we thought to be less prejudicial to us for the present, than an open, and sudden War: For by this means we gained the releasement of two small 
English
 Ships which their Men carried in thither, and had time to give notice to our Merchants in all Ports and places, of the true state of our busi∣ness with 
Algier.


On the Twenty-seventh of 
November,
 we de∣parted from the bay of 
Algier
 with a prosperous, and steddy Gale, steering N.E. and N.N.E. for 
Messina,
 from whence we intended to dispatch Let∣ters unto all places, rendring advices to his Ma∣jesty, and the Merchants, of the State and Condi∣tion of our Affairs, and Negotiation at 
Algier:
 And whilst we pleasantly sail'd with a prosperous wind, on a sudden a cry was made of Fire, in the Ship, which astonished us all with a great amazement. For the Cooper it seems, going into the Steward's Room to stave a Cask which formerly had some Brandy in it, by chance a Snuff of the Candle fell in at the bung, which put the whole Vessel into a Flame: But the same Man immedi∣ately stopping the Bung, soon smothered the Fire, and therewith extinguish'd thatand our fears. As to other Matters,
 our Voyage to 
Messina
 was speedy and happy, for we arrived there on the Second of 
December.


Some Days passed before we could get pra∣tick; for having touched at 
Algier,
 a place al∣ways suspected for the Plague, great scruple was made of admitting us to free converse in the Town: Until the Lord Ambassadour gave un∣der his Hand and Seal an assurance of the Health of our Ship; on confidence of which we received Pratick, and the Palace called Paradise, where commonly the Vice-Kings are lodged, was ap∣pointed to receive his Excellency and his Reti∣nue, and the Furniture thereof ordered by 
D. Francisco de la Villa Padierna,
 a 
Spaniard,
 who was 
Stratago,
 which is as much Commander in chief of all the Castles and Forts in and about 
Messina.
 So soon as his Excellency landed, this 
Stratago
 made him a Visit, and at his departure left his Guard with him in a Complement, but in the mean time the 
Jurati,
 who were six in num∣ber, chose (as I think) every year, or every third year by the Citizens for Government of the City, were wanting in the like civility towards our Am∣bassador; four of which are chosen out of the Burgers, and two out of the Gentry, for they took no notice of him, nor sent him any message until the hour that he was about to depart, when his Excellency refused to receive their visits, ex∣cusing his neglect of attendance to matters of Ceremony, at a time when business urged his departure: whence this omission on the Jurats side proceeded, may in probability be deriv'd from the antipathy they have to the 
Spaniards
 and their Government, always running contrary to that, un∣to which they find the 
Spanish
 Ministers most in∣clined. During our abode at this place his Excel∣lency having returned his Visit to the 
Stratago,
 accompanied with 
D. Joseppe de Luna
 a Cavalier of 
Maltha,
 and having wrote a Letter to the 
Conde de Ayala
 then Vice-King of 
Sicily,
 residing at 
Palermo,
 he gave advices unto all places of the doubtful state of our affairs with 
Algiers,
 that so Ships might be cautious of that people, and how they adventured themselves abroad without Con∣voy; and having compleated these Dispatches, we again returned aboard on the ninth of this Month; when the 
Stratago,
 abounding in all points of civility, sent an honourable present of all sorts of fresh provisions aboard Ship, and soon after came himself in person to bid Farewel to his Excellency. At his coming aboard we gave him nine Guns, and at his going off fifteen, and so soon as our Anchors were away, and our Fore∣top-Sail filled, we bid adieu to the Town with twenty one Guns more, which they returned by firing all the Guns of the five Castles, under command of that 
Stratago,
 which is an honour they seldom pay to any other, than the 
Genera∣lissimo
 of 
Spain,
 the Vice-King, and the Popes Admiral.


We had so fair a Wind, and so prosperous a passage, that we arrived at 
Smyrna
 on the 14th of

December,
 where we found the 
Prosperous
 and 
Smyrna
 Factor, the Merchants Ships which we had lost in the Storm,
 happily arrived. Here we remained for some days to order and settle seve∣ral affairs according to Instructions given by the 
Turky
 Company. And on the sixth of 
January,
 being Sunday and Twelfth-day, we returned a∣board to prosecute this Ultimate stage of our Voyage to 
Constantinople;
 our Frigat the 
Plymouth
 Anchored near the Town within the very Port of 
Smyrna,
 from whence sailing with a fresh Easterly Wind from the shore, we were carried without the Port, and out of command of the Castle; where the wind failing, and being whol∣ly calm, we Anchored until the next morning, when with a gentle gale at South-East we proceed∣ded forward, and being as high as 
Cape Caraborno,
 towards night the Wind came about to the 
N.E.
 with so strong a Gale, that with some difficulty we weathered the 
Cape,
 and making over for the Island of 
Mytilene,
 and bringing our Ship under a main course, we intended to pass the night under the shel
er of that Isle: All this night the wind so increased one hour more than an∣other, that in the morning it was grown to a perfect storm, and the Sea into a breach; the sky was so black, and thick, and the Sun so red, and louring, as signified the continuance of it; and the spray of the Sea was so forcibly carried by the wind over the Ship, that Masts, Yards, and Decks were querned with a white Salt. This extremity of weather made us think of some Port, or Harbour, wherein to secure our Ship. The Island of 
Ipsera
 lying 
S. B. W.
 about eight Leagues from 
Mytilene,
 was judged by our Ma∣ster to be the most convenient and safe place, wherein we might spend the fury of this storm; wherefore putting before it with our Foresail, and our Mainsail in the Brailes,
 the wind was so forcible, that it carried away our Foresail like Paper from the Yard; and bringing another in the place thereof, it had the misfortune to be soul of the slook of our Anchor, and so became as unserviceable as the former: being thus de∣prived of the benefit of our commanding Sails, we set our Spritsail, and Main-course, and so steered in between the two Isles of 
Ipsera
 the greater; and the less. Being shot with∣in, and keeping as near aluff as we could to the shore, we on a sudden struck upon a Rock, which astonished us all with a strange amaze∣ment; the Ship fetched five Sallies, or Seeles upon it with such violence, that we expected to sink immediately into the deep; and indeed if we consider the forcibleness of the wind, the tur∣gency of the Sea, and the weight of our burden, having four hundred persons aboard, and sixty Guns mounted, it will appear little less than a Miracle, that the Ship brake not into more pie∣ces than our numbers were aboard. I stood then by the Mate, when he fathomed our depth of water by the Lead and Li
; and we had then seventeen foot and a half by the side, but the Ship drawing eighteen foot, we began to fear a total ruin, and shipwrack, and with cast-up eyes, and stretched out arms, thought now of no other than of our last and ultimate Port. But in the midst of this horrid consternation and distress, it pleased God, who was our best Pilot, and gui∣ded us to the edg of the Rock, to bring us clear of it; when we soon espied some of our sheathing to swim upon the Sea; and running down to the Well of our Pumps, we perceived a great in∣crease of water, but not so much but that Pum∣ping once every half hour, we kept our Ship in a condition of safety. Being thus by Gods Provi∣dence come to a convenient place of Anchorage, being well furnished with ground-Tackle we rode for two days in a stress of wind, with two Anchors a head, of which our sheet-Anchor was one, and with our Top-masts and Yards struck. Afterwards the wind abating something of its late fierceness, though continuing in the same quarter, we had opportunities to go ashore and to make some Provisions of Wine, of which that Island yields an admirable sort, and as rich as any in the 
Archipelago,
 though the people are as poor, or rather more miserable than their Neighbours. In three or four days, by the 
ullage and weeds which the Leak had sucked in, the wa∣ter began to stop, and our Ship became so per∣fectly tight, that our Captain judged it not ne∣cessary to enquire, when we arrived at 
Constanti∣nople,
 into the damage which we had received from the Rock; and the Ship afterwards by Gods Providence arriving safe in the River of 
Thames,
 was brought into the Dock at 
Woolidg,
 where upon search was discovered a great piece of the Rock, as big as a mans head, struck into the bilge of the Ship, and so firmly fixed, as if it had been riveted within; which seemed so strange a thing, that hte Shipwrights before they would take it from thence, first thought fit to acquaint the King thereof; who was pleased in person to go and see it; which appearing a strange, and almost a miraculous accident, His Majesty com∣manded it to be taken out, and (as I am infor∣med) it is kept in his Closet. And now for the better description of this Rock, and for the a∣voiding of it, Seamen may observe, and take no∣tice of it in this manner.


The shallow water,
 or the Rock whereon we struck, bore N. N. W. ½ N. from the place where we anchored on the North of Great 
Ipsera,
 and lyes about half a mile from the shore. The mark is, the falling away of the South end of the first gray-cliff which a gall upon the foot of the high hill, on which is a house, there is also a white sand by the gray cliff; the longest way of the Rock is N. W. and S. E. and the length not longer than the Ship; the water in the shallowest part thereof is about thirteen or fourteen foot, with a Northerly wind; and seventeen foot or more in the deepest which is the place where we struck; yet as the people of the Island report, it hath six foot more with a Southerly wind; so that it is not strange, that our Master, though he had fre∣quented this place with the 
Venetian
 Fleet, should not have knowledg of it, for such a depth of water is seldom noted in Waggoners for a place of danger.


There is also another Rock near the Town a∣bout half a mile distant from the shore, bearing N. B. E. of the Point, the neat fluff point E. N. E. the Northermost point of little 
Ipsera
 N. W. B. N. the Southermost point of little 
Ipsera
 S. W. ½ W. the Southernly point of Great 
Ipsera
 S. E. 1 S. upon it, there is not above four foot water.


We rode here until the 14th day when be∣tween one and two in the morning, the wind sprang out of the W.S.W. with an easie gale, with which we weighed our Anchors, and put to Sea; the next morning early being the 15th day, we were up with the Island of 
Tenedos,
 and towards Noon we entered the 
Hellespont
 with a fresh gale, which was necessary to stem the strength of the current; and about three a Clock we passed the Castles of 
Sestos
 and 
Abydos;
 from whence came off a boat with a Druggerman, and Janizaries, bringing Letters from Sir 
Thomas Bendish,
 then Ambassador at 
Constantinople,
 congratulating the Arrival of his Excellency, and soon returned

again ashoar to carry the news of our entrance within the Castles.


On the Seventeenth Day about Noon, being just Three months since the Lord Ambassador with his Family embarked, we came to an An∣chor near the Seven Towers, from whence we gave notice to St. 
Thomas Bendysh
 of our near ap∣proach; and having given Two hours space for to carry the intelligence, we weighed our An∣chors, and stood in for the Port of 
Constantinople:
 At this time, a 
Bostangee,
 one belonging to the Grand Signior's Garden, came aboard, sent by the 
Bo∣stangee
-bashee or Head of the Gardeners, to dis∣cover, and know what Ship it was of such Equi∣page, and greatness; advising us also, that the Grand Signior was seated in a Chiosk or Summer∣house on the corner Wall of the 
Seraglio.
 Having thus our Anchor aboard with a fresh and favou∣rablegale, our Flags and Ensigns displayed, and a Streamer at every Yard-arm, our Guns and Wast-clothes out; and being near the Wall of the 
Seraglio,
 the same 
Bostangee
 came again aboard, acquainting us, that it was the Grand Signior's pleasure, that we should rejoyce with Guns, (which was his expression;) the Ship having her Sails swelled out with a gentle Gale, and the swiftness of her motion retarded by the current, gave the Turks an opportunity to take a full prospect of her, the decks being full of men; we fired Sixty one Guns, as we passed,
 and with that order, that the Vessel could never appear with better advantage, had she been described by the Hand of the most skilful Painter: And thus we came to an Anchor on 
Toppennau
 side, where Sir 
Thomas Bendysh
 came immediately aboard to congratulate the safe arrival of this new Ambas∣sador: And now here it may be enquired, whe∣ther the 
Seraglio
 returned any answer to this sa∣lute by those Guns which lye under the Garden∣wall, of which most, or all are dismounted: I answer, not; for this having been the first Man of War, or first Royal ship, that ever carried up an 
English
 Ambassador to 
Constantinople;
 it having been the custom formerly to have them tran∣sported thither on some goodly Merchant-ship laden with the rich Commodities of our Coun∣try, a return of Guns was never demanded, or expected; and perhaps it was a matter not then thought of; which if it had, and been required, it is probable, in that conjuncture (if ever) it would have been granted; both because old 
Ku∣perlee
 the Father, then governed, who was a great friend to the 
English,
 and Enemy to the 
French,
 whose Ambassador was then under restraint, would have in meer opposition and hatred to them, bestowed those honours on our Nation, which at another time could not have been ex∣torted for a great Sum of Money; and so much I collect from the very words of 
Kuperlee,
 who af∣ter our Lord Ambassador had made his En∣trance in a more splendid manner than usual, as we shall understand by the sequel, he demanded of our Chief Druggerman, how the 
French
 resent∣ed this treatment? He answered, not well, but with an envious Eye, as he supposed; let them burst with malice, replied the Vizier. Of late years since the glory and greatness of 
France,
 their Ambassadors have been always transported up to 
Constantinople
 in the Kings Ships. Monsieur 
la Haye
 the younger came on Man of War of the Kings, and a Fireship; Monseur 
de Nointel,
 with Two men of War and a Fireship; and now lately Monsieur 
de Guilleragues
 with no less an Equipage than the former. All which before they entered 
Constantinople,
 made a stop about the Seven Towers, capitulating first to have a re-salute from the 
Seraglio,
 before they would pass their Complement to that place; which being de∣nied, as a thing never practised; the 
French
 Men of War have of late passed with silence, without giving, or receiving a salute: Howsoever, as things stand now, I should scarce advise, that 
English
 Men of War should insist upon the like, for we having once done it, a custom may be pre∣tended; and that may give a beginning to such a dispute which a new Ambassador ought stu∣diously to avoid, the present circumstances of 
France
 not suiting exactly with the sole Interest of Trade which is exercised by 
England.


Against the next Day, being the Eighteenth,
 things were provided for the entrance of his Ex∣cellency; and indeed with that state and hand∣some Equipage, that neither any Embassador from 
England,
 nor yet from the Emperor, pas∣sed with greater Splendor and Honour than this: For when his Excellency first descended from the Ship into his Boat, the Ship fired Fifty one Guns, so leisurely, that they so continued, until he set his Foot on the shoar; where mount∣ing on Horse-back covered with a rich Velvet Foot-cloth, the whole Equipage marched in this Order, on Horse-back also;



First, The 
Vayvod
 of 
Galata,
 and his Men.


2. The Captain of the Janisaries with his Ja∣nisaries.


3. The Chaous-bashee with his Chaouses.


4. The 
English
 Trumpeters.


5. The 
English
 Horsemen, Merchants of 
Con∣stantinople,
 and those of 
Smyrna,
 which came to attend his Excellency by order of the Factory, being in number Six, with their Servants.


6. The Embassadors, Druggermen and Ja∣nisaries.


7. His Excellency with St. 
Thomas Bendysh,
 at∣tended with their Pages and Footmen.


8. The Secretary and Gentlemen.


9. The Countess of 
Winchelsea
 in her Coach, and Three other Coaches following with her Women, covered with Red-cloth, made after the fashion of Waggons, lying on the carriages un∣hung.


10. Which were followed by some Officers, and Reformadoes of the Ship. Such an appear∣ance as this being Extraordinary, the Streets were crouded with People, and all Windows filled with Spectators; and that which made the passage more uneasy, was the Rabble scrambling for Five Sol-pieces, of which sort of Money, 500 were by Order of the Lord Ambassador scattered amongst the People, who regarded not the dan∣ger of being trampled under foot, whilst they had the Silver in their Eye.




His Excellency being thus lodged at his House at 
Pera,
 he was immediately saluted from the Em∣perors Resident by his Secretary; and soon after by Signor 
Padavino
 Secretary to their Excellen∣cies 
Balarino
 and 
Capello,
 of whom we shall here∣after have occasion to name, being those who negotiated the Affairs of the 
Venetian
 Republick. And the next Day following, the like Comple∣ment was passed from the 
French
 Ambassador, and the 
Dutch
 Agent.


Three days after, the Grand Signior sent a Pre∣sent to his Excellency of Ten Sheep, Fifty Hens,
 a Hundred Loaves of Bread, Twenty Sugar∣loaves, Twenty Wax-candles, Ten whereof were white, and Ten yellow. This we mention particularly, because it was a Gift anciently be∣stowed in the times of the first Ambassadors; and though it had not been of late years pra∣ctised, yet being found in the Old Registers, the custom was again revived, because the 
Turks


were in an humour to gratifie, and shew all the Honour they could to the 
English
 Ambassa∣dor.


On the Twenty eighth of this Month of 
Janu∣ary,
 his Excellency had his first Audience of the Great Vizier;
 and being attended thither, ad met by the 
Turkish
 Officers on 
Constantinople
 side, (in the same manner, as when he first landed) he was conducted to the Viziers Palace; and be∣ing held up under the Arm by Two of his Gen∣tlemen (that being the fashion of great men amongst the 
Turks
) he was introduced to the Presence of the Vizier; who being aged and de∣crepit, was sitting on Cushions in a little Room with a Fire, and his Feet covered, several Pa∣shaws, Pages, and other Officers standing by him. His Excellency and Sir 
Thomas Bendysh
 were seated on Two Velvet stools; where first the Earl of 
Winchelsea
 having presented the King's Letters to the Vizier wrote in Parchment, and put into a Bag of Cloth of Gold; Sir 
Thomas Bendysh
 began to inform the Vizier, that this was that honourable Person, of whom he had for∣merly acquainted him, was coming to reside for Ambassador in his place: That he was of that Nobility, and relation to our King, that had not his Majesty intended highly, and in an extraor∣dinary manner to Honour, and oblige the Grand Signior, he would not have exposed his Kinsman, and a Person extraordinary, to the hazard of a Voyage so long and dangerous as this. Then the Earl of 
Winchelsea
-began to speak, and relate the happy restauration of the King his Master to the Throne of his Ancestors; extolling his Power, Greatness and Clemency in pardoning all, but such, who were engaged in the Blood of his Father. That in his passage to 
Constanti∣nople,
 he had by Command of the King touched at 
Algier,
 endeavouring to renew the former Articles of Peace, and release an 
English
 Lord (meaning the Lord 
Obryan
) taken Captive by them contrary to the Articles of Peace, but without success, not being able to reduce them to any Terms of Reason, or Justice: And enlarging in his Complements with assurances of the friend∣ship which the King his Master desired to con∣serve, and maintain with the Grand Signior, as a token thereof, he acquainted him, that he was the first Ambassador sent abroad by his Master, since his happy return, before he had designed, or appointed any to Christian Princes. The Vizier readily answered: 
That it was but Reason it should be so; since the Grand Signior was an Emperor, and they but Kings; and he the greatest, and most Sove∣raign Potentate of the World: And that as to the Business of
 Algier, 
he would take care of it, and do him Justice.
 This having passed, Two 
China
 dishes with Sherbet were brought forth, and given to the Two Ambassadors, and Two larger bowles of the same to their Attendants: Then the Pre∣sent was brought forth, and laid before the Vizier, consisting of Twenty Vests; Four of them were of fine 
English
 Cloth of several colours; Four of several coloured Velvets; Fourof several flowred Stuffs with Gold and Silver; Four of watred Tabbies, and Four of Sattins: In recompence hereof both the Ambassadors were vested, with Six others, which Vests are of no great matter of use, or value, more than that they are evidences and badges of the Vizier's favour. After this his Excellency with Sir 
Thomas Bendysh
 arose, and de∣parted, wearing these Vests, until they were passed without the Gates of the Viziers Palace, and then they delivered them to be carried by their Servants, as the others did; and so his Ex∣cellency returned to his House at 
Pera,
 with an appearance of a fair Correspondency, and with assurances that the Capitulations and friend∣ship should be maintained, and conserved with a strict and inviolate Faith.


The day of giving pay to the Janisaries draw∣ing near, the Ambassador's Audience with the Grand Signior was deferred until that time, for with that occasion the Court would appear in the most solemn manner, and the attendance of the Soldiery would render all things more great and powerful: In the mean time the Grand Sig∣nior often took a view from his 
Seraglio,
 of the 
Plymouth
 Frigat, and frequently rowed round her in a Boat; and some say, he once came 
In∣cognito
 aboard to see her; at length he was so pleased with her, that he fancied her to be a very proper Vessel to carry Soldiers and Ammuni∣tion for 
Candia;
 but proposing his Thoughts and intentions to the Vizier, he was disswaded from the demand, or constraint of the Ship, being ad∣monished, that this was a matter unpracticable, and uncivil towards a Prince, who on confidence of Amity and Alliance with him, had adventu∣red his Ship within his Port.


The Twenty sixth day of 
February,
 being Pay-day of the Janisaries, the Lord Ambassador had Audience of the Grand Signior, which was per∣formed in this manner. His Excellency, with Sir 
Thomas Bendysh,
 departing from his House, with his retinue on Horse-back, by break of day in the Morning, was met on 
Constantinople
 side by the Chaous-Bashee, and his Chaouses, and by them conducted to the 
Seraglio.
 We rode through the first Court which was very spacious, and then we alighted from our Horses, and walked through another Court leading to the Divan, or place of Judicature; at the upper end of which the Great Vizier was seated; on his right Hand sate Five Viziers of the Bench, of which the Captain-Pa∣sha, or Admiral of the Seas, was one; on the left were the Two Kadileschers or Chief Justices, one of 
Anatolia,
 and the other of 
Romelia,
 and by them the Tefterdar Pasha or Lord Treasurer, with Three other Pasha's: The floar of the Divan was covered with Carpets, and on them a richer covering of Bags of Money, for payment of the Janisaries. The Two Ambassadors with about Six or Seven of their retinue (amongst which I was one) being admitted in, and placed at the lower end, their Excellencies approached toward the Vizier, and were seated near unto him on Two stools co∣vered with Crimson Velvet, and some Discourse and Complement having passed between them, they retired to another part of the Room, that they might give way to Business. In the mean time the payment of the Soldiers went forward, every Churbagee, or Captain, taking from the heaps, the Pay of his Soldiers, and laying the Bags on their Shoulders, made up to the Vi∣zier, and having kissed the Hem of his Vest on his Knees, he retired with great Humility and hast from him, passing away with his side towards him, it being very unseemly amongst them to turn their backs to Personages of that Dignity.


The Payment being over, Three small Tables were brought in; the first of which was covered with a silver Voyder, at which the Two Ambas∣sadors sate with the chief Ministers; but the Great Vizier by reason of his Age and Weakness retired into another Room. The other Two Tables were covered with a mixed Mettal, which served in the place of a Table-Cloth, at which the others sate: We had no Knives, Forks, nor Plate; but only Wooden Spoons were laid for us, which was sufficient in that manner of eating, for their Meats are most boyled, and conveniently received by the Spoon; or are so well roasted, that they are easily parted with the Fingers. The

dishes were served in by one at a time, but so fast, that we had scarce tasted of one, before it was snatched away to make place for another; and I think there might be about Twenty several changes, in this manner; at the end of all, to con∣clude our Feast, a great Bowl of Sherbet was brought in, and we drank of it, as large draughts as we pleased. Being risen from the Table, Eighteen Coftans, or Vests, being the usual num∣ber given to the 
English
 Ambassadour, with one extraordinary in favour to the New Ambassador, were brought forth, and bestowed; and in the mean time, the Present from our King to the Grand Signior, provided at the expence of the 
Turky
 Company, consisting of Fifty Vests, 
viz.
 Ten of Velvet, Ten of Sattin, Ten of Cloth of Gold, Ten of Tabbies, and Ten of fine 
English
 Cloth, were brought forth and displayed in the open Court by Fifty men which carried them, and Four 
English
 Mastiffs, which were more ac∣ceptable to this Grand Signoir than all the rest. The whole body of Janisaries then payed, con∣sisting of about Five thousand, were drawn up in a body, and ranged on one side of the Court∣yard; amongst them there was that silence, that the least whisper, noise, or motion was not heard; and as their Janisar Aga, and other Commanders passed, the bowings they made in salute were so regular, and at the same time, as may well testify the exactness of their Discipline, and ad∣mirable obedience, which hath in a great measure contributed towards their Conquests and Enlarge∣ment of their Empire.


Being thus Vested, and ranked in Order, the Great Vizier entered into the Presence of the Grand Signior; and then Two Capugi-bashes or Chief of the Porters of the Gate, with long Silver Staves, took the New Ambassador under each Arm to conduct him to the Chamber of Au∣dience; those permitted to accompany him were Sir 
Thomas Bendysh,
 the Earl of 
Winchelsea
's Bro∣ther, Sir 
Thomas Allen
 Captain of the 
Plymouth
 Frigat, the Interpreter, and my self, who then being Secretary, carried the Credential Letters made up in a Purse of Cloth of Gold. We gent∣ly knocked at the first Gate, which was imme∣diately set wide open to us, in the Porch where∣of Forty white Eunuchs attended, clothed in Vests of Sattin, and Cloth of Gold of divers co∣lours, and stood with their Hands before them with marvellous silence, and modesty. Coming near to the Presence-door, where the Kapi-Aga or Chief of the white Eunuchs attended, we made a pause in the Porch, and trod very softly, so as not to disturb with the least motion, the greatness of that Majesty; and so profound was the silence, that nothing was heard besides the murmurings of a Fountain adjoining hereunto. Just at the entrance of the Chamber, hung a gilded Ball studded with divers precious Stones, the Floar was covered with Crimson Velvet; em∣broidered with Golden-wyre. The Grand Sig∣nior himself sate in a Throne raised a small heigth from the ground, supported with Four Pillars plated with Gold; from the top hung several gilded Balls twined with Masses of Pearl; the Cushions he sate upon, and those also that lay by, were richly embroidered, and beset with Jewels, and on his right hand stood the Great Vizier. And having made a considerable stop at the Door, the Two Capugibashees, who held his Excel∣lence under each Arm, brought him to the mid∣dle of the Room, and laying their Hands upon his Head, made him bow, until he touched the Carpets with his forehead; and then raising him again, they retired backward with him, un∣to the farthest part of the Room; and in like man∣ner they took all the others singly and in order, placing them behind the Ambassadors. The Creden∣tial Letters from our King were then presented, and appointed that they should be delivered to the hands of the 
Reis-Efendi,
 or Secretary of State.


Then the Druggerman or Interpreter, by Or∣der of the Lord Ambassador, read a Paper in the 
Turkish
 Language to this Effect.


First, Declaring how the King of Great 
Bri∣tain
 our Soveraign Lord and Master, was restored to the Throne of his Ancestors without War, or any Conditions: And the great Clemency of His Majesty in pardoning all, but those who had a hand in the Murder of his Father.


Secondly, Recommending the Merchants and their Interest to the continuance of his usual Fa∣vour and Protection.


Thirdly, Begging the freedom of all 
English
 Slaves, as a particular Testimony of Favour, and Grace to this New Ambassador.


These Ceremonies being performed, and the Paper read, we immediately departed, passing to our Horses by the same way which we came: And being mounted, we drew up a little out of the passage to see the Soldiers march by us, which indeed appeared to be a very flourishing Militia of young Men, robust, and well clothed; many of them running with Bags of Money on their Shoulders, and all of them chearful, and glad of the charge they carried with them; after them followed their Commanders exceedingly well mounted: And last of all came the Great Vizier attended with many Pashaes, and a goodly Equipage: And then his Excellency, with Sir 
Tho∣mas Bendysh,
 and attendance, proceeded forwards, and returned to their home. After this Two visits were made: Namely, to the Captain-Pasha or Admiral of the Seas, and the other to the Mustee; at the first, Six Vests were presented; and at the latter, Five; and both were perform∣ed, and accepted with such mutual kindness, that never did the 
Turkish
 Ministers cast more serene countenances on the Trade and Concernments of 
England,
 than on this conjuncture.


And thus the Earl of 
Winchelsea
 being very suc∣cessfully, and with fignal Demonstrations of Ho∣nour, and a good correspondence, seated in the usual residence of Ambassadors, the Grand Signior, as a particular Note and mark of his favour pre∣sented him with Three 
English
 Slaves, and re∣turned a kind and friendly answer to his Maje∣sties Letters, by Sir 
Thomas Bendysh,
 who embark∣ed on the 
Plimouth
 Frigat, and departed the Ele∣venth of 
March.
 And thus having given the Rea∣der a Relation of the State of the 
English
 concern∣ments in 
Turky:
 Let us view and consider the Condition of the 
Turkish
 Affairs amongst themselves.


At the arrival of this Ambassador, the im∣portant affairs of this vast and still growing Em∣pire, were governed by the Great Vizier 
Ku∣perlee;
 a Person decrepit and infirm in body, by reason of his great Age, but of a solid and subtle judgment; by Nature cruel, and by Years fro∣ward; which disposition was singularly well fit∣ted to do service to his Master, against the im∣petuous storms of the Faction of those times, in which the Pashaws, and Chiefs of the Soldiery (as often it happens in Empires, whose Body is grown too vast to be ruled by a weak Head) became rich and powerful, and by the long Va∣cations of Peace, insolent and wanton; for as then the Wars with 
Venice
 were carried on faintly, only by sending forth an Armata of Gallies in the Spring; and the preparations became rather ac∣customary, returning with the Year, and made

for exercise of the Arsenal, and amusement of the People, than designed with any probable expe∣ctation of success or Victory, proportionable to that Treasure and Trouble which maintained them. So that to encounter so many difficul∣ties, and predominancy of Ambition and Avarice, the Prince himself being young, the Fortune of his Empire had more than urgent necessity of such a rough and cruel disposition as was found in 
Kuperlee;
 who so seasonably made use of it, to the destruction of all such, who might either endanger his Prince, or himself; that in two or three Years time he became Master of the Lives and Estates of the Grand Mutiniers; confisca∣ting their richess and fortunes to the use and se∣curity of his Master; having in his time put to Death thirty six thousand persons, whom he proscribed in several Countries, and privately strangled in the City, by vertue of his absolute and uncontroulable Authority, without giving the Offenders liberty of Processes, or Pleas for their Lives, or the solemnity of Scaffolds, or ap∣plause of a Funeral Oration at the Gallows, whereby to win the affections and compassions of the vulgar, but went through with his bloody and tragical business, without noise, or rumour, or knowledge almost of the Souldiery, or the people; whilst the great Personages, whose ra∣pine and pride had contracted them envy and hatred from their inferiours, stood confused and amased, not having power to rebel, nor San∣ctuary to fly unto.


Such is the effect of an absolute, and arbitrary power, which is Master of times and affairs, and rather fits and squares Enterprizes to Counsels, than Counsels to Enterprizes. 
Reges Hercule non liberi solum impedimentis omnibus, sed Domini re∣rum, temporun{que} trahunt Consiliis cuncta, non se∣quuntur. Liv. lib.
 9. The Grand Signior in the mean time applauded the diligence and circum∣spection of his Minister; and though yet trem∣bling with the memory of late sollevations a∣mongst the Janizaries; yet being young, and active, addicted himself wholly to the delight of Hunting, and to follow the Chace of fearful, and flying Beasts; whilst his Vizier so closely fol∣low'd his game of Bloud, that he left no Person con∣siderable in the Empire, who was not a Creature made by, or depending on him; unless the Ka∣hyabei, or Lieutenant General of the Janizaries; 
Mortaza
 Pasha of 
Babylon,
 now called by the 
Turks Bagdat,
 and the Pasha of 
Magnasia;
 Men, whose bravery, and generous Justice, or else their Guards, or Fortune, had only seated beyond the reach and Sword of this Tyrant. This was then the State of the 
Turkish
 Affairs amongst them∣selves; As to Foreign, and Christian Princes; the Emperor, the King of 
England,
 the 
French
 King, and the States of 
Holland,
 had their Em∣bassadors and Residents at the 
Ottoman
 Court, with whom as yet passed a fair and amicable cor∣respondence, excepting with the 
French;
 whose Embassadour had then lately obtained his release from Imprisonment, to which he was confined contrary to the Law of Nations, and the Custom of the wisest, and most generous People of for∣mer Ages; and compelled to return into 
France;
 an Agent being there setled by the Merchants, to Negotiate their Affairs; the occasions and grounds whereof we have at large signified in another place: which unlawful treatment of a Person Sa∣cred, none will much admire, who considers the humour of supream Ministers that judge them∣selves under no restraint or limits of Law, either Civil, or National.


This Embassador from 
France
 was call'd Mon∣sieur 
le Haye,
 the Father, a Person excellently well qualifi'd, having with success pass'd in that ca∣pacity for the space of 25 years until some misun∣derstandings passing between him, and this Tyran∣nical Vizier, he suffered many indignities from him, which being added to the extream torment of the Stone, under which he laboured, made him wil∣ling on any terms to return to his own Countrey.


The 
Venetians
 notwithstanding the War, had two Ministers there resident; the 
Eccellentissimo Capello,
 Procurator of St. 
Mark,
 a right worthy and noble Person; and Signior 
Ballarino,
 a Person vigilant, and subtle, who omitted no opportuni∣ties to advance his own Fortunes, and with that the benefit of his Republick. The Emperors Re∣sident, called 
Simon Renninghen,
 a Person sincere, free, and open hearted, agreeable to the Nature of the 
Germans;
 had for some Years, tho with some difficulty, continued the Peace, or rather matters from breaking out into an open War; the Incursions on the Frontiers, and other accidents, always administring occasions of discontent, and complaints to both parties.


But that the Series of this History may be con∣tinud with an even Thread,
 and clear light to the Reader, we must cast back our Eyes to the Year 1657. when the Ambition of 
George Ragotzki,
 Prince of 
Transilvania,
 began New troubles in his own Principality, and laid the Foundation of a future War between the Emperor and the 
Turks.
 For now 
Poland
 was so wearied with the incessant Wars of 
Muscovy
 (the inveterate Enemy of the that Crown) with the frequent Rebellions of the Cos∣sacks, and the invasion of the 
Swedes,
 whom the traiterous Vice-Chancellour, and his Adherents, had invited to the spoils of their own Countrey; that King 
Casimirus
 was reduced to the ultimate extremity of his Affairs; the publick Exchequer, and private Treasuries were exhausted, the Vil∣lages dispeopled, the Fields uncultivated, Traf∣fick and Commerce ceased; nothing but Wars, Robberies, and Confusion filled the Diurnals with News, and the hearts of the Inhabitants with Sor∣row and Calamities: Wherefore 
Casimer
 King of 
Poland,
 vexed on all sides, and not knowing where or how to apply a remedy, dispatched his Great Chancellor 
Albertus Pravesmoski,
 in Qua∣lity of Embassador, to demand assistance from 
Ra∣gotzki,
 promising in recompence thereof, to adopt his Son to succeed him in that Kingdom. No Message could arrive more grateful to ambi∣tious 
Ragotzki,
 who by so desired a proffer, seem∣ed to arrive to the Zenith of his Proseperity; which like the Land of Promise, being only shewed to his Father in a long Prospective, seemed now as it were, by Inheritance, to devolve upon his Son; in order unto which, many days of Treaty and Conferences were held between 
Ragotzki,
 and the Polish Ministers;
 but 
Ragotzki
 insisting on certain particulars, which were not in the Power of the King or his Commissioners to grant without the approbation of a Diet, the Treaty was dissolved, and 
Ragotzki
 remained displeased, and angry; pretending himself to have been deluded and slighted, resolved to avenge the Affront, and by his Arms gain to himself the Crown of that King∣dom; so that raising a strong Army, and join∣ing himself in a Confederate League with 
Sweden,
 he invaded 
Poland,
 wasting all the Frontiers with Fire and Sword. The 
Ottoman
 Port growing jealous of the successes of these Affairs, and not so much of the Advance of 
Ragotzki,
 as of the grow∣ing greatness of the 
Swedes,
 with whom unwilling∣ly they would be Borderers, issued an express Command. That without contradiction or delay, he should immediately give stop to his March, and return with his Army into 
Transilvania.
 And though the Emperor of Germany, and the 
Krim


Tartar declared their dislike of his proceedings, threatning to invade his Principality at home, un∣less he retracted himself, and desisted from this enterprize; yet 
Ragotski
 having his understand∣ing blinded with Ambition, and the lust of Rule and Government, stopped his ears to the menaces of his Enemies, and the counsel of his Friends. This 
Ragotski
 enjoyed a State most happy, large, fertile, and populous, in Power inferior to few, superior to many; so that he might have passed peaceably and honourably with all, could his great spirit have bowed to, and complied with his Potent Neighbours.
 For on the one side the Puis∣sant power of the 
Turk
 threatned him, to whom the least Ombrages of displeasure administer oc∣casion of War; On the side of 
Hungary
 the Em∣perour over-awed him: On the side of 
Valachia,
 and 
Moldavia
 he lay open to the incursion of the 
Tartars.
 So that a man might rationally expect, That this Prince should have esteemed it honour enough to have conserved his own without ren∣dring himself obnoxious to the jealousie and su∣spicion of his Neighbours. But his great spirit was so enamoured of a Crown, and so bewitched with the hopes of obtaining it, that nothing seem∣ed difficult or improbable to the acquisition of his longing desires, which were the occasion of all those calamities and miseries in 
Hungary,
 which afterwards ensued.


In contemplation of all which foreseen evils, his 
Caesarean
 Majesty sent a Message to the 
Otto∣man
 Port, declaring against the temerity and audaciousness of 
Ragotski;
 who in the mean time subdued the Fort of 
Bristia,
 invaded with Fire and Sword the Province of 
Russia,
 plundered 
Po∣dolia,
 and advanced as far as 
Camonitz,
 a For∣tress strong by Art and Nature; and joining af∣terwards with the 
Swedes,
 assisted them in the subjection of 
Cracovia.
 About this time the Empe∣rour 
Ferdinand
 the third began to send succours into 
Poland,
 and to protest against the proceed∣ings of 
Ragotski,
 but being surprized by sickness, soon after passed to a better life; which for some time, giving a stop to the assistance of 
Poland,
 was interpreted by 
Ragotski,
 as a happy Omen of his good Fortune.


But how vain and deceitful are humane hopes, whose foundations are Ambition and Violence! For 
Leopold
 succeeding in the place of his Father to 
Hungary,
 and the Empire, immediately pro∣secuted the design in favour of 
Poland,
 and in the first place besieging 
Turone,
 one of the chief Cities of 
Prussia,
 taken by the 
Swedes,
 forced it to a Surrender. The King of 
Denmark
 also growing jealous of the encreasing greatness of the 
Swedes,
 nourished by ancient grudges, and National Emulations, took up Arms in defence of 
Poland,
 and being at first, flush of Money, gave constant pay and large donatives to merce∣nary Soldiers, which encreased his Army, draw∣ing great numbers from the Swedish Colours; so that being stoutly recruited, he entered into the Enemies Countries, possessed himself of the im∣portant Fort of 
Olme
 in 
Norway;
 overthrew the Swedish Army at 
Vorgast,
 and obtained a victory over their Fleet in the Baltick Sea. The 
Poles
 also themselves, who at first revolted from their Prince, and favoured the 
Swedish
 proceedings, perceiv∣ing the Wind change, and become contrary to that Party, began to abandon the interest they professed, and by degrees to return to the due o∣bedience of their King. 
Zerneski
 also the Gene∣ral, and 
Lubomiski
 the Great Chancellour of 
Poland
 met the 
Swedish
 Forces near 
Cracovia,
 where giving them Battel, discomfited the whole Army, killed fourteen thousand upon the place, took all the Cannon and Baggage, and won that day a most signal Victory.


Ragotski
 perceiving the face of things thus changed, and being by Command of the Otto∣man Port abandoned by his Moldavian and Wala∣chian Forces, began to turn his face towards 
Tran∣silvania,
 where now he wished himself and Army lodged in safety. But being overtaken by Gene∣ral 
Zerneski
 near the Mountains of 
Transilvania,
 he was, tho unwillingly, engaged to sight, and was with that fury assaulted by the 
Polish
 Horse, that tho according to his usual Bravery, he charg∣ed in Person at the head of his Troops, yet he was not able to withstand a violence so disadvan∣tageous in number, but that his men being 
 put into disorder, then to a Retreat, and then to open flight, his whole Army was deseated, many of them perished by the Sword, others flying through the Woods and Mountains, died with sa∣mine;
 and he himself obliged to buy a shameful Peace, engaging by Word and Oath to the pay∣ment of a great summ of Money, was permitted with a mean Retinue to return into his own Coun∣try. Nor did these misfortunes end here; but the 
Tartars
 commanded by the 
Turks,
 in revenge and chastisement of 
Ragotski
's Enterprize with∣out their consent, entered into his Principality with considerable Bodies of Horse, against whose sudden Invasion, an Army under the Conduct of his General 
Kemenius
 could not be so soon colle∣cted and disciplined, as to be able to resist that fury of 
Tartars,
 who at their pleasure burned the Towns and Villages, and carried away mul∣titudes of people of both Sexes, and all Ages for Captives into their own Country, amongst which some were of Quality and Condition. Amidst which troubles came Letters from the 
Ottoman
 Port, directed to the Nobles of 
Transilvania,
 de∣claring 
Ragotski
 a Rebel, and commanding that according to the Laws and Priviledges of that Principality, they should proceed to the Election of a new Prince, and in case of refusal, all the ruins and calamities were threatned, which they might justly expect in punishment of their disobe∣dience from a severe and angry Emperor.


Ragotski
 being well informed what was design∣ing against him at the 
Ottoman
 Port; and know∣ing that his power was not able to oppose so much puissance, resolved to give way to neces∣sity,
 and voluntarily depose himself, before he should be engaged thereunto by the Imperial Decree; so that he calmly receded from his Prin∣cipality, hoping that his humility and submissi∣on might procure his pardon at the Court. The Nobility of 
Transilvania
 being as well desirous to evidence their affection to their old Prince, as their obedience to the Grand Signior, did imme∣diately appoint a day for Election, but with Pro∣viso, that a general Petition should be made in behalf of 
Ragotski,
 that he might be again resto∣red unto ancient Grace and Favour with the Port, who in the mean time swore to live peaceably in a quiet and private condition, without making di∣sturbance, or innovation in the Government, and that when this Grace should accordingly be ob∣tained, then that the new Prince should recede, and suffer things to return to their former and pristine Estate. For which purpose there was choice made of one 
Francis Redeius,
 a Person of a peace∣able and gentle temper, who would easily conde∣scend to the terms agreed, and as willingly re∣sign up his Government again, as he unwillingly received it. But though 
Ragotski
 had renounced, promised, swore, and in appearance seemed to re∣cede from his Government, and surrender all at the irresistible Decree of a superior power; yet

his high Spirit, and working Brain could not dis∣lodg that Ambition of his Heart, which at first privately countermined and enervated the Power of the new elected Prince; but afterwards his towering Thoughts swelled too big to be suppres∣sed under the cover of Dissimulation, yielded just Reason to the 
Ottoman
 Port to suspect his designs; who not being ignorant of what was past, dis∣patched Orders to the Pasha of 
Buda
 to de∣mand the strong Fort of 
Jancua
 for Caution and Security of the good Behaviour of the 
Transilva∣nians.


Ragotzki
 seeing himself thus discovered,
 un∣masked himself openly, and threw away his Vi∣zard, and with a vigorous Force and Courage reassumed the Rights and Standard of his Princi∣pality, forcing 
Redeius
 not only to relinquish his Power, but to swear never again to usurp it, tho enforced upon him by the Authority of the 
Turks.


These Extravagancies so exasperated the minds of the 
Turks,
 that whereas before they began to entertain tender thoughts towards 
Transilvania,
 they now meditated its entire Ruin and Con∣quest; and so laying aside Arguments and Trea∣ties, they made Levies of Horse and Foot both in 
Europe
 and 
Asia. Ragotzki
 foreseeing how unable he was to resist a Force so unequal as the puissance of the 
Ottoman
 Empire, without the succor of Foreign Force, resolved, like the Prodigal Son, to throw himself into the compas∣sionate Arms of the Emperor, as his Father, earnestly supplicating, That whereas before, his disorderly and disobedient Life had rather meri∣ted Punishment than Favour; yet in this Cause, wherein the Interest of 
Christendom
 was concern∣ed, he would compassionate the common Good of the Christian Church, rather than chastise his particular Misdemeanours. With this mes∣sage 
Michel Mesces,
 his Chancellor, being dis∣patched, was graciously received by the Emperor, and readily assured of powerful Aid and Prote∣ction.


Ragotzki
 elevated with this courteous Treat∣ment and Promises, had his whole mind enflamed with hopes and desire of Revenge; so that as∣sembling such Forces as he could, he entered boldly into the Field against the Pasha of 
Buda,
 who with a considerable Army, was ordered to March before, and enter the Confines of 
Transil∣vania,
 and there unite with the Pasha of 
Temis∣war.


In the Transaction of all these Passages, 
July
 was well entered, when both Armies met in open Field; and tho the Forces of the 
Transilvanians
 were much inferior to those of the 
Turk,
 yet 
Ra∣gotzki
 full of his wonted Courage and Heat, so vigorously assailed the Enemy, that he quickly broke and disordered their Ranks, put them to flight, and killed three thousand upon the place. But little did this advantage benefit poor 
Transil∣vania,
 for the Great Vizier soon after following with the gross of his Army, consisting of little less than an 100. thousand Men, provided accor∣dingly with Artillery, and all other Military Ammunition; seconded by the 
Tartars,
 and assi∣sted by the 
Moldavians
 and 
Valachians,
 and a Rout of other barbarous Nations; laid Seige to the strong Fortress of 
Janoua;
 of which and of several others, in a short time he rendered himself Ma∣ster, laying waste and desolate all the Countries round with Fire and Sword. The Nobles of 
Transilvania
 sensible of these imminent and ap∣proaching Mischiefs, dispeeded three Persons of considerable Quality amongst them, in an Embas∣sy to the Vizier; viz. 
Francis Daniel, John Lues,
 and 
Acatius Berclay,
 who greatly laboured by their Oratory to perswade the Vizier, that they were in no wise consenting to the disobedience of their Prince, but did always readily submit to the 
Ottoman
 Servitude; imploring his Clemency and Commiseration of their distressed and ruined State. The Vizier inclining his Ear to their Peti∣tion, stopped the Progress of his Arms, but in∣creased their Tribute to such an excessive rate, that the burden of it became insupportable, and appointed 
Berclay,
 one of the Embassadors,
 to be Prince; taking thereby from the People, the free Priviledg of Election; Commanding them to accept him without farther Dispute or Repugnan∣cy. It is uncertain whether 
Berclay
 designed the Principality to himself by any instance he made to the 
Turks,
 or whether his Election proceeded meerly from the Vizier himself; yet this is cer∣tain, that returning home, 
Berclay
 applied him∣self to establish his own Dominion, and to dis∣appoint the designs of his Predecessor, and his party.


The 
Turks
 being satisfied with this Submission, with the Subjection of several places of Impor∣tance, with deposing of 
Ragotzki,
 and establish∣ment of a new Prince, began to disband a great part of their Forces; and the Great Vizier, with the remainder, returned towards 
Constantinople;
 supposing the Fire of this War to be totally extin∣guished.


In this condition of Repose, matters continued for about the space of two Years, when 
Ragotz∣ki
 impatient of his losses, and of the exchange of his publick State to a private Condition, invete∣rate in his hate towards his Rival and Competi∣tor, resolved to tempt Fortune once more, and make his ultimate Assay, either to establish him∣self in his Principality, or at least to render him∣self equal with other mortal Princes in the Grave; and so relying with much Confidence on the zea∣lous Affection of his Subjects, and the promise of powerful Adherents,
 he once again justled him∣self into the Government, by the Expulsion of his Rival; whom he could not behold with other than with an emulous and unpleasing Eye. 
Berclay
 perceiving himself thus ensnared, neglected, and persecuted by all Parties, represented these Inno∣vations to the 
Ottoman
 Port, with the most ag∣gravating Circumstances imaginable; beseeching them to afford him aid, and vindicate their own Honour in maintenance of him, whom they had constituted a Prince, and was a Creature formed by their own favour. The 
Turks
 immediately touched with the Sense hereof, Issued out Orders to 
Ciddi Ahmet,
 the new Pasha of 
Buda;
 Com∣manded him without delay, to gather what Forces he could to interrupt the designs of 
Tran∣silvania;
 and to put matters unto a stand, until a greater Army could second him, under the Com∣mand of 
Ali
 Pasha, appointed General for this Expedition. The Pasha of 
Buda
 readily obeyed, and assembling what Forces he could in 
Hungary,
 and joining with the Pasha of 
Temiswar,
 passed the 
Danube,
 and with a very considerable Army entered 
Transivania. Ragotzki
 undaunted at the near approach of his Enemy, boldly entered the Field with his Forces, and joined Battel with them in the Month of 
May,
 1660. between the Cities of 
Clausenburg,
 and 
Giulia Alba.
 At first the Christians endeavoured to have intercepted the Enemies passage, by some Ambuscado or Strata∣gem of War; but the 
Turks
 still advancing, were at length met by the Van-guard of the Chri∣stians; to assistance of which several Bodies fol∣lowing one after the other, it became a general Engagement of both Armies; in which Battel,

Ragotzki
 gave his usual proofs of Valour; de∣claring by his Actions, that he was resolved to dye, or to Triumph. But being at length wound∣ed in four parts of his Body, and his Army over∣powered with Numbers, he was forced to yield the Fortune of the Day to the 
Turks;
 leaving 8. pieces of Cannon, and his Standard in their hands; and the greatest part of his Army being either killed or taken, he himself with a few of his Attendants, recovered 
Varadin;
 where after 18.
 Days distemper of his Wounds, he expired his unquiet and troubled Soul. This was the end of that vain 
Icarus,
 who attempted to fly with feigned Wings and borrowed Feathers; this is the fate of ambitious Spirits, whom Pride elevates and exhales like a Vapour, unto that height, until it dissolves them into Showers, or precipitates them into the abyss of all Confusion.
 This 
George Ragotz∣ki
 was of a tall and well proportioned Stature, black Hair, and a frisled Beard: his Eyes quick and lively, of an active Body, and healthy Constitution: his Spirit was high and great, which betrayed him to Extravagancies: his Comport∣ment was generous and courteous towards all, which rendered him exceedingly beloved and esteemed by his Nobility: he was free in his Speech, and eloquent in his Expressions, prudent in his Counsels and Enterprizes: had not the quick∣ness and vivacity of his Soul made him something rash and violent in his Attempts: he was of the Protestant Religion, leaving behind him a Widow, and a Son of hopeful and happy endowments.


After the Death of 
Ragotzki,
 it might well be expected that these Storms of War should be di∣spersed, and that 
Transilvania
 should at length enjoy the Sun-shine, and calmer Weather of Peace and Repose. But 
Ali
 Pasha, General of the 
Tur∣kish
 Camp, being by this time arrived the Con∣fines with his powerful Army, resolved not to re∣turn empty or in vain, without advantaging the 
Ottoman
 Interest, and making some Satisfaction towards the Expence and Trouble of so great an Army. Wherefore taking pretence against 
Va∣radin,
 for receiving 
Ragotzki
 after his Defeat, abetting his party, and following his Interest, de∣signed to summon that important Fortress to sur∣render, which is fituated at the foot of those Mountains which open a Passage into 
Transilvania.


The Inhabitants of 
Varadin
 terrified at the ap∣proach of this formidable Enemy,
 dispatched a Messenger to the Emperor, imploring with most effectual Arguments his Sacred Protection and powerful Assistance against the common Ene∣my to 
Christendom,
 representing to his Cesare∣an Majesty, how that the 
Turks
 in their Capitu∣lations with him, had agreed to Build or Erect no new Fort on those Frontiers: and whereas it was the same thing to force and usurp a Fortress already made, as to form a new one; the taking of 
Varadin
 was to be esteemed a real Violation of the Articles of Peace. That his Majesty would be pleased to reflect on the fatal Consequences which the loses of 
Varadin
 might prove to 
Hunga∣ry
 as well as 
Transilvania;
 being that Gate, which obstructed, cuts off all Intercourse between them and 
Germany.
 These Considerations with seve∣ral others, were exceeding prevalent in the Impe∣rial Council; so that it was resolved, that Gene∣ral 
Souches
 should prepare his Army, and put all things in readiness to afford the Assistance which was desired; supposing that with the 
German
 Regiments, and 
Hungarian
 Forces, might be formed an Army of about 25. thousand fighting men. But in regard in those Instructions given to 
Souches,
 there was a Clause, that he should be care∣ful not to engage his Forces in any attempt, where the event might be doubtful, he assembled the principal Persons of that Country, and the Militia, to consult whether succor and relief might be given to 
Varadin,
 without hazarding the Army in a doubtful and a dangerous Adventure: in consideration of which point, a true Compu∣tation being made of all the Imperial Forces, they were found much inferior to that calculate which was made of them at 
Vienna;
 For that since 
Tockai, Zatmar, Kalo,
 and other places be∣longing to the State of 
Ragotzki,
 had been Gari∣soned by 
German
 Soldiers, there remained not of them above 4000. effective Men; the 
Hungarian
 Forces which were supposed to have consisted of 2000. Men, could not form 600.; the Haiducks which were computed to be 6000. Men, did not appear in the Person of one; being all dispersed and retired to their own homes.
 The additional Forces from the Princes of the Empire were as un∣certain, as the Expectation of them long and te∣dious; for tho the Imperial Forces united are of puissance sufficient to bid Battel, and Defiance to the numerous Troops of the 
Ottoman
 Power; yet in regard the Union of that Body depends on the Assembly of Diets, Treaties, and long De∣bates, which are subject to time and delays, caused by different Factions, (which are impossible to be avoided amongst different States) whose Disuni∣ons, Competitions, Emulations and Pretences, always in such meetings abound, and prejudice the common cause and benefit of the Empire; the raising of such a formidable Army, becomes a matter always of time and difficulty. Howsoe∣ver the Emperor, whose Hereditary and Elective Possessions bordering on the Confines of the Enemy, is necessarily engaged to be the standing Bulwark of the rest, and a Bank against the In∣undation of barbarous Nations; whilst other Princes whose Dominions are more Remote and Secure, apprehend not the Premures and Storms that the Emperor sustains, and is enforced to ex∣pel with the loss and diminution of his own People, and impoverishment of his peculiar Treasure: To these Considerations, which rendered these pious Intentions towards 
Varadin
 almost im∣possible, there wanted Money, which is the Si∣news of War, and the Soul of all Enterprizes: And that which farther retarded those Succors and Prosecution of the design in hand, was the depar∣ture o His 
Cesarean
 Majesty from his Court at 
Vienna,
 on occasion of a Progress as far as 
Trieste,
 to take Homage of his Provinces of 
Stiria, Carin∣thia
 and 
Cragno;
 which was an Action much against the Counsel and Advice of the Arch-Duke 
Leopold
 his Uncle; who foresaw how great disor∣ders would ensue by the Emperors absence, in this Conjuncture, from his Imperial Court. Upon which Considerations, Count 
Souches
 sent a true List of all his Forces, with an account of the strength of his Enemy; remonstrating that it was impossible to convey Forces into 
Varadin,
 without hazarding a Battel with 
Ali
 Pasha, which would prove an absolute Breach of the Peace; which in this Conjuncture, and want of Preparation, was neither honourable, nor safe for the Empire.


In the mean time 
Ali
 Pasha proceeded and encamped with his Army before 
Varadin,
 break∣ing first Ground the 
4th
 of 
July,
 1660. and be∣ginning a formal Siege, he soon begirt the Town, and continually labouring in making Trenches, Batteries and Approaches, they arri∣ved in a few days to the Counterscrap of the Wall. But the better to describe the Siege and Assaults on this famous City, it will be necessary first to explain the Condition and Scituation of the place.




Varadin
 therefore is seated in a Plain, on the Banks of the River 
Chryse;
 to the East it is envi∣roned with such craggy and rough Mountains, as render it almost on that side unaccessible; to the South the Town extended it self most; to the North it is washed with the River, over which some small, yet fruitful, Hills raise themselves; it is encompassed with a Wall filled with Earth, after the fashion of Modern Fortifications, and strengthened with five main Bulwarks, and a very deep Ditch filled with the River Water: It was well provided both of Victuals and Ammunition, and armed with Ordnance both great and small, as was sufficient to have repulsed a puissant Enemy, & have sustain'd a long & strait Siege. But the Gari∣son within consisted only of 850 Soldiers, an inconsi∣derable number, both in respect of the Circuit of the Fortress, & of that gross Army which encompass'd it.


The Enemy being now, as it is said before, un∣der the Counterscarp of the Wall, they perceived that the Ditch was so deep, and filled with Wa∣ter, that though their great Guns had made open Breaches in the Walls, yet there was no possibi∣lity to storm them, or bring the Soldiery to scaling Ladders, or handy blows. The besieged also made such continued Sallies, with success and slaughter of the Enemy, that after Three and Twenty days of vain labour to few the Ditch, 
Ali
 Pasha was at length almost resolved to have raised his Siege, and given over the Enterprize; upon which whilst he considered and ruminated (as ill Fortune would have it) a certain Maid, which formerly had been a servant to the Governour of the Garison, then a Captive in the 
Turkish
 Camp, having observed how on occasion the Citizens used to empty and drain the Ditch, revealed the secret to the 
Turks,
 hoping thereby not only to purchase her Liberty,
 but with that also a Sum of Money for price of her Treachery; so that dis∣covering where another Ditch was to be opened, the course of the Water was soon diverted, and the Walls of the Town laid dry and open to the Assailants. As this happened without, so another accident within, equally dangerous, befel the Be∣sieged; for one day an Officer of the Ammunition going into the Stores with a lighted Candle, by chance dropped a spark of fire from his Lanthorn into the Powder, which taking fire, blew up the Powder, Granadoes, Fire-works, and all other military Stores, with the neighbouring houses, and above a hundred men; which loss alone was sufficient to have dejected the minds of frail men; yet they so valiantly bore up their courages, that they seemed not in the least abated, but rather animated with the height of anger and despair. The 
Turks
 having now free access to the Walls, undermined some small Forts, which they blew up, and thereby made so great a Breach, that with facility hoping to gain the Town, if they made use of the occasion, they poured in such multi∣tudes of People as the Besieged were scarce able to withstand; and the 
Turkish
 Soldiery being al∣so weary of their sufferings, and irksomness of their tedious leagure, resolved now or never to put an end to their labours; so that advancing with their open Breasts to the top of the Battle∣ments, without fear either of Cannon, or Musket∣shot, they entered within the Walls, and planted the 
Turkish
 Banners on the Works; but being af∣terwards received by a resolute Company of the Defendants, they were again thrown from the Walls, and tumbled back into the Ditch with an incredible Slaughter. It is impossible here to de∣scribe the anger, the courage, the despair which was apparent in the faces of the Besieged, enfla∣med by the love of their own country, and ha∣tred of the 
Turks;
 so that three or four sustained sometimes the Assault of a Troop; and a small number united, opposed a whole Sangiack of the Enemy. The Women also forgetting the imbe∣cillity of their Sex, renewing in themselves the Courage and Vigour of the Ancient Amazons, exposed themselves without fear upon the Walls, throwing scalding Water, Stones, burning Pitch, and whatsoever came next to hand, upon the Assai∣lants; whom they so valiantly repulsed from the rising of the Sun till twelve at Noon, that after much slaughter on both sides, the 
Turks
 growing faint, retreated, and took breath a while within their Trenches. And now the Soldiery consi∣dering the Obstinacy of the Christians, began to mutiny, and resolving not to cast away their lives in vain, motioned to raise the Siege, and be gone; which when the General opposed, they threat∣ned to sacrifice his Life to the Ghosts of their de∣parted Brethren. But see, how many times the Devil ruines the fortune of the Christians! for whilst they were in this deliberation to depart, behold, a certain, 
Thracian
 one of the Garison Soldiers, advis'd the 
Turks
 that there were not above Three hundred found Men remaining in the whole Garison,
 that they were now reduced to their ulti∣mate 
Crisis;
 so that if they appear'd only before them, and would but terrifie them with another assault, the Town was their own, without the least doubt of Surrender. This advice retarded the hasty depar∣ture of the Camp; instead of which they again mu∣ster'd themselves before the Walls, and prepar'd to assault the Breach, resolving to put all to a se∣cond extremity. The Christians within percei∣ving the resolution of their Enemy, and being sen∣sible how much they were infeebled by the last Convulsion, and loss of blood, and as yet sore of their wounds, immediately spread a white Flag of Treaty, which was as readily accepted by the 
Turks,
 and all Articles agreed on the 
17th.
 of 
August,
 and on the 
20th.
 the Garison marched freely out with Colours flying, and Drums beat∣ing, with liberty to go wheresoever they pleased, without hurt or injury; which Conditions were fully and faithfully performed and maintained.


Varadin
 being thus yielded,
 afforded matter of discourse, of discontent, of fear, and apprehen∣sions at 
Vienna;
 some argued, That it was but common and natural Reason, when our Neigh∣bours house is on fire, to look to our own; others blamed the flow and phlegmatick proceedings of the 
German
 Ministers, who in such urgent emer∣gencies as these, could fit as unconcerned, as Spectators at a Theatre, who regard nothing, which way the prize is carried; and in short, the whole Christian World stood Admirers of this sot∣tishness, esteeming either those Borderers asto∣nished and struck into a stupid timidity, or moved by principles of Policy, which none be∣sides themselves either understood, or penetrated. Only Count 
Nicholas Serini,
 a Prince who had a fair and Soveraign Inheritance in those parts,
 Commander of 
Croatia,
 and the Confines under his 
Cesarean
 Majesty, a most mortal and in∣veterate Enemy of the 
Turks,
 could not endure their insults, bravadoes and daily encroachments, but watching his occasion of advantage, when 
Canisia
 was almost destroyed by a dreadful fire, and thereby their Ammunition, and Provision for the most part consumed, he gathered what Forces he could possible, and made use of the op∣portunity to lay Siege unto it, not doubting but in that Conjuncture, and miserable Calamity of all things, to promote the Interest of his Master, and the common cause of 
Christendom;
 which as soon as he had done, he wrote a Letter to the Em∣peror,

acquainting him that God had opened him a Gate and Path to his Interest, and to a just re∣venge of the 
Ottoman
 perfidiousness: Who having violated their Faith, and the mutual Peace in ta∣king 
Varadin,
 would be justly and gloriously re∣compensed by the loss of 
Canisia;
 which being now, as it were by miracle, put into his hands, it were a neglect of the Divine Providence not to improve with advantage an opportunity so cheer∣ful and so promising: to which, besides other ar∣guments, he added, That if his 
Cesarean
 Maje∣sty should not think fit to concur herein with as∣sistance of his Imperial States, yet at least he would be pleased not to interdict him from the Glory of that design, in which he questioned not but to succeed, and in a short time to render not only to his Majesty, but also to the whole Chri∣stian World, proofs of his Valour, and a good account of his Enterprize. Howsoever, the Empe∣ror's Council seriously considering that 
Serini
's State could not be engaged with the 
Turk
 with∣out involving his Interest;
 and that the Princes of the Empire, though when assaulted, would willingly contribute their Forces in the defensive part, yet would be backward to be the Aggres∣sors, and engage their States in an offensive and provoking War, did therefore not only deny to second, or abet his designs with Military suc∣cours, but positively commanded him to retire, and desist from his resolution against 
Canisia;
 with which Answer, the Zeal and Spirit of 
Serini
 was so inflamed, that throwing in passion his Cemiter on the Ground, he raised his well-formed Seige, and retired to his proper Residence at 
Chiacaturno.


The loss also of 
Varadin
 moved the 
Transilva∣nians
 to consult their safety in this extremity of their Affairs,
 which now amidst these dangers and storms which threatned them, appeared in a de∣sperate and languishing Condition, unless reme∣died by a desperate Cure, and the resolves of some wise and valiant Counsel. Wherefore in the first place, they concluded to depose 
Acatius Barclay,
 the Favourite of the 
Turks;
 and in his stead they constituted 
John Chiminianus,
 or 
Ke∣menius,
 the late General of 
Ragotski
's Army.
 In the next place, they made their Addresses and Ap∣plications to the Emperor for assistance, suppli∣cating, as 
Ragotski,
 and those of 
Varadin
 had done before, the powerful protection, and sacred Patronage of the Imperial Eagles, alledging those Arguments of common safety, and mutual inte∣rest, which apparent reason suggested, and which were the present Subject and Theme of all the Courts in 
Christendom.
 To this Demand the Emperor assented, promising readily his assistance, but with Proviso, that for his security, the Cities of 
Zechelhid, Chowar, Julia,
 and other places, should receive Garisons of 
German
 Soldiers. The 
Transilvanians
 willingly accepted the Propositions, so that soon after those places were supplied with 
German
 Garisons. But as yet no effectual Forces came from the Emperor, nay rather the 
German
 Councils seemed willing to perswade the 
Turks,
 that there was no design, but to maintain the an∣cient, friendly and amicable Correspondence; to which end it is said confidently, that the Prince 
Gonzaga,
 wrote to the Pasha of 
Buda,
 That those Garisons sent to possess certain places of 
Transilvania,
 were only in appearance, and not to create Dissentions between the 
Austrian
 Court, and the 
Ottoman
 Prince; which Letters 
Ali
 Pasha sent to the 
Transilvanians,
 with design, that dis∣covering unto them an evident reason to distrust the Emperor, they should wholly resign them∣selves to the good will and disposition of the Port. But notwithstanding, these verbal assurances pre∣vailed not so much with the 
Turks
 on one side, as the 
German
 Garisons administred jealousie on the other: So that the Vizier raged furiously against the Emperor, for encouraging 
Kemenius,
 who had treacherously murdered his two innocent Brothers in his Rebellion against 
Barclay,
 the only true and lawful Possessor. Nor did the 
Turks
 only vent their anger and disdain in words, but also by the sad and calamitous effects of War; passing without farther parly into the Emperors Dominions in 
Hungary,
 where they put all to fire and sword. Count 
Serini
 perceiving evident∣ly hereby that the War was broken forth, and that it was not longer time to stand at a gaze, and not make necessary Provisions for defence; about the beginning of 
June,
 he laid the foundations of a Fortress on the Banks of the River 
Muer,
 within the Dominions of the 
Turks,
 about a League distant from 
Canisia,
 and in memory of his Fami∣ly and Name called it 
Serinswar,
 a place conve∣nient to assault, and offend the Enemy, and to fix the Bulwark, or Redoubt, of the Province of 
Sti∣ria,
 which work was laid with that secresie, and executed with such expedition, that it was almost finished before it was known, or notice taken thereof by the 
Turks;
 but so soon as it was disco∣vered, and the News arrived at 
Constantinople,
 the old-Vizier 
Kuperlee
 stormed with rage, and in his height of passion, signed a Command for strangling the Pasha of 
Canisia,
 for not timely preventing the Erection of that Fort in its begin∣ning. In like manner this work was an occasion of disgust at 
Vienna;
 for though the 
Turks
 were the first who had broken the Peace, and given just cause to the Christians to provide all cautions imaginable for their safety; Yet I know not why, nor wherefore, there wanted not certain persons in the Court either emulous of 
Serini
's Glory, or zealous of the Emperors Interest, who interpreted the activeness, and forward heat of this Count to be like fire to enflame the Fuel of Controversie between the two Empires;
 yet certainly we can∣not but meritoriously applaud the Heroick Spirit of this Prince, who was provident of his Countries safety, watchful of the Enemies Motion, soon touched with the sense of the 
Mahometan
 infide∣lity, and in fine, a zealous Champion of the Christian Cause. But now, with what Salve or Balsome soever the 
Italian,
 or 
Spanish
 Chirurgi∣ons of Politick Government, imagined to obduct a callous over the smarts or wounds of these dif∣fering States; the Breaches grew every day too wide to be drawn up, or cemented by artificial compliances, or verbal lenitives;
 for now the succours promised by the Emperor were arrived in 
Transilvania,
 under the Command of Count 
Montecuculi,
 and joining with the Forces of 
Keme∣nius,
 formed such a numerous, and well compo∣sed Army, as was judged not only sufficient to contend for the interest of the Christian Cause, but also for the entire decision of the Worlds Do∣minion: So that both Generals with an unani∣mous consent, confident of Victory, agreed, not to expect the approach of 
Ali
 Pasha, but boldly to meet and provoke him to Battel.


Ali
 the 
Turkish
 General perceiving the strength and resolution of the Christians, thought it pru∣dence for a while to detract from Engagement, and temper the usual mettle of the 
Ottoman
 fury with cooler Counsels of advantage, which delays and opportunities of time would administer: for observing that the 
Transilvanians
 were divided into Factions, he humoured the dissenting party,
 by constituting 
Michael Apafi
 their Prince; a person in the flower and strength of his Age, of great parts and abilities; and one who violently

affected the Principality, having but lately pur∣chased his freedom from slavery. In this manner 
Apafi
 passing from his Prison and Chains, to the glory and trouble of a Throne, poor 
Transilvania
 remained divided, and taking Arms against her self, went daily working and contriving her own ruine. This hath always been the Master-piece of the 
Turkish
 Policy, and this disunion amongst Christians hath availed the 
Ottoman
 Interest more than their Swords, and confirmed their obstinacy in Religion with a Miracle, as if the division of Christian Princes (which in late Ages have frustra∣ted the holy designs against this common Enemy) had been an effect of their Prayers, and a Conces∣sion of Divine Providence to their daily Petitions. So now the 
Transilvanians
 being divided, great numbers of them revolted from 
Kemenius
 to 
Apafi,
 which not only weakned, but discouraged the Christian Army with fear and confusion; amidst of which, 
Ali
 Pasha took his time to assault them, not far from 
Cladiopolis;
 and being assisted by the advantagious conjuncture of the present opportu∣nity, so wholly discomfited them, that he killed and took 50000 persons, which was the Issue of the present union, and the exclusion of 
Kemenius,
 who was now forced to abandon 
Transilvania,
 and seek his refuge in 
Hungary.


Howsoever 
Kemenius
 could not here rest satisfi∣ed, but revolving in his mind certain ways to re∣cover his Principality, obtained from 
Montecu∣culi
 some 
German
 Troops; with which, and with his own scattered Forces, which at length he had collected into a Body, he resolved to try his For∣tune once more with the 
Turks;
 and joining Bat∣tel with them, not far from 
Presburg,
 he fought with a resolution becoming the desperateness of his design; either that day to Die, or to Triumph. The Fortune of that days conflict remained a long time doubtful; so equal they seemed on both sides to be in their Courage, in their Force, and in their Conduct, until at length the advan∣tage of the 
Turks
 number prevailing, 
Kemenius
 was forced to a disorderly retreat,
 and afterwards to a confused flight; in which, being by one of his own Soldiers knocked from his Horse was trampled un∣der foot, & the greatest part of his People remain'd a Sacrifice to the enraged Weapons of the 
Turks.


Apafi
's party being greatly encouraged with this success, joining with a body of the 
Turks,
 laid Siege to 
Claudiopolis,
 the Court of the 
Tran∣silvanian
 Princes, now Garisoned by 
German
 Sol∣diers, and Governed by 
David Retani,
 a right valiant and trusty Soldier, who omitting nothing which might conduce to the defence and mainte∣nance of the Town, either by his care or valour, made many successful Sallies upon the Enemy, and tired and wearied them out in their Siege; until at length General 
Schenidau
 then in 
Hungary,
 gathering what force he could, which were not above 6000 Men, marched with all haste possible to the relief of 
Claudiopolis;
 the report of whose approach arriving the 
Turkish
 Camp before his Person, or Army, and the common rumour and fear augmenting much their number; the 
Turks
 were so terrifyed hereat, that in haste and disorder they forsook their Siege after three Months continu∣ance; leaving great quantities of Victuals behind for want of Carriages, and Beasts of burden. 
Sche∣nidau
 having gained this success and honour with so much facility, he reinforced the Garison, and returned with Triumph home;
 carrying with him great Booties of Cattle and other spoils of the Enemy. The defence of this place was account∣ed almost miraculous; for besides that the For∣tifications were after the Ancient Model, it was unprovided of Cannon and other warlike Ammu∣nition; and therefore we are not to pass by the Governour 
Retani
 without due Commendations; whose valiant and generous spirit, with courage equal to his diligence, knew how to fortify and to defend his Walls; For out of the Town Bells he founded his Artillery; he daily wearied the Enemy with Sallies, surprised one of their Batteries, which most annoyed the City; composed the Muti∣nies of the Citizens within; and in short, against the Opinion of all, he defended and maintained it in the possession and right of the Emperor.


Claudiopolis
 being thus relieved, the 
Turks
 sto∣mached inwardly the disgrace, and yet thought it prudence for the present to dissemble; and therefore upon some addresses made for Peace from 
Transilvania,
 and certain Propositions tender∣ed by the 
German
 Resident; the Vizier coumer∣feited his inclinations thereunto so far, that he prohibited all farther Acts of Hostility upon the Frontiers.


Notwithstanding which, the rumour at this time running, of a Combination of all Christen∣dom against the 
Turk,
 with Men or Money,
 for∣warded by the endeavours of the Pope, and the contrivances of 
Venice,
 encreased the former jea∣lousy, and caused the Skirmishes on the Fron∣tiers to be more hot and frequent: And the Vi∣zier being froward and cholerick, and by nature jealous; matters had immediately proceeded to an open rupture, had not the 
German
 Pesident, by his Moderation and Prudence, represented af∣fairs in the smoothest guise of Peace, and de∣layed the War rather than composed it; so that this whole Summer was spent in disputes, mes∣sages, and debates on both sides.


The Vizier designing this War in his Eye, and desirous to comply with the vagrant humour of his Master,
 who was weary of his 
Seraglio
 at 
Con∣stantinople,
 resolved to transfer the 
Turkish
 Court to 
Adrianople,
 so that toward the end of 
June
 they entered their Tents without the City. But before they could dispose their affairs for to de∣part, the Plague, which is the Epidemical Disease of this Country, and the common distemper of the Summer Season, began to break forth and dif∣fuse it self through all parts of the City; that in a short time the Keys of many Houses were brought to the Grand Signior for want of Pretenders and Heirs surviving to possess them: In greater Houses of Pasha's and others, where have been a Hun∣dred and fifty persons, scarce five have remained alive for burial of the others; what the fury of that Mortality might be, was best conjectured by the daily account was kept of the Corps carried out of the City, by the Gate only of 
Adrianople,
 which for some Weeks amounted (I speak mo∣derately) to Twelve or thirteen hundred a Day; it being observed amongst the 
Turks,
 when above a Thousand in a Day are carried forth Dead by that Gate, that then Prayers are to be made to Almighty God to withdraw that heavy judgment. At which time the 
Greek
 and 
Armenian
 Patriarchs are likewise desired to offer up their Devotions, and intercede with God for mitigation of the Pesti∣lence; and the same Day in a Field called 
Ok∣maidan,
 do all assemble, though divided apart, to pray against the common Calamity, it not seeming vain to them, that every one should call upon his God. Nor did the Plague rage only in the City, but the Ships and 
Turks
 Saykes were in∣fected in parts remote on the Black Sea, and the 
Propontis,
 so that above a Hundred Sail were re∣ported to be lodged at several Ports for want of Seamen to navigate them home. The Camp also where the Grand Signior, and Vizier remain∣ed, was not exempted from this common

Contagion, for the necessary intercourse between that and the City communicated the evil equal unto both, strowing the ways with dead Bodies, in that manner as represented a passage conduct∣ing to a Coemetery, or Charnel-house, rather than to a Martial Camp or Court of a Great Em∣peror. This mortality hastned the Grand Signior with his Army and Attendances into a better Air, the Vizier was to follow a few days after, but be∣fore his departure he setled and constituted his Son 
Chimacam,
 or Governour of 
Constantinople.
 Things in this confusion and haste not being well provided for, the Grand Signiors reception at 
A∣drianople
 caused him to prolong his Journey by taking a compass round by the Castles at the mouth of the 
Hellespont,
 and from thence went to 
Dimotochum,
 where having lingered out eight or ten days more, he made a solemn entrance into 
Adrianople,
 which will for some years fol∣lowing be discoursed in this History as the Seat of the 
Ottoman
 Empire.


The time of this great Mortality was no sea∣son for us to move in business or action, we and all other Christians avoiding common conversati∣on, every one consulting his particular safety. Howsoever two businesses brought our Lord Am∣bassador to Town from his Country Retirement. One was to obtain justice from the Vizier, on two miscreant 
Turks
 who had committed a Robbery on his Page and Steward, as they were drinking at a Fountain near a place called 
Bauchasarai,
 a Village inhabited by 
Greeks;
 the Steward by the swiftness of his Horse escaped, but the Page being sickly and weak fell into their hands, and was grievously wounded by them.
 Complaints hereof being made to the Grand Vizier, he seemed much concerned at the evil treatment of the Ambassa∣dors servants; and therefore sent the Nayp of the Kadi of 
Galata
 to take notice, and write down the Wounds which the Page had received; and at the same time dispatched Officers into all parts adjacent, to take the Thieves, and to examine, and torment the people in places where it might be suspected only that they were harboured, and that nothing should be neglected in order to this discovery. It is incredible with what diligence, se∣verity, and violence this command was executed, the people in the Villages where they had lodged or been, or but passed through, were all seized; and the men examined under the Cudgel, with Drubs on their feet; the men, women, and chil∣dren of 
Baucha-sarai
 were carried, and some of them in Chains, to our Ambassadors House at 
Pera;
 and all the Countries round were so ill treated, that their common safety was concerned in the taking of these Thieves, and the allarum was by this time so far spread, that it was more pressing and urgent than our 
Hue-and-Cry;
 in short, one of the Thieves was taken, and he discovered the abode of his Companion, and both were brought to our Ambassadors House, and there put into the Stocks, laden with Chains, and guarded by the 
Turkish
 Officers. The next day they were carried before the 
Stambol-Efendi,
 or Recorder of 
Constantinople,
 they confessed the fact, and Hoget or Sentence passed upon them, which by Law could reach no farther than to the Gallies; but being brought before the Vizier, he had a mind to stretch the Law, and their necks to a farther ex∣tent, and so without other demur calling the Hang man, ordered him to put Ropes about their necks, and to carry them to the Lord Ambassador, following his directions for their execution; and so accordingly one was hanged by the Fountain, and the other on a Tree at the entrance into the Vil∣lage of 
Bauche-sarai.
 This Exemplary justice raised the reverence, and fear of the Country∣people towards our Ambassador unto that degree, that during the time of the Earl of 
Winchilsea,
 no∣thing of this nature ever passed again, but on the contrary, the Paisants, and the people in the Countries round, honoured and feared him like one of their Pasha's, or great men.


The other business was of a different nature re∣lating to the Emin, or Customer of 
Aleppo,
 who being dismissed of his Employment was now come to 
Constantinople;
 before his departure from 
Aleppo,
 he had demanded of our Merchants there 16000 Dollars for Arrears of Custom due to him, on Silk and other Goods; his pretence was false and unjust, howsoever it being usual for 
Turks
 upon every demand to gain an advantage, the matter was compounded with the Sum of 2500 Dol∣lars, and so the Customer departed with an ap∣pearance of perfect satisfactation; notwithstand∣ing which coming to 
Constantinople
 he renewed his pretensions again, and by the favour of the 
Reis-Efendi
 or Secretary of State, so proceeded in his business, that the Lord Ambassador was for∣ced to make a second composition with 2000 Dollars.


The Grand Signior and Vizier, as we said be∣fore, being now at 
Adrianople,
 the Viziers Deputy, called by the name of the 
Caimacam,
 governed 
Constantinople,
 to whom our Ambassador, accor∣ding to custom made a visit, presenting him with eight Vests.


Likewise in absence of the Vizier, it being usual for the Ambassador to make a Visit to the 
Bostan∣gee-Bashee,
 or Head of the Gardiners; his Excel∣lency passed that Complement on him, and pre∣sented him with four Vests. This person though entitled Head-Gardiner, is yet of great power, making a considerable figure at Court; for he not only commands all the Gardiners belonging to the many 
Seraglio
's of the Grand Signior, which are very considerable in number, but his Jurisdi∣ction reaches all along the 
Bosphorus,
 and com∣mands the Villages, Woods and Countries at a far distance, so that he may in 
English
 be com∣par'd to the chief Ranger.


It was now towards the Winter,
 when this Vi∣zier 
Kuperlee,
 finding himself mature with Age, and ready to fall like Autumn Fruit, sent for his Son from 
Constantinople
 to bear a share with him in the Burden of the Empire. This he did with the consent of the Grand Signior, for he alledged, that being now feeble and decayed, he could not make his personal Addresses as formerly, nor at∣tend at the Court to render his Majesty an ac∣count of his Affairs; and therefore had need of so trusty a Messenger as his Son, to carry his ad∣vices and directions, and faithfully to communi∣cate what he should encharge to his Relation; all others being on some consideration or other suspected, and at least Enemies to him, or to the Grand Signior. the Sultan accepting the pro∣position and the Person, had often occasions of discourse and familiarity with the Son, called 
Ahmet,
 who deported himself with that faith and prudence in the management of all his Affairs, that the old Vizier had no great difficulty to pro∣cure a Grant of succession for him in that Office: For though there were many obstacles therein, as the abhorrency of the 
Turkish
 Policy from all he∣reditary succession in places of trust; and the Youth of his Person, not exceeding thirty two years of Age, and some emulous, powerful, and ancient Competitors, who hated the Father;
 Yet the old Fox had so ingratiated himself with his Master, for (to speak truly) he had been the only instrument that had preserved him and his

Empire from falling into as many Divisions as there are Pashalicks, or Governments, that the Grand Signior gave credit to him as to an infallible Oracle,
 assuring him that before any other, who might either pretend Merit, Age, or Precedency, his Son should be preferred to the Succession. The old Man acknowledged the favour with all humi∣lity and thankfulness, declaring, that he had now served his Majesty faithfully for the space of five years, a longer proportion than commonly Vi∣ziers had managed that Office, in such tem∣pestuous and distracted times, who either for their own offences, or want of Providence, or good Conduct, have made shipwrack of their own lives, and the Charge they pi∣loted: But he had lived in the worst of times, when the spirits of men with discontent were en∣flamed round about him, and threatned the ruine of their Prince and Empire; and yet had reduced things to composure, and to the obedience of the 
Ottoman
 Yoke, that now he that was the Sultan might incline his Head to rest with security, and enjoy his pastimes and pleasures, without being interrupted by those Conspiracies, which destroy∣ed his Father, and endangered him in his years of Infancy. And because the continuance of his Se∣curity and Glory depended on the execution of certain Maximes, which he had framed to himself, he was chalking out to his Son such undoubted Rules and Doctrines of Government, as would certainly tend to the glory and prosperity of the Empire, being abundantly satisfied that his Son was faithful, prudent, and active. But three things he particularly recommended to his Ma∣jesty.




1. Never to give Ear to the Counsels and Ad∣vices of Women.


2. To amass what Treasure he could possi∣ble into his Coffers, though with Oppres∣sion, and impoverishment of his Peo∣ple.


3. To be continually on Horse-back, and keep his Armies in constant Action.




On the 
19th
 of 
October,
 
Kuperlee
 having ended his days, whose Disease was Old Age, and a Gan∣grene in his Legs, his Son by Hattesheriff, or the Grand Signior's Patent under his hand, taking the Seal, was constituted Vizier in the place of his Fa∣ther, to the admiration and disappointment of the graver Seniors, who were discontented, not only to perceive themselves neglected, but that person also to supplant them, who was judged uncapa∣ble of the Office, according to the Canon, and ancient Precedents of this Government.


The Body of 
Kuperlee
 was transported to 
Con∣stantinople,
 where in his life time he had erected a very stately and magnificent Structure, and his Monument over the Grave, or Vault, where he designed to be interred. In his life time he had filled it with Corn, which daily was distributed to the poor, and being emptied after his death, re∣ceived his Corps, over which a small Mosch was endowed with Oyl for Lamps, and maintenance of certain Talismans and Softaes, to make Prayers and Offerings for his Soul.


The Father being thus interred,
 
Ahmet
 his Son began to contrive his own establishment, and to settle his Greatness on the foundation of his Fa∣thers Rules of Policy, from whom not to degene∣rate in cruelty of Nature, or leave his Legacies unpaid to those he had proscribed, he in the first place sacrificed the Blood of the Pasha of 
Mag∣nasia
 to his Fathers Ghost, with some other petty attendences; so that the World perceived that they had changed the Vizier, but not his tyranny, or at least the same spirit of the Father seemed to be renewed, transmitted again into the Person of the Son. But more difficult it was to obtain the like success against 
Mortaza,
 the Pasha of 
Babylon,
 and the 
Kayab-begh,
 or Lieutenant General of the Janisaries, who were long before (as we have said) marked out for destruction by his Father. For the first was the most powerful Pasha of all 
Asia,
 vigilant, and active, and had done and merited great rewards from his Master, and par∣ticularly in decoying, and cutting off the Head of the Grand Rebel 
Asan
 Pasha, who dared the Sul∣tan at the Gates of his Seraglio; but understand∣ing the ill will of the House of 
Kuperlee
 against him, stood always on his Guard, lodging with∣out the Wall of the City, and under the prote∣ction of his Arms and Souldiers, who were great∣ly affected to the generosity of his Person; so that, though many attempts were made upon him, and that Officers, or Executioners came from the Court, openly tendring from the Sultan the Present of a Sword, and Vest of Sables, the usual Signals of the 
Ottomon
 Grace, but privately bringing a Bowstring, or a Halter; yet they were all entertained at a distance, and returned again with the same dissimulation they had used in their feigned Addresses. In like manner the 
Kayah∣begh,
 an ancient, prudent, and experienced Com∣mander, beloved by the Soldiery, and secured by the Priviledge of his Office, (for a 
Kayah-begh
 cannot be cut off during his Command, without infringement of the honour and order of the Ja∣nisaries) preserved still his Station, and Com∣mand in despight of the Viziers hate and endea∣vours. But what could not be done by meer vir∣tue of the absolute Power, was effected under the appearance of honour and favour of the Sul∣tan, who by his Royal Commission, having made him Pasha of 
Damascus,
 he was at the same instant deprived of his Military Power and Priviledge, and lay now naked and exposed to the Arbitrary Pleasure and will of 
s Adversary. Nor could his prayers or tears incline the Grand Signiors mind to reverse his Order, who, together with the Vizier, rather inforced it with the specious pretext of Favour and Grace for his former me∣rits, and with commendation of his Abilitles agree∣able to the importance of so considerable a Go∣vernment, encreased the just suspicion of 
Solyman,
 (for so the 
Kayah-begh
 was called.) not being ig∣norant of the 
Turkish
 Proverb, A 
Kayah-begh
 is like a Fish in the Water, which out of its Element immediately dies. Howsoever,
 
ut finis omnium cum dominante, grates agit,
 he acknowledges the fa∣vour of his Master, and gave thanks for it, ac∣cording to the Duty of a good Subject, who ought to acquiesce in the sentence of his Prince, which, though never so full of severity, ought to be be∣lieved, and called Clemency. The Vizier now hasted 
Solyman
 Pasha to depart with all expedi∣tion, not allowing him above Four or Five days time to make preparation for so long a Journey, which otherwise he would have prolonged, as one, like the rest of Mankind, desirous to protract the thread of Life, imagining that in his journey, at some distance, where his Death might be most obscure, and least noted, the Edict of the Grand Signior might overtake him, and find a Grave for him in some solitary Desert, or unfre∣quented Mountain. Wherefore he made one Day an Address to the Vizier, under pretence of taking his last farewel, and freely ac∣quainted him with his apprehension and his

fears, desiring that he would deal as frankly with him, in letting him know the utmost of his Fate, for that now he was in his hand, and was so good a Proficient in the 
Mahometan
 Religion, as to op∣pose nothing which was his Destiny, or inconsi∣stent with the Decree of the Sultan. The Vizier reverencing the Years, and pitying the Conditi∣on of so worthy a Commander, abased solely by his Power, bid him be of good cheer, assuring him of his Life, so long as he acted nothing con∣trary unto his, which he confirmed by Vows, and all imaginable Protestations, encouraging him to proceed forward to his Government with those cheerful Words and Assurances, that 
Soly∣man
 Pasha taking his farewel with more ease of mind, and confidence of Life, departed 
Adria∣nople
 in three days after his designment to the new Office:
 But not many days Journey had he advanced into 
Asia,
 before the Grand Signiors and Viziers Commands overtook him, altering his design for 
Damascus,
 and instead thereof or∣dered him a Pilgrimage unto 
Mecha,
 and exile into the remote and desert parts of 
Arabia,
 until he should be thought worthy to be recalled by that power which banished him. In like manner some few days after, the Mufti being on a 
Fri∣day
 seated in his place, in the Mosch of Sultan 
Se∣lim
 (a very noble and famous Fabrick) and atten∣ding there the Grand Signiors entrance, that he might begin his Prayers, was unexpectedly whis∣pered in the Ear, that he should retire and give place to another Mufti; which immediately he obeyed, and in four hours departed 
Adriano∣ple,
 being banished to 
Gallipoli,
 for his Friendship (as was supposed) to 
Solyman
 Pasha, and for not passing the 
Fetfa
 for his Death, according to the will and desire of the Grand Signior.


During the Transaction of these affairs in divers parts, the Wars against the 
Venetians
 were carri∣ed on faintly; the Gallies had no other design, or employment, than to transport recruits of Men and Ammunition to 
Canea,
 that so the 
Turks
 might rather keep the ground that they had gained in that Island, than add thereunto by new Conquests, until such time as that being freed from other Wars, they might have leisure and opportunity to attend unto that alone. Accor∣dingly the Captain Pasha set forth at the usual Season from 
Constantinople;
 and arrived at 
Scio
 with twenty three Gallies, besides his own called the 
Bastard-Gally,
 or Admiral; the advice of which, coming to the Captain-General of the 
Ve∣netians,
 he hastned thither with all his Fleet to be∣siege him in the Port: but this seeming after some days a tedious work, and what might lose too much time; he resolved to depart from thence, and so leaving a sufficient Guard before the Port, he set Sail with two Galleasses, thirteen light Gal∣lies, and seven Auxiliaries for the Coast of 
Rhodes;
 where his Brigantines advised, that the remainder of the 
Turkish
 Fleet were Anchored, and were taking aboard two thousand Soldiers for reinforcing 
Canea;
 but before the 
Venetians
 could arrive, intelligence was given them by the way, that the 
Turks
 were loosed from 
Rhodes,
 and were Anchored under the Island of 
Patmos;
 wherefore altering their course, they steered for 
Nio,
 and there watering their Vessels, sailed near to 
Nixia,
 where the Van-guard discovered five and thirty Gallies of the Enemy, which had made prize of a Tartana laden with Provisions design∣ed for the 
Venetian
 Fleet, and having taken out her lading, had set her on fire. The 
Venetians
 ha∣ving their Enemy in their Eye, gave them chase until the Evening, when the Night coming on, put an end to the pursuit: but keeping their course towards 
Candia,
 they had sight again of them the next Morning, and coming nearer, the 
Turkish
 Admiral put forth his Flag of Defiance, as if he intended to come to a Battel; but the Wind blowing hard, and the Sea increasing, both Fleets were separated until the Morning; when the 
Venetians
 discovered certain of the Enemies Gallies to Leeward of 
Milo,
 where bearing down before the Wind upon them, five of them ran a∣shore; one was sunk, and four were taken by the 
Venetian
 and 
Maltese
 Gallies, three of which fighting with great Courage and Valour, killed divers brave Cavaliers of one and the other Coun∣try. The men which ran the Gallies ashore at 
Milo,
 did it with design to secure themselves in that small Fort which the 
Turks
 possessed in that Island; but they were not able to withstand the valour of the 
Venetians,
 who having first recover∣ed the Cannon of the Gallies which were ran a∣shore, with their rigging, and what else was use∣ful, they set the Hulls on Fire; and immediate∣ly entering the Port, the Captain-General land∣ed two hundred select men, and veterane Soldi∣ers to besiege the Fortress, giving Orders to one 
Manolacchi Macchiotti,
 who was well acquainted with the 
Turkish
 Language, to summon them to a Treaty, the which they readily accepted, and were received to quarter at discretion of the Ge∣neral; the next Morning they were brought down to the Sea-Coast to the number of about nine hundred, amongst which there was a Jani∣zar-Aga, a Bey of 
Rhodes,
 and three of 
Constan∣tinople,
 besides Captains, and other persons of condition and quality. These Prisoners being divided into several Gallies and Ships, the 
Ve∣netians
 departed, and cruising about the Coast of 
Candia,
 to hinder the importation of all succours, they encountered with 
Antonio Priuli,
 with a good Squadron of Vessels under his Command.








THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROUR OF THE TURKS.


The Second BOOK.


Anno Christi, 
1662.
 Hegeira, 
1073.


AT the beginning of this Year the People of 
Algier
 sent Messengers and Presents to the Grand signiors Court, then at 
Adrianople,
 com∣plaining against the Actions His Majesties Fleet, under the Com∣mand of the Earl of 
Sandwich,
 had done against their Town and Castles, pretending those Forts to be the Grand Signiors, and the Affront offered to him, as willing to interest him in thier Quarrels and Piracies. And that thier Addresses might be more graciously received, they brought with them certain Presents, which tho in former time swere Yearly, were now only as their Affairs required, and on this occasion were doubled: for besides their Presents to the Ministers and Officers of State; they brought to the Grand Signior a Ship made in Silver, beset with Emrods, Rubies, and other Stones; fourteen young and hansom Boys, and a neger Eunuch for the 
Seraglio.
 But the Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 His Majesties Embassador there Resident, being then at Court, had so well prepossessed the Vizier with the Ground and Rea∣sons for the War, that the complaints of 
Algier
 were judged in no wise touching the 
Ottoman
 In∣terest, or the breach of Peace, any Impeach∣ment of the good Correspondence and Friend∣ship which then intervened between the King of 
England
 and the Grand Signior. But their Pre∣sumption to search 
English
 Ships, and take out Strangers Goods, was objected as an Argument of their Disobedience and Rebellion, contrary to the Grand Signiors Capitulations, which also was aggravated by their ill Treatment of the Grand Signiors Pasha, whom they had beaten, imprisoned, and cast out of all Power and Authority; which severe Reprehensions so terrified and discouraged them, that they not only desisted from their Pre∣tensions against the 
English,
 but began to fear, lest the Power and Interest of the Ambassador at Court, should contrive some mischief to their own Persons.


Soon after this the Vizier esteeming it necessary towards his better establishment to gratifie the City of 
Constantinople,
 and the Grandees of the Empire, by the Grand Signiors return to his Im∣perial Seat, prevailed with him, (as a matter wholly necessary) to adorn and comfort that place by his Presence; for now he began to de∣clare a kind of abhorrency to it, in regard the memory of those Rebellions which were nourish∣ed in that place, to the Destruction of his Father, and to the great hazard and narrow escape after¦wards of himself, had taken that Impression on his Fancy, that the Chamber of the Seraglio ap∣peared melancholly and dismal, and the Walks of his Garden solitary, and the noise of the Rooks and Daws amongst his Trees, were like the croak∣ings of Ravens or unlucky Birds. Howsoever the Vizier had so far entered into his Affection and Esteem, that his Perswasions were stronger than his own absolute Dominion; and prevailed so with him against the force of his own Fancy, that about the Equinoctial he began his Journey

towards 
Constantinople,
 to the great Joy and Sa∣tisfaction of his People: But by the way lingring out his time in Hunting and other Pastimes of the Woods and Fields; it was the 
30th
 of 
March
 be∣fore he made his Entry, for never was Prince so great a 
Nimrod,
 so unwearied a Huntsman as this; never was he at quiet, but continually in the Fields on Horseback, rising sometimes at Mid∣night, to ride up the Mountains, that he might more early discover the Sun in the Morning; by which extravagant course of Life, he wearied out his Court and Attendants, who began to be∣lieve the amorous humour of the Father more supportable, than the wandring Vagaries, and restless Spirit of the Son.
 But not only were his Huntings tedious to his Court, but troublesome and expensive to the whole Country, which were all summoned in wheresoever he came, and some∣times thirty or forty thousand men appointed to beat the Woods for three or four days, carrying before them the compass of a days Journey about, inclosing all the Game and wild Beasts within that Circuit, which on the day of the Hunt, the Grand Signior kills and destroys with Dogs, Guns, or any other way, with abundance of noise and confusion; which Pastime, tho lawful in it self, and commendable enough in so great a Prince, yet the frequent use of it, was a burden and an oppression to his People, whilst in the Winter they passed many cold Nights in the Woods, and being unused to that hardship, many of them paid for their Emperors Pastime with their own lives.


The Grand Signior being now at 
Constantinople,
 the Vizier judged not himself so well fixed in his Government, but that through the Malice of his powerful Enemies, who were familiar to the Grand Signiors Ear, he was then in danger to be shaken; the principal of which was 
Kuzlir Aga,
 or chief Eunuch of the Women of the 
Seraglio,
 who by means of the Valede, or Queen Mother, was ill-affected to him, being both inclined to prefer some Favourites of their own, for the Diminuti∣tion and Eclipse of the Viziers Power, one where∣of was the 
Tefterdar
 Pasha, or Lord Treasurer, placed in Office against the Viziers Approbation, which the Vizier understanding, made short Work with him, depriving him of his Office, commanded him in a few hours to quit 
Constanti∣nople.


But the Queen Mother, and 
Kuzlir Aga
 resent∣ting this Affront to their Favourie, resolved to even scores in a piece of the like Nature: Where∣fore they obtained for the 
Viziers Kahya,
 or Steward, the Pashalick of 
Darbiquier,
 a rich and honourable Government, not for any disaffe∣ction or hatred they had unto him, but only to deprive the Vizier of the Counsel and Assistance of so knowing and faithful a Servant; for he was a Person, who by his own Estate and Friends had raised the House of 
Kuperlee,
 having in the time of his Poverty and Meanness lent him that Sum of Money, which gave him the first Rise to his Richess and Authority; for Re∣compence and Interest of which, old 
Kuperlee
 made him his Steward, and shared to him his Honours and Prosperity; in which deporting himself towards all People with the same modesty and evenness of Temper which he used in his for∣mer Condition, he procured no Enemies to his own Person, and such as hated the Interest he served, only wishing him disobliged from it, so as to be able to dispense their Malice on the Vi∣zier, without concerning him in his Masters ruin. This consideration moved the angry Lady, and the envious Eunuch to vex their Adversary by the removal of his most faithful Creature and Ser∣vant.


Mahomet Kahya
 now Pasha of 
Darbiquier,
 after a reasonable and convenient time allowed him for his Preparations, being very rich, set for∣ward towards his Government, with a very noble and numerous Retinue, having amongst the rest five hundred Persons young, well mounted, and well armed; which notwithstanding were not so strong, but before they were advanced many days Journey into 
Asia,
 were encoun∣tred by a greater force of bold and desperate Robbers, who engaging with him, killed two hundred of his People on the place, rifled his Baggage, and constrained the Pasha himself to fly to the next City. This strange and audacious Robbery produced many Commands and Orders for Seizure and Suppression of Theives in the lesser 
Asia.
 And because the custom is, that something must be done in Compliance with the Imperial Commands, many poor innocent Men were taken in the Fields and Mountains, and per∣haps without any other Crime against them, than that they were not masters of a thousand Aspers to bribe the Officers, were for want thereof sent as Thieves to the Port, where with∣out further Conviction or Tryal they were exe∣cuted.


The Vizier being thus weakned by the remo∣val of his faithfullest Friend, his Condition was given over as desperate by the generality of the World, and several appearances of Troubles arising from the 
Eastern
 and 
Western
 parts, gave occasion to the Queen Mother, and her Party, to disparage his Abilities in the esteem of the Sul∣tan: Wherefore they exhorted him to imitate the Example of his Renowned Predecessors, who made use of their Viziers only to ease them from the troublesom part of their Government, but did not entirely throw off the Knowledg and Pri∣vity of the important Transactions and State Af∣fairs in the whole Empire. This Lesson awaken∣ed the Grand Signior a little, so that he declined some days his Sports abroad, and Exercise on Horse-back, and instead thereof passed much of his time in a 
Chiosk,
 or Garden-house on the Wall of the 
Seraglio,
 just opposite to the Viziers Gate, where his chief Business and Concernment was to observe such as went in, or came out; and when at any time he espied those enter, re∣markable for their Attendance, or difference of Habit, he would send to know of the Vizier, what occasion drew those People thither, what their Business was, and the like, by which he gave himself that Satisfaction as to believe that he had now found the true way of inspecting his Affairs, and taking care of his Empire.
 The Vizier was not insensible from whence this humour of the Gr. Signior proceeded, nor ignorant what ill Consequences such petty matters might produce; wherefore he resolved, if possible, to reconcile the favour and good will of the 
Valede,
 or Queen Mother, but all his Addresses (it seems) were returned fruitless; so difficult was it to appease the Malice of a feminine Spirit; and this malice She so ill concealed, that it was often said by 
Turks
 of Quality and Judgment, That the Great Viziers Mother, who entertained a Familiarity with Spirits, as they believed, had by their En∣chantments procured the Office of Vizier for her Husband and Son successively, and prevailed still to preserve her Son in the favour of his Master, yet could not by force of Magick get Power or Do∣minion over the 
Valede;
 No Spells, it seems, had virtue enough to qualifie the Spirit of that angry 
Juno.
 Some hereupon judged, that the Vizier

might have thoughts to make Resignation of his Office, and to content himself with some Pasha∣lick of a higher and more eminent Degree; but Apprehensions and Jealousies of their Dangers, and his own natural Ambition, soon stifled those Considerations, resolving to continue his Charge in Opposition to all the Difficulties and Dangers he might encounter. And perhaps he gave him∣self the same Counsel which the 
Vitellian
 Soldiers did to their General.
 
Nihil atrocius eventurum, quam in quod sponte ruant, moriendum victis, mo∣riendum deditis; id solum referre, no vissimum Spi∣ritum, per ludibrium & contumelias effandant, an per Virtutem.
 Men who must dye, whether they yield or are conquered by force, have the same Fate; all the difference is, that the one dies with Valour and Reputation, the other with Re∣proach and Cowardice. But to execute this stout Counsel with Prudence and Wisdom, he con∣ceived it necessary, if possible, to reconcile the sincere Friendship of 
Samozade,
 the 
Reis Effendi,
 or Chief Secretary of State, a Person the best practised of any, in the Affairs and Nogotiations of the 
Ottoman
 Empire, and one much in the Esteem and Favour of the Queen Mother, and in order thereunto treats him with more Famili∣arity and Condescension than was ordinary, or by many judged agreeable to the Greatness of a Grand Vizier; for always when he came into his Presence, he arose up, calling him secretly Fa∣ther, Tutor and Companion, in supporting the Burden of the weighty Government, and such other Compellations, as the Grand Signior vouchsafed only to the Vizier: for tho this 
Reis Effendi
 was of the greatest Abilities, and this present Vizier the most youthful and unexperi∣enced of later Times, yet it may be accounted one special mark and token of his Prudence, in knowing how to elect so useful a Friend, and of his Policy in procuring his sincere faithful∣ness towards him, and making him really his own. To which end he conversed much with him, com∣municated all his thoughts, freely demanded his advice, received his private Entertainments, and in fine, was wanting in no points of affable Cour∣tesy and Compliance, whereby he might create him his own, contenting for some time himself with the name of Vizier, tho the other as one, who best knew how to manage it, enjoyed the Power.


The Chief Officers of the 
Seraglio,
 instigated by the Queen Mother to diminish something the Power of the Vizier, put often the Grand Signior in mind, as a matter agreeable to his Dignity, to have a regard to his Government, which caused him more frequently than his humour served, to betake himself to his 
Choisk
 over a∣gainst the Viziers Gate, to make his usual Ob∣servations; and perceiving some Christians to enter the Court with red Calpacks or Caps, and yellow Shooes (prohibited to Christians by or∣ders of inferior Magistrates, but never until now thought worthy the Imperal Observance) imme∣diately called for the Subashee or Constable of 
Constantinople,
 and from the Window command∣ed him with great Fury to enter the Viziers Court, and such Christians as he should find there with yellow Shooes and red Caps he should first beat, and then send uncovered and barefooted home. The Subashee armed with a Power in this matter as high as the Viziers, entered the House without Complement or Licence, and encountring first the 
Kapikahya
's or Agents of 
Moldavia
 and 
Valachia
 negotiating the Affairs of their Prince and Coun∣try, he rudely layed them down, and without Respect to their Persons or Office, beat them on the Feet, tore off their red Stockins and Caps, and sent them home with their Heads and Feet bare, derided by the People,
 and lamenting the Affliction of that Tyranny to which they were subjected. This inhumane Treatment of Persons in a manner sacred, was seconded by publick Proclamations, strictly prohibiting all Christians from wearing red Caps, yellow Shooes, scarlet Vests, and the like; and 
Janizaries
 from the use of Hanjars or Daggers, and silk Turbants, upon pain of Death; which Order was so strictly en∣joyned, that the Corners of every Street were furnished with Officers to observe, and punish such as were found to offend. The Grand Signi∣or Rimself judged also the Execution of this Or∣der of that importance, as to deserve his own proper Care and Inspection; wherefore walking abroad, as his manner was, in disguise, with his Executione at hand, encountred in the Streets an unfortunate Bridegroom, an Armenian, who that day, on priviledge of his Espousals, had ad∣ventured to dress himself with yellow leathern Soks: nothing was, or could have time to be pleaded in his behalf, before the fatal Blow was struck, which sent him to his Grave instead of his Nupital Bed. This fury continued some few days with much rigour, and strict observation, but afterwards growing cold again, all care was neglected, happening herein, as commonly it doth in all things, which have no other foundation than humour and fancy.


But this inspection into petty matters did not so much disturb the thoughts of the Vizier, as did the power and greatness of 
Mortaza
 the Pasha of 
Babylon,
 by the Turks called 
Bagdat,
 a person of an undaunted Courage, and greate Conduct, whom he had hitherto suffered to live, contra∣ry to the true knowledge of his interest, and the Rules his Father had left him: wherefore he resolved to renew his design and attempts against his Life, one I remember was in 
December
 of the past Year, when in our Journey to 
Adrianople,
 we met a Messenger on the way, who amongst other Discourses informed us, that he was then going to 
Bablyon
 for confirmation of 
Mortaza,
 and as a testimony of the G. Signiors favour and good will towards him, he carried him a Sword, and a Vest of Sables: we immediatly, and that truly, guessed for what Present the Sword was sent; for in some Months after the Chaous-bashee, or chief of the Pursuivants, returned without delivery of his Present.
 For the wise 
Mortaza
 was so justly Jealous, that he would not so much as admit him to his Presence, but returned him again with his Sword and Sables for those who were more easy and credulous, and who believe to dye by Com∣mand of the Sultan to be Martyrdom, and the only Crown of all their Merits and Deserts: and knowing that he could not long subsist in Oppo∣sition to so great an Enemy; he contracted an Al∣liance by Marriage with a Daughter of one of the 
Gordean,
 or 
Curdean
 Princes, and in Dowry had one of the strongest Forts of those Mountains delivered into his hands.


The Vizier finding himself thus foiled in his oc∣cult Artifices, began publickly to profess his En∣mity; and therefore in the first place perswaded the Grand Signior, that the long continuance of 
Mortaza
 in that Government, beyond the usual term, so Opulent and Powerful, and of a Spirit so Ambitions and Rebellious, could not but prove dangerous to himself, and in time give him Con∣fidence of Competition for the whole Empire; which hazard to prevent with most prudence and advantage, (there being a present occasion of good Soldiers for relief of 
Candia
) 
Mortaza
 and

his Complices could not be better bestowed than upon that Employment. The Grand Signior readily consented to his Counsel, being naturally very apprehensive of Danger, and in his place constituted the 
Aga,
 or General of the 
Janizaries,
 posting him away with all speed-possible to his Government; who did not run so fast in his Journey, but that the advices of the coming of a new Pasha, arrived timely the Ears of 
Mortaza,
 who judging it an unequal match to contend with the whole Empire, gave way to his Successor, but withal, kept himself so on his Guard, that his Adversary could not reach his Head, and send it as the first-fruits and Tribute of his new Of∣fice. For yielding up his command as in an ho∣nourable manner of Retreat, he gave out, that with his Army (reported to consist of Forty thousand Men) he was on his March to 
Can∣dia,
 but soon after his design was disco∣vered to be otherwise; for believing his own Force unable to contend with his Masters, he re∣tired with his richess, and some of those most faith∣ful to him, unto his Fort on the Mountains, and to the Protection and Country of the King of the 
Curdi,
 whose Daughter he had Married, and re∣mained in Epectation of time and opportunity, to take his revenge on the Vizier, hoping that with time this storm would blow over, and that the Beams of his Princes Favour would again shine upon him.
 These 
Curdi
 are called by some Wri∣ters 
Cordiaei,
 from whence the Province had the name of 
Gordiene,
 bordering on 
Assyria,
 the King∣dom once of 
Zabienus,
 who siding with 
Lucullus
 against 
Tigranes
 King of 
Armenia,
 was by 
Tigra∣nes
 murdered with his Wife and Children. These People inhabit the Mountain 
Amanus,
 dividing 
Syria
 from 
Cilicia,
 which by reason of the diffi∣cult access thereunto, was never yet subjected to the 
Ottoman
 Yoke; they are said in former times to have worshipped a black Dog, and dare not speak ill of the Devil, not for love, but fear. But some report, that have lately been amongst them, that they have left off that hellish Supersti∣tion, and embrace a certain sort of Religion mix∣ed with Christianity and Turcism; but yet without Baptism or Circumcision. In brief, they are a bad sort of gross People at the best, contenting them∣selves with little Religion, addicted to Blood and Robberies. These 
Curdi
 or 
Gordeenes,
 being a peo∣ple retired, keep within their Mountains, are shy in their Conversation and Discourse, and afford us little subject, or opportunity of knowing with any Satisfaction, their Religion or Manners; but from such of our Country-men, as have lately entertained Society with them, we have this ac∣count. They are seated on those Mountains, as we have said before, which of old are called 
Cor∣diaei
 or 
Gordiai,
 beginning near 
Aleppo,
 but run∣ning out as far as 
Persia;
 they make shew of the 
Turkish
 Religion for fear, but have in reality ano∣ther of their own, which permits them to eat Swines Flesh, and drink Wine, as the 
Druses
 and 
Kalbeenes;
 Bacon being esteemed by them a particular Cordial, or Restorative for the Sick. The chief Country and City of those near 
Aleppo,
 is called 
Jeumee,
 where they have a Convent of twelve Priests with a Superior over them, and ano∣ther of the like sort near 
Mosul
 or 
Nineveth.
 The two Chiefs of these Monasteries meet at fixed times to consult for the good of the Com∣mon-weal. Their Devotions are private in a Cave; they tell us of but one Book, which contains both their Law and their Rituals; being asked what they thought of our Saviour, they answer∣ed, he was their Breath, and their Soul; at the name of 
Mahomet
 they Spit, and with 
Nicode∣mus
 his Circumspection and Assurance of Secrecy, they declared, themselves and Christians the same, which they would make appear so soon as they were delivered from their fear of Bondage to the 
Turk.
 They say that they worship God, and will not curse the Devil, to which no Force or Power can compel them partly, perhaps because they have heard of our Saviours Precept, 
Bless, and Curse not,
 but rather, because they hold, that the Devil and his Followers shall one day be resto∣red to their former seats of Blessedness and Digni∣ty. When their Priests are together, and Wine brought in amongst them, the Superior makes a sign for Silence, and afterwards a short Admoni∣tion, that Wine is the Blood of God. I have heard that a 
Capuchin
 Fryer was once invited a∣mongst them, with Promise to give him a sight of their Book of Rituals, and being come to 
Jeumee,
 was detained a day or two in a Cave, on pretence that the other Superior of 
Mosul
 was then amongst them, who being a severe Person, if he knew of his being there, would certainly put him to Death, as one who came to alter their Religi∣on; upon which Suspicion the 
Capuchin
 forgetting his Curiosity, fled for safety, with all speed pos∣sible. Their Priests are said to be Grave, wearing black throughout; their Garments plaited or quilted; the Vestures of the Commonalty are a∣greeable to Mountainiers, whose Natures are Rough and Boisterous, addicted to Blood and Rob∣bery, the common Vice of those People. I have heard, that the Son of a 
Gourdeene
 Widow being killed by some of that Country, She assembled her nearest Kindred, and required them to bring her the Windpipe of the Murderer, which when they had done, She together with her Friends, eat in it Revenge. In fine, their Religion may have some small Reliques of Christianity, but mixt with the dregs of other Religions. 'Tis possible they may be of the 
Manichee
 Race. Their Opi∣nion of the Devils Restoration, was once held in part by 
Origen:
 that of Wine (that it is the Blood of God) was the 
Heathenish
 conceit of the 
Egyp∣tian
 Priests. Their whole Nation, if well united, may compose an Army of thirty or forty thousand Men.


But to return to our purpose. The news of the Flight of 
Mortaza
 to this Ignoble Prince, troubled the Grand Signior, who still retained some Impressions of kindness to his Person, re∣membring his Generosity, Valour, and former Deserts, the memory of which was encreased also by the Friends of 
Mortaza,
 who wanted not in the Court to represent them with some Compas∣sion, arguing that his flight was not of Contuma∣cy or Contempt to his Masters Protection, but an effect of natural Preservation; which worked so far on the Grand Signior, that he immediately sent for the Vizier to enquire of him the State and Condition of 
Mortaza.
 The Vizier to defend himself, and make good what before he had counselled his Master, aggravated his Adversa∣ry's Crimes, and his Disobedience and Flight to an inconsiderable King; with which, and some other light Excuses and Perswasions, that the re∣moval of such a Person was agreeable to the pre∣sent State of Affairs, and conducing to his own Se∣curity, easily pacified the Mind and Affections of the Grand Signior; but no sooner was he return∣ed to his House, but advice was given him, that the 
Emaum
 of 
Mortaza,
 or his Priest or Chaplain, was then at 
Constantinople,
 whom the Vizier im∣mediatly sent for, and without any Plea or Indict∣ment, struck off his Head, and threw his Body in∣to to the Sea, on pretence that he was sent thither, as a Spy for his Master, and to give Intelligence, and a

beginning to Rebellion: These were his colours and allegations for his deserved Death; for Go∣vernours though never so wicked and so absolute, and that have no need to render any other cause to the World of their actions, than their own will, yet esteem it necessary to act under the specious guise of justice, and in the good opinion of the multitude. The Aga of 
Babylon
 encountred the same Fortune; for 
Mortaza
 giving place, he thought it fit for himself to do the like; resolving for 
Constantinople,
 but being intercepted in his Journey by the new Pasha, his Head was struck off, and his Journey shortned.


But that which again renewed the trouble and fears of the Vizier, was a report that the late 
Kahya-begh
 degraded at 
Adrianople,
 was secretly returned to the City, and lived concealed, giving such Orders to the Janizaries as tended to Mutiny and Insurrection, and that the pretences and re∣ports of his being gone to 
Damascus,
 and thence in his holy Pilgrimage to 
Mecha,
 were but all false stories to conceal his Residence at 
Constanti∣nople.
 This set the Vizier all on fire, and made him tremble with the thoughts of it; wherefore search was made for him day and night, but not found; for in reality he as gone on his designed Journey, only it was the misfortune of his Kahya, or Steward, as before it was of 
Mortaza
's Emaum, to fall into the Viziers hands, who being beaten to confess where his Master was, died afterwards of the blows.


But notwithstanding that 
Mortaza
 was fled, yet the Vizier laid not aside his fears and thoughts concerning him, not knowing how soon he might be recalled home, and seated in his place; of which various Examples are extant in 
Turkish
 History; and therefore he sent orders to 
Mahomet
 Pasha, his late Kahya, now Pasha of 
Darbiquier,
 as Ge∣neral (with the knowledge and consent of the Grand Signior) and to the Pashaws of 
Aleppo, Erzirum
 and others near adjacent, to prepare and assemble what Force was necessary to con∣strain the King of the 
Curdi,
 to surrender 
Morta∣za
 into their hands: But whilst these matters were in agitation, some unexpected troubles in 
Georgia
 diverted their Arms, and held them for some time in suspense, not knowing what the issue might be. The Original and Ground thereof was this:
 After 
Sultan Solyman
 had taken 
Erzirum,
 it was agreed in the Capitulations between the 
Turks
 and 
Per∣sians,
 that of the seven Provinces of 
Georgia
 (an∣ciently called 
Iberia,
 but now as supposed to have received the Denomination from St. 
George,
 the Cappadocian Martyr, there had in great esteem and reverence) three should be tributaries to the 
Turk,
 and three to the 
Persian,
 all govern'd by 
Achic-bash
 as head and supream Prince, to whom the Seventh should also be subjested, without ac∣knowledgment to either; in payment of which Tribute, they continued most willingly, lest for default thereof, the importation of Salt, of which their Provinces afford none, should I be hindred either from the 
Turkish,
 or 
Persian
 Dominion. And now it happened that 
Achic-bash
 dying, his Wife married again, who to gratifie her new Lover, was contented to have the eyes of her Son put out, who was the lawful Heir to the Govern∣ment. This Fact was so hainously received by the Princes of the three Provinces under the 
Per∣sian,
 that with common consent, they elected one to succeed 
Achic-bash,
 and extorted the power out of the hands of the Amorous Traitor. The Princes of the three Provinces under the 
Turk
 alarm'd hereat, made insurrection, resolving rather than any Foreigner, to set up one of the Kindred of 
Achic-bash,
 which the 
Persian
 Provinces better understanding, approved likewise, and for confirmation, and maintenance of their choice, assembled an Army of Threescore thousand men. The Pashaws tending towards 
Curdi,
 were surprized in their March with the news of these disturbances in 
Georgia,
 and not rightly apprehending the causes of these sud∣den commotions, gave an arrest to the pro∣gress of their Arms, inclining towards the parts of 
Georgia,
 to be in a readiness to suppress all designs against the 
Ottoman
 Dominions, so that the thoughts of War against the 
Curdi
 was for some time laid aside. The news of these troubles did also alarm the Port, with which also came a report, That six hundred Tents of the 
Kuzilba∣shees
 (which are the best sort of 
Persian
 Horsemen) were pitched nigh the Confines of the Grand Sig∣niors Territories; so that Orders were dispatched to the aforesaid Pashaws to watch the motion and issue of those Affairs, but those storms blowing over by the establishment of 
Achic-bash,
 the 
Turkish
 Forces proceeded on their first design against 
Mor∣taza,
 marching to the pass of the Country of the 
Curdi,
 which is very steep, asperous and rough. The whole Kingdom being, as it were, one Mountain of dangerous and difficult access, hath hitherto preserved the Inhabitants from the 
Ottomon
 Sub∣jection. The entrance thereunto being strong by Nature, is also fortified with several Castles, the chief of which, possessed by 
Mortaza,
 is called 
Zizri,
 and the People there abouts 
Zezidi.
 The 
Turkish
 Army being arrived at this pass, 
Mahomet,
 the Pasha of 
Darbiquier,
 appointed General, as we have said before, ordered five hundred of his se∣lect men to enter within the pass, which the 
Curdi
 perceiving, with little opposition, put to flight, being so commanded by the General; the unad∣vised 
Curdi
 eagerly pursuing the enemy, left the pass naked, and undefended, supposing their whole victory and success to consist in the Rout of those few: Whereupon the 
Turkish
 Army wisely possessed the pass, and got between the 
Curdi,
 and their place of Retreat, and laying the Siege to the Castle, required them either to surrender them∣selves, or else 
Mortaza
 and his Complices into their hands.


The 
Curdi
 perceiving themselves thus hardly beset, and in a manner defrauded, their Garison which possessed the pass without the Confines, the Enemy gotten possession of the Gate which open∣ed to their Country, their Castles besieged, and in danger to be gained, and an inlet made to an In∣undation by their Enemies, caused them to re∣quest a three days truce for Consultation, which being granted, they began to consider, whether it were better to hazard the welfare of their Coun∣try in a dangerous War, of which the 
Turks
 having already compassed the passage, had made half the Conquest; or to surrender up 
Mortaza
 to his own King, one in whom they had no part, no interest, nor relation. The latter Counsel was most generally pleasing; wherefore they seized 
Mortaza,
 promising at first to conduct him through the Mountains to the 
Persians;
 but afterwards be∣ing on Horse-back, and about a Mile distant from the Camp, they bound his hands behind him, and with his Steward, the Master of his Horse, and a Page, delivered him into the hands of the 
Turks,
 who immediately str
ck off their heads, and sent them to 
Constantinople,
 where for three or four days they lay before the Door of the Divan, with Inscriptions on them whose they were, and afterwards were thrown into the Sea.

And thus ended this famous 
Mortaza,
 who had in like cases, by order of this Viziers Father, been an active Executioner of other Pashaws, and now included in the same Fate, by means of the Son, being proscribed (as we have said before) by Testament, and the most likely of any Pasha in the Empire to stand in competition for the Office of Vizier.


The Vizier upon this success began to shew a more cheerful Countenance than formerly, suspecting less of danger upon removal of so suspicious an Enemy. And truly it was now hard to say where in the whole Empire was a generous, bold, or ambitious spirit remaining, who had Reputation and Authority enough to attempt a priority, such havock was made by this Viziers Father of all hopeful and daring dispositions, and such an Addition made to the slaughter by this man in present Office, that whether mens spirits were vanquished, and cow∣ed with former Examples, or that the Age really afforded not such Heroes, it is hard to say: None now appearing other than obse∣quious to this Vizier, and to fear, and court him.


The Vizier having thus successfully contrived his Establishment, and security at home, had time to confirm it by his Wars abroad, well judging that foreign Wars allay Civil Dissenti∣ons, and the Prosperity thereof doth both pro∣duce reputation and terrour of his Person amongst his Enemies, as well as reconcile affections, and increase Authority amongst his subjects at home. Wherefore he meditated on a War against the Em∣peror, and was glad to embrace the occasion from the late Disturbances made in 
Transilvania
 by 
Kemenius,
 as we have related in the former Year. But yet like a crafty Politician, who looketh one way, and steers another; so the Vizier, that he might the better lull the 
Germans
 into a sleep, and apprehensions of se∣curity, he dissembled his inclinations to Peace, and to hearken to such propositions as were ten∣dered him by the 
German
 Resident, namely, that the Fort of 
Serini
 should be demolished; being built against the intention, and without the knowledge or consent of his Imperial Master; that the Garisons of 
Zechelhid, Coloswar,
 and other places should be removed, with other over∣tures, and the fairest Propositions imaginable, which might give the 
Turks
 satisfaction, and by some means or other reconcile the differences, if possible.
 To which counsel the Emperor was the rather inclinable, in regard that a Treaty at that time was on foot between the 
French
 King, and the Duke of 
Lorain
 for 
Alsatia,
 and that the re∣sult might prove prejudicial to the Empire, should he at the same time be engaged in a War against the 
Turk,
 whilst as dangerous a friend as the other was an Enemy, crept easily into a suspected Neighbourhood. But the other Christian Princes, especially 
Rome,
 and the Allies, engaged in the 
Venetian
 Quarrel, perceiving the Emperor to de∣tract from his resolutions of War, upon this su∣spicion, endeavoured to clear him from all jea∣lousie in reference to the 
French
 designs, and for better evidence thereof, had their own engage∣ments seconded by Protestations from that King, not only not to molest the Empire during this War, but to afford him considerable aid and assi∣stance both in Men, and Money. These Nego∣tiations and incitements to a War, encouraged the Emperor, and the 
German
 Princes in that manner, that whilst the 
Turks
 expected the re∣turn of the Currier from 
Vienna,
 as it were 
 an Oliver Branch of Peace, and Confirma∣tion of all Articles, which before were esteemed to be concluded, and agreed; the Scene was wholly changed, and the Letters contained new demands and propositions, and in fine, made all doubtful and unsatisfactory. The 
Turks
 penetrating rightly into this Affair, pressed hard to have a speedy Peace, or War; wherefore the 
Reis Effen∣di,
 or Secretary of State, did at a private Conference with the 
German
 Minister in name of the G. Sig∣nior, and in few words declare, That three months were allotted to demolish the Fort built by the Count 
Serini,
 and for coming of an extraordinary Ambassador to confirm the Articles: Notwith∣standing which, the Grand Signior unmindful of the time, and of the Conditions he had given, and prefixed for Peace, ordered the Vizier im∣mediately to prepare for the War, declaring that he would in Person accompany him in part of his March, and remove his Court to 
Adrianople;
 for this being a Country, champian, and plain, full of Game of all sorts, so drew the heart and de∣light of the Grand Signior, that his Seraglio at 
Constantinople
 seemed as a Cage, or Prison, in re∣spect of those desired Plains of 
Thrace:
 His Wo∣men were no pastime or recreation to him, in whos Apartments he spent little time: For this excessive humour in Hunting made him daily to press the Vizier to depart for 
Adrianople,
 not that he had so real a desire to the War, as he had to his Game; which gave occasion to that ordinary Saying amongst the Turks, 
That the Grand Sig∣nior had left some Hares behind him at
 Adrianople, 
and would return to seek them.
 At length the Vizier not longer able to resist his importunity without his displeasure, summon'd a Council of all the Viziers of the Bench, where also the Janisar Aga was present, to consult concerning the time of their departure, at which they unanimously con∣cluded, that for divers Reasons, it was most ne∣cessary to defer this expedition until the next Spring. First, Because that three months time were already given to the Emperor for sending his Extraordinary Ambassador. Secondly,
 Be∣cause in so short a time, Provisions could not be sent into those Parts for relief of the Camp. Thirdly, Because the Souldiers which were abroad could not have timely notice to repair to their Colours. Fourthly, Be∣cause many Souldiers had begun to rebuild their houses destroyed by the late Fires, which by the Spring they might see finished. And lastly, That the Summer being now almost spent, was not so fit for action, as the Spring, which gives new life and blood to men, as well as sap and moisture unto Vegetables. These Reasons being repre∣sented with all humility to the Grand Signior, he seemed to rest satisfied, and his heat of vi∣siting 
Adrianople
 for the present allayed. And in the mean time, that the design against 
Ger∣many
 might be the more covertly carried, it was given out that the preparations were intended against the 
Venetian
 Territories in 
Dalmatia, (viz.) Zara, Sebenico,
 and 
Cataro,
 and Pro∣clamation was made that all Souldiers should prepare themselves for the Wars against the next Spring. In which Interim no accident interve∣ning which might bring matters to an accom∣modation and better understanding, the daily Skirmishes on the Frontiers made the Contro∣versie every day more difficult to be reconciled, and the breach the wider. The Count 
Se∣rini
 also proceeded in finishing the Fortifica∣tion he had lately raised near 
Canisia;
 and the other Commanders of the 
Cesarean
 Ar∣my seeing the great progress of the 
Turks
 in 
Transilvania,
 secured 
Claudiopolis, Somoswar,

Sechilhid, Clewar,
 alias 
Coloswar,
 and 
Betlem,
 with some other Towns and Fortresses. The 
Turks
 on the other side,
 under the Command of 
Ali
 Pasha, penetrate into the very Center of 
Transilvania,
 and conceiving a jealousie of War from the passages before mentioned, lost no time to take their advantages, so that the Pasha of 
Varadin
 not contenting himself with that Coun∣try, and limits formerly prescribed for mainte∣nance of his Fortress, adjoined to his Jurisdicti∣on what Villages and Towns he thought fit, the whilst the poor Prince 
Michael Apafi,
 though made by the Turks, durst not lift a hand, or interpose the least Obstacle or Impediment to his quiet pro∣gress, or peaceable possession, which so harrassed the People of the Country, and wrought that misery and destruction therein, that the Prince, deprived of his power in Government, and disa∣bled by oppression to pay his Annual Tribute, had no hopes of redress, but from the assistance of Divine Providence, governing the hearts of Chri∣stians and Turks to compassionate the misery of his Country. Wherefore he craved the assistance of the Emperor, and of the King of 
Poland,
 ac∣quainting other Christian Princes more remote of the sad estate of the Christian Cause; he sent also his Ambassadors to the Port with most submissive Letters to the Vizier, complaining against the Pa∣sha of 
Varadin,
 and craving his Commands for retirement of his Army, within their due and an∣cient bounds. Letters were also directed to the Publick Representatives of Christian Princes re∣siding at 
Constantinople,
 one of which was direct∣ed to the Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 his Majesties Ambas∣sador, which being that which may conduce to the more full understanding of the present deplo∣rable Condition of 
Transilvania,
 I thought fit to be here mentioned.




Excellentissime Domine, & Amice observandissime,


AFflictiones Regni Transilvaniae quibus per complures annos justo Dei Judicio casti∣gatur,
 toti Orbi Christiano manifestae sunt, nec possumus non fateri, inter duos Potentissimos Monarchas adeo indies hoc Regnum coangustari, ut nisi extraordinaria Dei clementia aliquod subsequatur levamen, vix, immo ne vix qui∣dem, diu duraturum credamus. Sed ut ad rem proximius collimemus. Potentissimus Im∣perator per Legatos Regni, & nostros nunc reduces Clementissimum suum patrocinium pol∣licetur, interim autem Passa Varadinensis non contentus Villis ac Pagis ad dictam Arcem per∣tinentibus, usque ad meditullium plane Tran∣silvaniae, metu Mortis, integras ad deditio∣nem cogit Regiones, quae nunquam eidem Arci applicatae fuerant, nec possible est Principatum Transilvaniae iis ademptis, ulterius persistere, Tributum{que} annuum persolvere posse. Qua de re tam Potentissimum Imperatorem quam Su∣premum Vezirium denuo requirere cogimur, ve∣stram quocirca Excellentissimam Dominationem confidenter rogamus, eo quo convenientius pu∣taverit modo continuo nostro Oratori opitulari, ea{que} qua pollet Authoritate Causam promovere, ne gravetur rem non saltem Transilvaniae, ve∣rum quoque Christianitati perutilem factura, nos{que} ad vincula amicitiae arctissime devinctura, cui felicem vitam precamur, & manemus indu∣bitati.


Datum in Castris ad Pagum
 Koczard 
positis
 
die 
26
 Sep∣tembris, 
An. Dom. 1662.


Excellentissimae Dominationis vestrae Amicus Benevolus,
 Michael Apafi.




In 
English
 thus.




Most Excellent Lord, and most worthy Friend,


THe Miseries of 
Transilvania,
 with which for many years, by the just Judgment of God, we have been afflicted, are manifest to all the Christian World; nor can we but confess, how between two most Potent Monarchs, our Principality is so daily straitned, that unless through the extraordinary Mercy of God, we obtain some relief, we believe not our selves longer able to subsist. But to come nearer to our Business. The Most Potent Empe∣ror, by his own Ambassadors, and ours now lately returned, hath promised us his most Gracious Protection; yet notwithstanding, the Pasha of 
Varadin
 not content with the Towns and Villages appropriated unto his Castle, hath entered into the very middle of 
Transilvania,
 and hath compelled, for fear of death, those Provinces entirely to yield themselves, which never before were belonging to his Fortresses, which being taken away, it is impossible for the Princi∣pality of 
Transilvania
 longer to subsist, and pay its annual Tribute; wherefore we are constrained again to beseech the most Potent Emperor, and the Supream Vizier, as also we confidently desire your Excel∣lency, in that manner which your Excel∣lency judges most convenient, to be assi∣stant to our Agent, and with your Au∣thority to countenance our Cause, in which your Excelleney will not only per∣form a matter beneficial to 
Transilvania,
 but to all 
Christendom,
 and oblige us for ever with the Bonds of friendship; and praying for all happiness of Life and Pro∣sperity to your Excellency, we remain your undoubted Friend.


Given in our Camp at the Village
 Koczard 
the five and twenti∣eth day of
 September, 1662.


Your Excellencies Loving Friend,
 Michael Apafi.




This Letter was received by His Majesties Ambassador with that humanity as was agreeable to his Noble Nature; and with that sense of the Christian Cause as became a Religious Minister of the Faith's Defender, and an Answer returned thereunto full of affectionate Piety and Compas∣sion. But it was feared that the time was elap∣sed, and the Disease proceeded too far to admit a gentle Cure; for it could not probably be ex∣pected, that the Vizier should, upon fair words or perswasions, or by the force of passionate and Rhetorical expressions, be induced to let slip the

fair opportunity of an intire and total subjection of 
Transilvania.
 And the truth is, herein lay the ground of the great Quarral between these two Emperors; for ever since the Defeat of 
Chimianus
 (or as the 
Transilvanians
 call him 
Kemenius
) the 
Turk
 swallowing in his thoughts the intire subje∣ction of that Country, designed to reduce it to the Government of a Pasha, rather than of a Chri∣stian Prince, though elected at the 
Ottomon
 Port; and in order thereunto, advanced beyond the Li∣mits of the ancient bounds, and pitched his Camp in the very Bowels of the Country. These pro∣ceedings giving matter of jealousie to all the Cap∣tains of the bordering Christians; the Count 
Serini
 first hastned the finishing of his fort, as much as was possible; and next, according to his exam∣ple, the 
Imperialists
 in all parts of the Borders for∣tified their Towns and Castles, and reinforced their Garisons; which was answered by the 
Turks
 in the like preparations. And thus mutual fears and jealousies effected that ill Correspon∣dence, in which the State of Affairs then remain∣ed.


And since 
Transilvania
 is the present Scene of Action, it will not be much from our purpose to digress a little in declaring the state of that mise∣rable Principality, and by what ways and means the 
Turks
 encreased their Tribute, and encroach∣ed on their Liberties; the which Relation I re∣ceived from one of the 
Transilvanian
 Agents, to this effect.


In the time of 
Sultan Solyman,
 
Transilvania
 was governed by her own Laws, and her natural Prince, paying then only Thirty Thousand Dol∣lars of yearly Tribute. After which 
Ali
 Pasha taking 
Varadin
 on the Frontiers, had some part of the Country alloted him for maintenance of his Garison, and at that time solemnly swore, That beyond those Limits allotted to 
Varadin,
 the 
Turks
 should not farther enter into 
Transilvania,
 but that Oath being little regarded, they have since that time possessed themselves of six Provinces, 
(viz.) Bichar, Doboka, Halnock, Colos,
 in which is 
Clau∣diopolis,
 and of the best part of 
Zarand.
 Nor were the 
Turks
 satisfied herewith, but in the year 1658. the Vizier 
Kuperlee
 entered 
Transilvania,
 and by force of Arms took the strong Town of 
Janova,
 and demanded the Surrender of 
Lugas
 and 
Karansebes
 into his hands. Nor could the allegations of the Oath of 
Sultan Solyman,
 or of 
Ali
 Pasha, or any other perswasions or submissi∣on induce him to moderate any part of his severe demands, until first having miserably destroyed the whole Country, and satiated himself with blood, he was contented, upon the sad and humble supplication of the ambassador from that Prince, to withdraw his Army out of 
Transilva∣nia,
 on condition that Fifty thousand Dollars of yearly Tribute should be added to the former Thirty thousand, and that 
Lugas
 and 
Karansebes
 should be wholly abandoned by the native Inha∣bitants, and deliverd into possession of the 
Turk:
 And as a mark of his absolute Dominion over that Country, he forced one 
Achacius Barcley,
 em∣ployed before as Ambassador to him, to take on him the Government, threatning that if he ac∣cepted not of the Charge, he would invest a Car∣ter in the Principality: Notwithstanding all this Treatment; and though the 
Transilvanians
 com∣ply'd with all the propositions offered them by the 
Turk,
 yet not long after the 
Tartar Han
 passed twice through the Country, miserably harrassing, spoiling, and killing, or making Cap∣tives all he met, whose departure also from this Country was purchased with a considerable Sum of Money. And this was the state of the misery of 
Transilvania,
 when the troubles raised by 
Ra∣gotzki
 and 
Kemenius
 added to the other discon∣tents, and administred farther occasion to the en∣suing War.


But whilst the thoughts of the 
Ottoman
 Court were intent on their preparation for the next years War in 
Hungary,
 advice came that the 
Turkish
 Fleet, consisting of Seventeen Ships, and Thirty seven Saiques, lately departed from 
Con∣stantinople
 bound for 
Alexandria
 in 
Aegypt,
 and convoyed by six Gallies, which met them at 
Scio,
 very rich with Money, and other goods, (whose returns are yearly for the most part made in Su∣gar, Coffee, Rice, and other Commodities) were encountred near 
Rhodes
 by the 
Venetian
 Ar∣mata, and such ruine and prize made of them,
 that of the Threescore Sail, Twenty eight Saiques, & 4 Ships were sunk and taken: 
(viz.)
 18 Saiques taken, & 10 burnt, 3 Ships taken, and one burnt, and thereon Two hundred and seventy Slaves, among which there were of note, 
Arnout Asan Aga,
 Eunuch of the Seraglio, 
Mahomet Aga, Bas∣cut Agasey
 of 
Grand Cairo,
 and 
Emin Reis,
 Cap∣tain of a Ship. When this news arrived, I hap∣pened to be at the Viziers Court, and perceived a strange disturbance and alteration in the faces of all then present; but more particularly the Grand Signior seemed to be heated with fury, and pre∣sent resolution of revenge; so that he had almost forgotten his designs against the Emperor; and quitting his pastime in Hunting, he began to talk of transporting his Arms into 
Dalmatia,
 and there∣upon sent Orders to one 
Beco
 a Begh of the 
Mo∣rea
 to cause a survey of the High-ways, Passages, and Bridges towards 
Dalmatia,
 as if he had in∣tended immediately to march, and either to de∣fer his 
Hungarian
 War, or wage both at the same time. But his graver, and more sober Council mo∣derated his heat with Reason, knowing that the de∣signs of Princes, though never so absolute, must be subject to times and seasons, until their Pow∣ers can extend to Omnipotency, which never yet could exceed the abilities of a mortal man, though some have affected Divine Honours, and by Flatterers have been ranked after death in the number of the Gods. The 
Venetians
 lost Seventy men only, or thereabouts, and amongst them 
Giacomo Semitecolo,
 a noble 
Venetian,
 with other Braves and Souldiers of Fortune. The 
Turks
 hor∣ribly touched with this loss and disgrace, espe∣cially the Grand Signior, who had an Interest in the 
Caravana,
 had a mind to vent some of their fury on Signior 
Ballarino,
 the 
Venetian
 Minister to the Port, like those (as we say) who can∣not beat the Horse, will beat the Saddle; so that they intended to imprison him again in some dark Cell, or obscure retirement, of which, or of some other rigor Signior 
Ballarino
 was so sensible, that he wrote this ensuing Letter to the Senator 
Nico∣lo Contarini,
 which may serve to explain the anguish and sorrowful apprehensions of his Soul.




IF my Mind were capable of Comfort, I could not in the midst of so much anguish enter∣tain a more efficacious Motive thereunto, than those obliging Expressions which your Excel∣lency uses towards me, who like a Terrestrial Deity is pleased to protect me. But alas, I am too much overwhelmed with Grief to disco∣ver any Subject which may cause me to dry my Tears. I find no shelter against that Storm which I foresaw. Nor is it sufficient for me to discover the Tempest before it arrives: It is

not sufficient in this darkness to lose my Sleep, disturb my Quiet, tire my Body, debilitate my Health by a slender Diet, whilst tossed in the Bosom of an inexorable Element, I am denied the enjoyment of a ray of Light. I hold the Helm of the Ship as direct as I can, but the adverse Waves of my Fortune drive me into the midst of those Storms where I ap∣prehend the greatest Dangers: I am here in the midst of the Sea, which is the Nest of Extravagancies, the grand belief of unthought of Accidents, the spacious Theatre of Trage∣dies, a fierce Giant, a horrible Monster, who with gentle 
Opiates
 endeavonrs to lull asleep, and lead those to Destruction who have too great a confidence in their own Strength. I reproach my self for not having been able to make it sufficiently understood, how one stroke of adverse Fortune is capable to put all into Danger, who are imbarked in the same Ves∣sel; And as little able am I to inculcate into the minds of Men, that whilst the Waves of the vast Sea are smooth and calm, the nearer is the raging of the Waters, and the fury of a Tempest. It was therefore necessary that there should have been some more skilful Pilot than my self to conduct this Vessel. I was long since acquainted with my Imperfections, and therefore called aloud for the assistance of an abler Pilot, to direct me in this tempestu∣ous Region; but since I was not heard, I glo∣ried at least to be alone in this Gulf, that be∣ing swallowed up by a final Ruin, my Martyr∣dom may be a means to save the rest. Rains and Lightnings do not affright me, but rather serve to quench that fire of Disdain which I conceive against my self, for not knowing how to perform better, and serve to enlighten me daily to find out that Compass or Cart which may direct me to a course or path of Security. I fear Thunders and Tempests, because the violence of one, and the hardness of the other is able to render a cold Sweat mixed with Blood altogether unprofitable. This miserable School, tho of eleven Tears continuance, con∣strains me to study the Disposition of the Stars, the Signs in the Air, the Ebbings and Flowings of the Waters, concealed Rocks, the Dangers of a long Voyage, and the necessity of recover∣ing a Port. I have studied indeed, but I fear I have not well learned this profound Discipline; for where there is the greatest ur∣gency, there I have gathered the least Fruit; for since the Aspect of the Spheres are become more inauspicious, I am doubtful that I shall see the Ship beaten with swelling Surges, and being full of Water, it will be so far from being eased by those opportune Remedies which I bring, that it will rather be encreased by my Tears. God grant by his miraculous Pro∣vidence, the Tranquillity which we desire, and which by humune means will be difficult to ob∣tain. I had not the understanding to take Opportunity by the Foretop when She present∣ed her self unto me with gentle and benign Appearance, showing me the means to save this floating Vessel, and spare our insidious rewards. For this Reason my dejected, but not conquered mind, makes my very Bowels feel an unusual anguish of an over-troubled Estate. May it please the Divine pity, that these my Afflictions may prove the Off-spring of my own vileness, but not the means of my Ruin. I trust therein, I confess, and yet frail hope, amidst this Gulf of Sin, induces me to expect doubtful Successes; Yet certainly I will endeavour to avoid a shipwrack on those Rocks of Despair; And so imploring the Patronage of your Excellency here on Earth, I confirm my self.


From 
Pera
 of 
Constantinople
 
the 
19
 of 
December, 1662.




This Letter seems to be wrote in the stile of a despairing Person; yet if it be well considered, the meaning is no other than what the Issue of Affairs some years afterwards did evidence; and his In∣tentions were no other than to describe the ill na∣ture of the 
Turkish
 Ministers, and their obstinacy of continuing a War, until they had wearied out the 
Venetians
 into an Humour of surrendring the whole Island of 
Candia
 unto them. I had the Honour to be well acquainted with the Person of Signior 
Ballarino,
 and I always esteemed him in his external Behaviour accomplished with the Excesses of 
Italian
 Civility; he was endued with great fluency of Language, both in Discourse and Writing; he was Jealous, Acute and Wary; and in short, was a proper Minister for that Re∣publick, well practiced and versed in the manner of Treaty with the 
Turkish
 Court. He at first was sent from 
Venice
 to 
Constantinople
 in quality of Secretary to the Excellentissimo 
Capello,
 Pro∣curator of St. 
Mark,
 a Person eminent for his Office, and the several great employments which he had exercised in that State; he was sincere, and of a generous Soul; his comely Looks, and grave Habit spoke him to be a Gentleman, and a Senator. In short, he was so well estemeed of at 
Venice,
 that he was thought worthy to be imployed in this Embassy to the Grand Signior, which is commonly granted to Persons after they have run through all Services of the Commonwealth, as a Consummation of their Honours and Richess. This Gentleman then had the misfortune to be invested in this Honour in the worst of Times, when the War was broke forth, and being there∣by exposed to their cruelty, he was put into Pri∣son, where passing for some time a Life of Sor∣row and Sadness, he fell into a Melancholly, which represented all things to him in the black∣est manner; so that, I know not why his fancy suggested to him, that he was not only miserable in his Imprisonment and Restraint amongst the 
Turks,
 but that he was fallen also into disgrace, and displeasure of his Prince at home. I will not say that Signior 
Ballarino
 did nourish the Opera∣tion of this black humour in him; but I have heard that he did not administer that comfort to him, as might serve to dispel the thickness of that Vapour which obscured the generous temper of his Soul. In short, he gave such way to this melancholly, that he laid violent hands upon himself (as we have said before); but afterwards by the Care of his Friends and Servants, being cured of his wounds, he lived some years after, by his Sorrows and Repentance for it, to give Satis∣faction to God and the World. Howsoever, the Senate being informed thereof, and judging this Act to be the effect of a violent Phrensy, appoint∣ed

Ballarino
 to take on himself the intire manage∣ment of Affairs, reserving only the Title and Ho∣nour to Signior 
Capello. Ballarino
 now manage∣ing all Affairs, 
Capello
 looked on himself as neg∣lected and laid aside, howsoever comported his Condition with Submission and Gentleness, never openly resenting the Honours of 
Ballarino,
 or to see him preferred before himself; Howsoever, se∣cretly nourishing an inward Discontent, his ro∣bustious Nature, upwards of eighty years of Age, was forced to give way to its final Dissolution; and falling Sick, he sent to the Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 then Ambassador for his Majesty at 
Constantinople,
 to acquaint him of his Distemper, desiring him to send me, who was then his Secretary, unto him. At these Summons I was easily perswaded to go, having always had his Person in great Reverence; and being come to his Bed-side, he raised himself upon his Pillows, and embracing me in his Arms, I fancied my self to receive the Benediction of one of the Ancient Patriarchs. He began with a weak Voice to say to me, Sir, I am near my end, ex∣pecting every Minute to render up my last Breath, and therefore as a dying man, I desire of your Master, the Ambassador, that so soon as I am dead, he would be pleased to deliver this poor Carcass of mine from under the covering of this accursed Roof. For Answer whereunto I did not stand to expostulate the Reasons with him, well knowing the cause of his discontent; but that I would communicate his desires to my Lord Am∣bassador, and speedily return with my Answer to him. Accordingly I departed from him, and quickly brought from my Lord a Promise to en∣deavour his utmost to comply with his request; at which he seemed to be much satisfied, and commanded his Servants then present, especially one called Sig. 
Tomaso Gobbato,
 his great confident, to be Witnesses thereof. The next day he expired his last Breath, and the day following his Body being embalmed, his bowels were buried, and the Funeral Rites performed with such order and decency as was seemly in a Country where he lived rather like a Prisoner than an Ambassador. All things being thus prepared, the Earl of 
Win∣chelsea,
 according to the Will of the Deceased, sent for his Body, already embalmed, which was immediately without opposition or scruple sent to his house; where it remained for some months, in expectation of a conveyance for 
Ve∣nice.
 At length a Dutch ship, being bound from 
Constantinople
 thither, it was designed that the Body should be thereon imbarked; but I know not for what reason, the Customer refused to suffer it to pass; though it may well and rational∣ly be conjectured, That 
Ballarino,
 who was sen∣sibly touched to have the care of the Body of his Master, his Countryman and Colleague taken from him, did with Presents prevail with the Customer to put difficulties in the way which he supposed might vex those who were thought worthy of this employment. This opposition being made, and not to be overcome without much Money, it was contrived that the Ship departing should attend the Corps at 
Tenedos,
 which was without the command of the Castles; and the body being divided from the Legs, was packed up in a But of Cavear, and so sent down by a boat with Licence of the Customer, as a parcel of Goods and Mer∣chandice; and so safely arriving aboard, the Corps were separated from their adjuncts; and being laid decently in a Coffin, covered with a Pall of black Velvet, with Scutcheons, and other orna∣ments appertaining to the Funerals of such great Personages, it arrived safely at 
Venice,
 where it was interred with the usual ceremonies, in the Tomb of the Ancestors of that Ancient Fa∣mily.


But the heads and thoughts of these Governours were not so employed in their preparations of War, but that the Vizier could lend an ear to the suggestions of some malicious Pharisees, who, un∣der pretence of Religion, informed him, That the Christian Churches, burnt down in 
Constanti∣nople
 and 
Galata
 by those dreadful Fires in the year 1660, were again re-edified against his com∣mand, and the Law of the 
Turks,
 which allows the reparation of Churches, and continuance of such which were found standing when 
Mohometanism
 was introduced; but not to erect new, or re∣build what are either by time, fire, or other ac∣cidents fallen to ruine. And being farther informed,
 that though those Churches were restored under the notion of Dwellings, or Ware-houses, yet se∣cretly served for Celebration of Divine Service, and thereby his Decrees and Edicts were frustrated and disappointed: Wherefore, furiously transport∣ed with a 
Mahometan
 Zeal, commanded immediate∣ly that the Authors of those Buildings should be imprisoned, the Churches themselves levelled to the Foundation, and the ground whereon they stood confiscated to the Grand Signior. This action, though naturally agreeable to the disposition of the Vizier, who was a perfect 
Turk,
 zealous in execu∣tion of all points of the 
Mahometan
 Law, being e∣ducated after the severest sort of Professors, and one of those whom they called Softaes; yet he was chiefly prompted unto this, and to a greater abhor∣rency of Christianity, by one 
Vanni Effendi,
 a Shegh, or Preacher, one who was as inveterate and mali∣cious to the Christian Religion, as any 
Enthusiast
 or Fanatick is to the Rites of our Church and Religi∣on. And thus we may see how troublesom Hy∣pocrisie and 
Puritanism
 are in all places where they gain a Superiority; for this Preacher not con∣tented only to ruine the Christian Churches, but perswaded the Vizier that the terrible Fires in 
Con∣stantinople
 and 
Galata
 in the year 1660, and the last years unparallel'd Pestilence, and the incon∣siderable advance of the 
Turks
 on the Christians for some years, were so many parts of Divine Judgments thrown on the Mussulmen or Believers, in vengeance of their too much Licence given to the Christian Religion, permitting Wine to be sold within the Walls of 
Constantinople,
 which polluted the Imperial City, & ensnared the faithful by tem∣ptation to what was unlawful: Wherefore a com∣mand was issued, That no Wine should be hence∣forth sold within the Walls of the City. And it was farther intended, that 
Greeks
 & 
Armenians,
 & all other Christians, who had Dwellings or Possessions with∣in the Walls of the City, should within Forty days sell those habitations, and depart; which other∣wise should be confiscated to the Grand Signior; but God who supports the Faithful in Tryals of Persecution, moderated this Decree, and reserved still this Church in the midst of Infidels; not suf∣fering this City to lose the Name nor Religion of that holy Emperor, who both erected, and christ∣ned it; as also to preserve most of the Churches, which though again uncovered, yet were redeem∣ed for Money from the possession of the 
Turks.
 Nor was the 
Mohometan
 Zeal satisfied in Demolish∣ment of the Churches themselves, unless it vented part of its fury against the poor Workmen, which for their hire and days Wages erected them; such as 
Greek
 Labourers, Masons, and Carpen∣ters, who were all beaten and imprisoned. But it happening at that time that the Queen Mother building a sumptuous Mosch, and having occasion of many Labourers and Artists to forward so vast a Work, sent to the Maimarbashee (who is

the Master work-man, or Cape, over all such who are employed in Building) to sup∣ply such a number of Carpenters, Masons, and others, as were convenient to carry on that Fabrick with expedition; who readily replyed, That he would provide all that was possible, but could not promise a sufficient number, unless those 
Greeks
 were set at liberty, who were im∣prisoned by the Grand Vizier for building the Christian Churches; which answer being reported again to the Queen Mother, she interceded with the Vizier in their behalf, who being glad of any occasion to gratifie to great a Lady, immediately released them, without any fine or reward, which he designed to obtain for their li∣berty. Howsoever the Vizier not well brook∣ing such an indignity (as he supposed) put upon him by so mean a Slave, as the Maimarba∣shee, dealt with some of the imprisoned Labou∣rers to accuse him, as the Author and Licenser of building the Christian Churches. The 
Greeks
 easily enough perswaded to please so great a Per∣sonage, accused him accordingly, whose Evi∣dence, though nor passable against a 
Turk
 by the 
Mahometan
 Law, yet served the Viziers revenge for the present, who immediately commanded his head to be struck off,
 and his Estate confis∣cated; which was reported to consist of Two thousand Purses of Money, every Purse import∣ing Five hundred Dollars, then found actually in his House, which, if true, is a strange Wealth for so ordinary a Person. But by this, and by many other instances, we may perceive that there is no People in the World more covetous and desirous to amass Wealth than the 
Turks,
 nor none more uncertain to enjoy it.


About this time the 
French
 Merchants in the 
Le∣vant,
 having advised his most Christian Majesty that the 
Turks
 were sensible that the affront to the Person of 
Monsieur la Haye,
 his Ambassador, was contrary to the Law of Nations, and such an injury as could not but provoke the Choler of so puis∣sant a Prince to a just revenge; and knowing that his Majesty being powerful at Sea, was able to extend his Arms to the utmost Confines of his Empire, whilst the interposition of other Coun∣tries limited the 
Turks
 march by Land, and their ignorance and inability in Marine Affairs rendred them uncapable to arrive those Banks of 
France,
 which the Sea washes: These Considerations the 
French
 Merchants having perswaded the King to be the thoughts of the Grand Signior, and that he desired the continuance of the Peace and Traf∣fick with 
France,
 and as an evidence of his re∣morse and displeasure for the injury to Monsieur 
la Haye,
 the Father, his Majesty was contented in satisfaction thereof to redress this injurious transgression of the Law of Nations, by some ex∣traordinary marks of favour and honour to the Person of Monsieur 
la Haye
 the Son; that so ex∣ceeding the usual method and rule of Ceremony towards this Ambassador at his arrival, the World might be convinced of the real affection, and hearty desire the Grand Signior had to renew his Peace, and preserve his Commerce with 
France.
 This is supposed to be what the Mer∣chants of 
Marseille
 and 
Lyons,
 governed by the Interest of their Trade, suggested to their King, to induce him to send an Ambassador to 
Constantinople;
 for at this time Monsieur 
Roboli,
 a Merchant,
 remained only as Consul or Agent for the Affairs of Commerce. Things thus repre∣sented at the 
French
 Court, the King dispatched away two Gentlemen to 
Constantinople
 with Let∣ters to the Grand Signior and Vizier, and one to the 
Sieur Roboli,
 the Agent, declaring that if the 
Turk
 would make amends for the last Affront done to the Ambassador, by some signal notes of Ho∣nour in the abused Person of Monsieur 
la Haye,
 the Son, he would then condescend to confirm the Ancient League and Amity. The Letters translated out of the 
French
 Tongue, were as followeth.




To Our Dear and Well Beloved 
le Sieur Roboli,
 Agent for Our Affairs at 
Constantinople.


By the King.


Dear, and Well Beloved,


THe Inclination We have to continue that Amity with the Emperor of the Turks, which hath remained so long between Ʋs, and Our Empires, and maintain the ancient Alli∣ances, hath caused Ʋs to write to Him, and his Great Vizier, to know the Entertainment and Reception that they will give to the 
Sieur de la Haye,
 the Son, in satisfaction of the violence exercised before on his own Person, and the Person of the 
Sieur de la Haye,
 the Father, our Ambassador, against the Law of Nations. We write to You this Letter, to give you Or∣der to conduct and present before the Vizier, the Secretaries 
du Pressoir,
 and 
Fontain,
 which We have sent to carry him our Di∣spatches, and return with the Answers, which you shall solicite without loss of time, the which you shall bring your self, in case they be not agreeable to that resolution we have taken not to receive any satisfaction, but in the Person of the said 
Sieur de la Haye,
 the Son, which is due to Ʋs, for that Insolency and Affront which hath been done them. Willing also not∣withstanding, that before you depart, you as∣semble the 
French
 Merchants in 
Constantino∣ple
 together, that they may chuse amongst them∣selves one for their Chief; but if the Answers be such as We have cause to expect, We ap∣prove that you remain in the Station where you are, in Quality of Our Agent, until the arrival of the said 
Monsieur de la Haye,
 and that you send them by the said Secretaries 
du Pressoir,
 and 
Fontain,
 of which you shall not fail, for so is Our Pleasure.


Given at
 Paris 
the Twentieth of
 January, 
1662.


Signed, LOUIS. De Lomenie.








The King of 
France
 his Letter to the Great Vizier.


To the Most Illustrious and Magni∣nificent Lord, the Chief Vizier of the Sublime Port of the Grand Signior.


Most Illustrious and Magnificent Lord;


Although the Indignity offered to the Per∣son of the 
Sieur de le Haye Venteley,
 Our Ambassador, and to his Son, which We have designed to the same Charge, have touched Ʋs as far as becomes a victorious Prince, who holds the first rank over Christian Kings, and who hath under his Power one of the most warlike Nations of the World; Notwithstand∣ing after being informed, that the disgrace which the said Gentlemen have incurred, hath proceeded rather from malice, and the ill Of∣fices of some Persons, who have endeavoured to disturb, by this ill Treatment of them, the good Correspondence which hath been between Ʋs, than from any design on the Grand Sig∣niors part to offend Ʋs; and that on the con∣trary, there continues in His will an intention to maintain the Ancient Friendship which re∣mains between Our Estates and People after so many Ages. We being not desirous to estrange Our selves, shall send an Embassador in ordinary to his high Port, and having cast our Eyes up∣on the said 
Sieur de la Haye,
 the Son, We are much inclined to dispatch him for this employ∣ment; but as We desire to be assur'd of the good re∣ception that shall be made him, We give You ad∣vice of Our intentions by this Letter; that ac∣cording to the desire You have testified of the con∣tinuance of Our friendship, and Our Ancient Al∣liances with His Highness, shall pray God to have You, Most Illustrious and Magnificent Lord, in His holy and worthy Protection.


Written at
 Paris 
the twelfth day of
 January, 
1662.


LOUIS. De Lomenie.






The King of 
France
 his Letter to the Grand Signior.


To the most High, most Excellent, most Puissant, most Magnani∣mous, and Invincible Prince, the Great Emperor of the Mussul∣mans, 
Sultan Mahomet,
 in whom all Honour and Virtue abound. Our most dear and perfect Friend.


MOst High, most Excellent, most Puissant, most Magnanimous, and Invincible Prince, the Grand Signior, Emperor of the Mussulmans, 
Sultan Mahomet,
 in whom all Honour and Vertue abound. Our most dear and perfect Friend. May God encrease Your Greatness and Majesty with a happy end. We have not known how to impute the ill usage, which hath been offered to the Person of the 
Sieur de la Haye,
 our Ambassador, and to his Son, designed by Ʋs to the same employment, to any causes and motions in Your Highness, but rather to the Instigation of some People which would trouble that good Correspondence, which hath been so long established between Ʋs, and our Empires. And as we have cause to be∣lieve that Your Highness desires much to con∣tinue this friendship and good understanding, upon what hath been wrote Ʋs on Your Part; and to concur with You herein, we desire much likewise to continue to maintain an Ambassa∣dor at Your High Port, in place of the said 
Sieur de la Haye.
 And since We have none of Our People that is more intelligent than the 
Sieur de la Haye,
 the Son, in what concerns the Affairs and Functions of this Embassy; We have elected him for this employment, to which we We shall willingly dispatch him, if We may be assured of the good usage and kind reception which shall be given him. This is that which We expect from Your Highness, reserving a more particular information to be sent by the 
Sieur de la Haye,
 the Son, of the good Correspondence which We desire always to have and maintain with You. And hereupon We pray God, That You may be most High, 
&c.
 as above, in his Holy and Worthy Protection.


Written at
 Paris 
the twelfth day of
 January, 
1662.


Your true and perfect Friend,
 LOƲIS. De Lomenie.






The Viziers Answer to the fore∣going Letters.


TO the most Glorious amongst the Sublime Christian Princes, chosen amongst the Great and Sublime of the Religion of the 
Mes∣siah,
 Mediator of the Affairs of all the 
Na∣zarene
 Nation, Lord of Majesty and Reputa∣tion, Master of Greatness and Power, 
Louis
 Emperor of 
France,
 the end of whose days be happy. The Salutations which respect Friend∣ship, and are desired from Love and Affecti∣on, being premised. Your Majesty shall know that the Letter which was sent to Your Friend, by the Honourable 
du Pressoir
 and 
Fountain
 hath been delivered me by the 
Sieur Roboli,
 Agent and Attorney of the Embassy, at the High and Imperial Port; the Contents where∣of We have apprehended to be as Your Ma∣jesty gives to understanstand, touching the in∣tire

Amity and good Correspondence. Certain∣ly Your Majesty knows; that the Augmenta∣tion, and daily Encrease of that Amity, pro∣ceeds from the protection and honourable Ob∣servance of Conditions and Capitulations be∣tween both Parties. By the Grace of the Most High GOD, the Sublime and Imperial Port of the most Happy, most Puissant, most Vala∣rous, most Magnificent, and most Strong Em∣peror, Support of the Mussulmans, My Lord, whose Arms God prosper with double Force, is always open for our Friends, and others, with∣out any Obstacle, as all the World knows, and particularly for Your Majesty, Who is our Friend, and hath been long in Amity with the most Serene 
Ottoman
 Family, whom God esta∣blish until the day of the Ballance. It being a most certain Truth, that there hath happened neither on one side or other any Action contrary to the promised Faith.


And now, since Your Majesty desires for a new Ornament of the Ancient and Good Corre∣spondence, and to the end that the Agreement and Conditions thereof be honoured as they ought, that the considerable Person amongst the Nobles of the Court of Your Majesty, the 
Sieur Denys de la Haye,
 Son of the late Am∣bassador, a Subject of Reputation, Your Gen∣tleman of Credit, whose Days may they con∣clude in happiness, be sent to reside at this Happy and Imperial Port, for Your Majesty, according to the ancient custom; to the end that the Intention of Your Majesty may be per∣formed, We have exposed it at the High Throne of the thrice Happy, most Mysterious, and most Great Emperor, My Lord, Who with an Imperial regard of courteous Demonstration, hath accepted the said Demand with willingness, and therefore in signification of his Pleasure, We write You this Our present and friendly Letter; and if it please God, according to the ancient Custom, when the said Embassador shall arrive at this High Port with the Let∣ters of Friendship from four Majesty, he shall be honoured on the Imperial part, and entertain∣ed according to the ordinary custom, the Imperial Capitulation shall be renewed, the Ornament of Affection on one side and the other shall be con∣firmed; and for an efficacious Confirmation of a good Peace between both Emperors, an Imperi∣al Letter shall be sent to Your Majesty, whose health be happy and prosperous.


From the Imperial City of
 Constantinople.


The Poor
 Hamet 
Pasha.




In Answer to the Kings Letters,
 the Grand Signior made no reply, but only by his Vizier, by reason that in all the Ancient 
Turkish
 Registers and Archives, there was no example found, that the Grand Signior ever wrote to any King; who had not an Ambassador actually resident at his Port. But this Negotiation about a 
French
 Am∣bassador took not effect, until some time after, in which other Letters and Messages intervened, as will appear by the following Sequel of this Hi∣story.


It was now towards the beginning of Winter, when the Season of the Year compelled the 
Turkish
 Fleet of Gallies to return according to custom,
 to the Port of 
Constantinople.
 The whole Sum∣mer before, they had for the most part passed in some Harbour or Creek amongst the 
Greek
 Islands, having afforded nothing of Convoy or succour to∣wards the safe Conduct of the Fleet of 
Grand Cairo,
 but suffered them to fall into the hands of the Enemy, as before mentioned, and indeed for several years the Marine Affairs of the 
Turks
 have always gone decaying in Fame and Force; and the preparations of the Armata every Spring, have been of Form and Course, rather than with hopes of success correspondent to the expence. In their return home, near 
Constanti∣nople
 they encountred a fierce storm, so that three Gallies were cast away at 
Ponte Piccolo,
 (by the 
Turks
 called 
Cucuccheckmage,
 about four Leagues distant from 
Constantinople.
) Howsoever the Wea∣ther clearing, the remainder of the Fleet got into Port, entring with Joy, with Vollies of great and small Shot, with Streamers flying, Pipes sounding, and all other sorts of their Country Musick, bringing with great Ostenta∣tion a small Flyboat, which had been a 
or∣nese Man of War, taken by them as she was cruising singly in the Arches of 
Pelago;
 which was brought in with so much Ceremony used in toaing her into Port, decking her with Streamers and Pendants, with such signs of Vi∣ctory and Triumph, as if they had led Cap∣tive the whole 
Venetian
 Armata.
 But I must not omit the relation of what besel one of the Beghs Gallies, designed, with the rest, to ren∣dezvous at 
Constantinople,
 whilst she loitered amongst small Isles in the Gulf of 
Nicomedia.
 It was a Gally, the Commander of which had newly received as the Portion of his Wite, being a Young man lately married. who entertained great thoughts of raising his Fortunes by the spoils and prize he was to make. At these sles several of the Officers, and
 Levents went on shore; where whilst they entertained them∣selves with Wine and merriment; the Slaves made an insurrection in the Gally, seized the Captain, cut off his Head, and threw his Body into the Sea; and so becoming Masters of the Vessel, weighed Anchor, and set sail. Those on the shore admiring at the unexpected depar∣ture of the Gally, accompanied her with their Eyes and wonder as far as they could perceive her in sight, but observing her to steer a dif∣ferent course from the Port, to which they were designed, suspected much of the truth of what had succeeded; wherefore taking their Boat im∣mediately, they ha
tned to 
Constantinople
 to give advice of what had passed, that (if possible) Orders might timely arrive the Castles on the Hellespont, which might obstruct their farther passage. But alas! the poor Slaves were so dis∣mayed with their own action, and so tran∣sported with a slavish fear and apprehension of what might succed, should their escape not be effected; that they knew not what course to steer: All things seemed to contradict their li∣berty, the Wind proved contrary, their Spirits dejected, their understandings void of counsel and contrivance; so that wand
ing three or four days in the 
Propentis,
 at last ran their Gally ashoar on the 
Asian
 side, near 
Palermo,
 from whence they were brought back to 
Constanti∣nople,
 and there, by sentence of the Captain Pa∣sha, fourteen of them had their Legs and Arms broken, and so suffered to die in that torture, and afterwards their Bodies were thrown into

the Sea, to the terrour of all other Slaves, who prefer a miserable Life at the Oar, before the torments of some hours in dying.


Though the 
Turks
 have their Affairs but ill ma∣naged at Sea, and their success accordingly for∣tunate; yet their preparation for Land services are more expedite, and executed with that se∣cresy and speed, that oftentimes Armies are brought into the Field, before it is so much as rumoured by common Mouths that any designs are in agitation: For though it was now Win∣ter, yet the design against 
Germany
 went for∣ward, Forces were daily sent to the Frontiers, Cannot, and Ammunition for War, transported by way of the black Sea, and the 
Danube.
 Or∣ders issued out to the Princes of 
Moldavia
 and 
Valachia
 to repair their Wharfs and Keys along the River,
 for the more convenient landing of Men and Ammunition, and to rebuild their Bridges for the more commodious passage of the 
Tartars;
 that Horses should be provided against the next Spring, for drawing all Carriages of Ammunition, and Provisions; their Magazines stored with quantities of Bread, and Rice, their Fields well stocked with Sheep, and other Cat∣tel, and that no necessaries be wanting which concern the victualling, or sustenance of a Camp. The 
Tartars
 were appointed to have in a readi∣ness a Hundred thousand Horsemen, to make In∣cursions on the Frontiers; likewise the Pashaws of 
Darbiquier, Aleppo, Caramania,
 and 
Anatolia
 received their orders; and seven and twenty Let∣ters, accompanied with as many Vests, after the 
Turkish
 manner, were sent to as many Pashaws of the Empire, to dispose the strength of their Coun∣tries in a Warlike posture, so as to march when the Grand Signiors Commands should re∣quire them to attend his designs: And that the occasion of the War might appear the more justifiable, it was resolved, That no Acts of Hostility, or other Breaches of Peace should be pretended, than the Fort built by the Count 
Se∣rini,
 being a matter really against the Articles of the last Peace; the Demolishment whereof, the 
Ottomon
 Force intended to make the princi∣pal end of their first Enterprize, in which if they encountred any opposition from the Emperor, the Cause of their War would be then the more plausible; for as yet the Emperour had not fully declared his approbation of that Work, raised by 
Serini,
 as agreeable to his Assent, or Plea∣sure. On the other side with no less caution and labour did the Christians endeavour to se∣cure their Frontiers, by raising their Militia, and reinforcing their Garisons, and especially to per∣fect the new Fort near 
Canisia,
 which, as it was thought so considerable, as to countervail the inconveniencies and miseries of a War, so the Turk thought it neither honourable, nor secure, until he had seen it razed, and levelled with the ground.


All things thus growing black and stormy round about,
 that nothing seemed less probable, and it may be said, less possible, than an accommo∣dation; behold, on a sudden, an Accident fell out at 
Rome,
 from whence this War with the Turks received its life and heat, which becalmed much of the fury and storm on the Christian Con∣fines, and inclined matters in 
Germany
 towards propositions of Peace, fearing that 
Italy,
 who had begotten this War, was not able (as things stood) to contribute towards its maintenance and support. The occasion was this. It happen∣ed that in the streets of 
Rome
 the 
French
 Ambas∣sadours Coach was assaulted by the 
Corsi
 Natves of the Islle of 
Corsica,
 which are of the Popes Guard, the Page killed at the Boot of the Coach, and the Ambassadors Lady wounded; whether this barbarous act was designed against the Per∣son of the Ambassador by any Persons of Emi∣nency, or malice of the People, is little to the purpose I have now in hand; only the King took this Affront so heinously, that for the pre∣sent no acknowledgments or satisfaction the Pope could make, could allay his just resent∣ment, or any thing be imagined possible to ex∣piate this indignity, besides a VVar. This News of this Division between the Son, and the spiritu∣al Father, filled all the Ministers of 
Constanti∣nople
 with much Joy, and with subject of Laugh∣ter, and expectation of the Event, judging now that their daily Prayers for the Discord of the Christian Princes amongst themselves, were heard and granted, since they had so far a∣vailed, as to disunite the very Oeconomy of Christendom. And now they imagined that this difference would have a forcible influence on their Affairs in 
Hungary,
 and either incline the Emperor speedily to a Peace, or otherwise to undertake a War on disadvantageous terms. Things had an issue accordingly, for in a few Weeks after, advice came by Post from 
Ali
 Pa∣sha, then at 
Temiswar,
 that is 
Salam-Chaous,
 cal∣led 
Chusaein,
 who had long since been sent to 
Vienna,
 with more distinct Demands of what the Turks proposed, and being supposed, through his long stay, to be detained a Prisoner,
 was again returned, and with him had brought the Baron of 
Goez,
 as Internuncio, sent to 
Ali
 Pasha, to receive a more particular Imformation of the Turks propositions, for that the Emperor pretended, he was not as yet throughly satisfied therein. And thus matters, beyond all expecta∣tion, began to incline to an agreement, in re∣gard that 
Rome
 being now in danger her self, not by the Turks, but by the Christians, held her self uncapable to administer that Fuel to the Fire of War which she had promised; so that the League treated there beginning to fail, the Em∣peror grew faint, and the Princes cold, in their Preparations, wishing some Course could be ef∣fected, which might bring matters to an accom∣modation. Such were the Discourses and imagi∣nations of the Turks; in which condition we leave the state of Affairs until the beginning of the next year; and in the mean time it may not be from our purpose, nor tedious to the Reader, to record what befel this year most remarkable to the 
English
 Nation, and their Trade in 
Turky,
 which also may be beneficial, by instruction of past examples, to such who shall for the future be concerned in the Traffick and Business of the Levant.






What Remarkable accidents befel the 
ENGLISH
 Nation, and their Trade this Year in 
TURKEY.


THE Messengers from 
Algier,
 as before related, having promised better Obedience for the future to the Commands of the Grand Signior, obtained a new Pasha for their City, and Country thereunto belonging; who before his departure, was enjoyned by the Grand Signior to dispose Affairs with the Earl of 
Win∣chelsea,
 his Majesties Ambassador at 
Constantinople,
 as might demonstrate his dispositions towards a Peace, and his desire that the 
Algerines
 should do the like, and accept of that Clause in the Articles,

prohibiting the search of 
English
 Ships, either for their own or Strangers Goods. The place ap∣pointed for the meeting between the Embassa∣dor and the Pasha, was a certain Chiosk, or Garden house, belonging to an Eunuch, the 
Aga
 of a Seraglio at 
Pera;
 where both parties being met, the Pasha declared that the Grand Signiors desires were, That a Peace should be concluded on the Ancient Capitulations, and that by him these Orders were to be carried unto 
Algier,
 from whence he was advised, that the 
Algerines
 were ready to accept those Articles, if one of his Ma∣jesties Ships singly appeared about the Treaty; so that the World might not esteem their conde∣scension to proceed from Force and Compulsion. Hereof Advices being sent into 
England,
 a Peace ensued in some Months after; but what faith these Infidels kept will be related in the Sequel of this Story; the Memory of which is engraven with the Point of a Diamond, and the Losses which ensued thereupon to the Exchange at 
Lon∣don,
 deserve a particular Treatise, which in the mean time many Families retain in a sad remem∣brance.


In 
May,
 Advice was brought to the Lord Am∣bassador, how that the 
Ann,
 a Frigat of his Ma∣jesties Royal Navy, commanded by Captain 
Jonas Pool,
 which had convoyed the general Ships to 
Symrna,
 in her passage homewards stopped at the 
Morea,
 and came to an Anchor near a place in that Country, called the Black Mountain, com∣modious to Wood and Water in; to which end were landed threescore men, armed with Swords and Firelocks; these made havock of the Woods on all sides, loading their Boats away as fast as they could, and not only so, but set great Frees on Fire which in that dry Season of the Year dispersed it self far and wide; which being seen at a distance in the Night, alarmed the People of the Country, so that the Begh; or Governor came down with some Force to discover the matter, supposing that some 
Malteses,
 or 
Vene∣tians
 might be landed. At the approach of this Body of 
Turks,
 our Men quitted the Woods, and shifted away as fast as they could to their Boats, of which Thirty eight escaped, the rest falling short were intercepted by the 
Turks,
 and Eleven of them were killed, and Eleven taken Captives; and of the 
Turks,
 two Aga's, and Two or Three others had the fortune to fall by some Musket∣shot from our men, whilst in this confusion they endeavoured to defend themselves. On the news hereof, our Lord Ambassador represented the whole matter to the Vizier, declaring, That it was lawful according to our Capitulations, to take refreshments, and supply our wants in any part of the Grand Signiors Dominions; and that therefore he demanded Justice on the Begh of the 
Morea,
 and restitution of the Captives. But the Vizier understanding that some 
Turks
 were killed in the skirmish, lent not so ready an ear to these Complaints; howsoever, to be acquitted of the Ambassadors solicitations, referred the business to the Examination and Justice of the Captain Pa∣sha: But it falling out that at that time the Consul and Merchants at 
Smyrna
 had an un∣happy difference with the Captain Pasha, (which shall in the next place be related) was the Cause that all Applications to his Fa∣vour and Justice were suspended, and a slow progress made towards obtaining the liberty of those poor unfortunate men. Howsoever, some months after it happened that the Begh of the 
Morea
 being removed from that Government, and coming to 
Constantinople
 with his whole Estate, brought with him the Eleven 
Englishmen,
 which he had taken, and offered them to sale unto the Ambassador, who considering that they were 
Englishmen,
 and such as had been enslaved in actual Service of their King, he esteemed him∣self obliged both in Charity and Honour to re∣deem them. But the Case appeared too foul to demand their Liberty by strength of the Capitu∣lations; for besides that, the cutting Wood in places inhabited without permission, is a Rob∣bery and a Crime in its self, not to be maintained by the Law of Nations, the killing of a principal Aga, and wounding others, might sufficiently warrant the 
Turks,
 without any Breach of Peace, to detain these men as lawful Captives: Where∣fore the Lord Ambassador deeming it unseemly, that those who had served in his Majesties Navy should be condemned to the 
Turkish
 Gallies, dis∣bursed Fourteen hundred Lion Dollars, which was demanded for them, which was afterwards repay'd him by his Majesty; and having cloathed, and provided them with necessaries for their Voyage, conveyed them with the first occasions into 
England.


The difference between the 
English
 Nation, and the Captain Pasha which impeded the Liberty, for some time, of these Captives, had its Origi∣nal at 
Smyrna,
 where some 
English
 Merchants making Collation one Evening in a Garden were assaulted and beaten by certain drunken
 Le∣vents, belonging to a Gally then in Port, in whose Company was a 
Portuguez
 Slave. The News hereof flying to the Frank Street, put all the Neighbourhood into an uproar, so that divers People with such Weapons as came next to hand, in a fury went in pursuit of the Levents, and un∣happily meeting one, drew him into the 
English
 Consuls house, where they treated him with such blows as abated much of the heat and fumes of his Wine; during which disturbance and confusion, the 
Portuguez
 Slave found an op∣portunity to make his escape. The Consul knowing it some advantage in 
Turky
 to complain first, sent to the 
Kadi,
 giving him to understand the ill usage of Four of his Merchants (whose names he gave in writing) by the unruly Levents, whilst they innocently, and without injury to any, divertised themselves in a Garden; to which, for the present, little more was given in answer, than that on a farther examination of the Busi∣ness, the Conful should receive Justice In the mean time the Turk, who had been beaten in the Consuls House, resolved not to leave the Gate till he had received satisfaction for his blows; and the others that were his Comrades demand∣ed their Slave from the 
English,
 which was lost, by whose means and assistance (as they pretend) he had made his Escape. The matter came now to high Demands on both sides, which the 
Kadi,
 either not being desirous, or not of sufficient Au∣thority to compound, the Gally departed with∣out any agreement, and the complaint was car∣ried by the Turks to the Captain Pasha, who then being with his Fleet at 
Mytiline,
 with little other thoughts or business, was glad of this oc∣casion to get Money, and therefore suddenly re∣turned the Gally again, with Orders to bring before him the Four Merchants, whose names he particularized, to make answer to their ac∣cusation of having beaten his Levents, and con∣trived the escape of the slave. The Consul and Merchants being affrighted by this Message, and Command of so great a Personage, endeavoured with Money to accommodate the Business, by force of which it was at length taken up, costing in all the summ of Two thousand seven hundred Dollars, or thereabouts. The which passage

may serve for an example to such as live in 
Turky,
 that all troubles of this nature are best compound∣ed for at first; for at the beginning nothing more was demanded than the price of the Slave, & of the broken pate of the Levent: But being suffered to come under the Cognizance of powerful and co∣verous Tyrants; as there is no fahtoming their unsatiable desires, so there is no prospect into what inconvenient dangers such Affairs will involve, and entagle themselves.


As 
Turky
 hath been seldom or never without having false Money currant, so the best sort of Silver hath been so clipped by the Jews, 
Arme∣nians,
 Merchants, and others; that the Dollar was brought at 
Constantinople
 to six Drams, and at 
Smyrna
 to seven, which made great confusion in the Trade of these Countries. Wherefore the Vizier as he had already given proof and testi∣mony to the World of his strict observance, and adherence to the 
Mahometan
 Law, so he was de∣sirous to appear highly careful and sensible of the Publick Interest: And therefore as the most neces∣sary work, he began with the Dollars of six Drams, proclaiming that they should no longer pass in payments,
 and that those in whose hands they were found, delivering them into the Mint, should receive a
 80 in return of every such Dol∣lar, by which means the Mint would ad∣vance a Fourth on every Dollar, esteem∣ing every Dram worth Fourteen Aspers, and that for the present no Dollar being currant under seven Drams, it might afterwards be brought to Lyons, and Dollars of nine Drams; which regu∣lation, though at first grievous to some particular persons, would afterwards redound to the com∣mon advanrage and benefit of Trade. To for∣ward which Design the Grand Signior, and Queen Mother sent all their Dollars of six Drams to be new coined into Aspers at the Mint, so likewise did the Vizier, intending to be very strict in pro∣hibition of that Money. But a while after it hap∣pened that the Treasurer of the Viziers Steward having occasion to pay Monies, either for his own or his Masters account, forced some Bags of Six Drams on those to whom payment was to be made; the Receivers denied to accept them; but he being a powerful man, and very urgent, forced the Mony upon them, with which laden, as they had received them, they went directly to the Vizier, acquainting him that they were desirous to obey his Commands, as to the six Dram Dol∣lars, but his Stewards Treasurer had forced on them that sort of Money, which if it was his plea∣sure that they should still pass, they were con∣tented to receive; if not, they desired him to give Command for their payment in other Mo∣ney. The Vizier being highly enraged, that the first Violation of his Commands should begin in his own Family, immediately ordered, without farther proof or process, that the Offenders Head should be struck off, and his body thrown into the Sea; which Sentence was executed in the same hour for example and terror of others, and to expiate the crime, and take away the scandal from the Fountain of Justice, whose streams can never be esteemed to run clear when the source is corrupted. In like manner the Overseer of the Mint was strangled, and 
Emir
 Pasha, formerly Pasha of Grand 
Cairo,
 was banished to the Isle of 
Lemnos,
 for making the Coin of Aspers 5 
per Cent.
 worse than their true value.


The Merchants at 
Aleppo,
 being far from the Court,
 are more subject to troublesom Avanias than others, who are nearer to the Head or Fountain, from whence Justice should pro∣seed as may appear by many examples, and particularly by an accident which fell out there this year. For it happened, that a Jani∣sary which served the 
English
 Nation, riding abroad with some of the Merchants, for want of heed, or the unruliness of his Horse, chanced to hurt a Youth playing in the streets. Whereup∣on the Merchants, and the Janisary, not to suf∣fer this business to come within the knowledge of the Cities Officers, immediately for some Money quieted the complaints, and stopped the farther demands of the Father; and to make the busi∣ness more secure, caused the Father to make Ho∣get before the 
Kadi,
 that he was well satisfied, and remained without farther pretence, either on the Merchant, or the Janisary, for the hurt which his Child had received. But the Pasha, who had for a long time attentively watched an opportunity to extort Money from the 
English,
 was resolved not to let pass this fair occasion; and therefore sent to demand from the Consul those Merchants, which he called Accessories to this mischief, and the Assassinates of a 
Mussulman.
 The Consul appearing in Person before the Pasha, denied to deliver up the Merchants, being guilt∣less of any crime; and that for hurt to the Child, the Father had received full satisfaction from the Janisary, and given a discharge before the 
Kadi.
 Howsoever this reason would not pacifie the Pa∣sha, who could acknowledge no other argu∣ment available than a Sum of Money; and therefore in prosecution of his design produced Ten false Witnesses, that the Child was dead of its hurt, and that 
English
 men had done the mis∣chief. The Consul had now no other answer than a flat denial; for the Pasha had forced by threats the Hoget from the Janisary, and persist∣ing with constancy in defence of his Merchants, the Pasha confined him for an hours time in a Chamber of his House, and beat, and imprisoned his Druggerman. The Consul afterwards re∣turned home; and perceiving a difference be∣tween the Pasha and the Mufti, purchased the favour of the Mufti on his side, and procured from him an Hoget of the several proceedings in this business, which was dispatched away with all expedition to 
Constantinople,
 that a redress of this injury might be obtained from the Superiour Power. Whilst the Lord Ambassador in due manner resented this breach of Capitulations, and prepared to make his complaints to the Vizier, it happened that certain Christians of 
Aleppo,
 from whom the Pasha had forced 18000 Dollars by unjust extortion, were then at Court solliciting the restauration of their right. The Ambassador judging this a convenient and opportune prepa∣ration to prepossess the mind of the Vizier with a true apprehension of the injustice of this Pasha, encouraged and pricked forward these abused and oppressed Christians in their complaints; and the next day presented his Memorial to the Vi∣zier, containing all the particulars of the late pas∣sages at 
Aleppo;
 Which with the other Crimes alledged the Day before, so moved the mind of the Vizier, that he promised the Ambassador to send a Kapugibashee of the Grand Signior to en∣quire into the Truth of these Allegations; and that he might be satisfied of his real intentions to do him justice, he advised him to send a Mes∣senger in company with this Officer, who might witness the reality of his proceedings. The Ka∣pugibashee being in this manner dispatched, and arriving at 
Aleppo,
 made the Pasha refund the Money he had unjustly taken from the poor op∣pressed Christians of that Country; in which good action my Lord Ambasador had been an useful instrument, having encouraged the Agents

of those Christians at 
Constantinople,
counselled them what Course to take, and introduced them by his Chief Interpreter to the Presence of the Vizier, for which he received the thanks of the 
Greek
 and 
Armenian
 Patriarchs, who gratefully acknowledged to the 
English
 Consul at 
Aleppo,
 how much they were engaged to the charity and favour of the 
English
 ambassador: But whilst all mens eyes were in expectation what farther pro∣ceedings were designed against the Pasha in fa∣vour of the 
English,
 the Officer denied to have received any instructions therein, and so return∣ed to 
Constantinople
 without taking notice of the 
English
 Concernment. The Ambassador judging himself herein slighted, sent to the Viziers Kahya to know the mystery of this neglect; for the Vi∣zier and himself having pawned his word and promises to do him justice against the Pasha of 
Aleppo,
 it seemed strange that his assurances should vanish into nothing; and that he so mean∣ly esteemed his Quality and Office, as to dispa∣rage it with so much disrepute and contempt as must necessarily befal him, should this Pasha escape without exemplary punishment; for then the World might with reason believe his Appli∣cations of no prevalency, and his Merchants fear the insufficiency of his protection. To which the Kahya answered, That it was true, that the Ka∣pugibashee was not instructed in the Concern∣ments of the 
English,
 in regard a more solemn and eminent piece of Justice was designed for the Ambassador, than any that could be performed by the Kapugibashee, and that in twenty or thirty days at farthest, the Pasha should be de∣prived of his Office. The next day following the Kahya advised that the Hattesheriff, or Im∣perial Command for deposing of the Pasha, was signed, and that old 
Mahomet
 Pasha of 
Darbiquier
 was constituted in his place; which News was highly pleasing to the Lord Ambassador, in re∣gard he had been an ancient Friend to the 
Eng∣lish,
 under whom he presaged to our Nation at 
Aleppo
 all security and contentment.
 By which Story it is observable, That though the Supream Officers amongst the 
Turks
 are willing to satisfie Christian Ambassadors resident with them, in the Care they have of their Welfare, and main∣tenance of their Capitulations; yet are not desi∣rous to publish to their own People the punish∣ment of their Grand Officers, at the instigation or for the concernment of a Christian: And that tho the 
Turks
 are apprehended amongst us for a People of great Morality, and singleness in their Dealings; yet it is observable in this, as well as in o∣ther their actions, that they have double Tongues and Faces, and know how to act with as fine a Thread, and plausible pretences, as are accustoma∣ry in the most politick and refined Courts of 
Italy.






Anno Christi 
1663.
 Hegeira 
1074.


THE Baron of 
Goez,
 which at the end of the last Year arrived at 
Buda
 with several o∣vertures of Peace, had so far proceeded in his Treaty with 
Ali
 Pasha of 
Buda,
 that all Articles seemed almost concluded, and scarce any diffi∣culty to remain, unless the Surrender of 
Zekel∣hyd
 on the Confines of 
Hungary;
 which also was afterwards accommodated by Agreement, That the City should be resigned into the hands of the Prince of 
Transilvania,
 as the most equal Con∣dition between the Emperor and the Turk. So that, matters thus seeming to be composed, all People talked of Peace with 
Germany,
 and that the force and miseries of Wars were to be turned upon 
Dalmatia:
 And though the 
Turks
 had no design less in their thoughts than this, or any in∣tentions towards a Peace, as will be proved by the Sequel; howsoever, the 
German
 Ministers, as men credulous of what they desire, gave the Peace for certainly concluded, in which conceit the 
Turks
 so humoured and indulged their fancy, that they perswaded Prince 
Portia,
 the Chief Mi∣nister of State to the Emperor, in that manner of the reality of their intentions, that he neg∣lected the necessary Provisions and Preparations of War, And though he was often advised by the Resident at the 
Ottomon
 Port, that all these Demonstrations of Peace were only Artifices of the 
Turk,
 to delude the Emperors Council;
 yet so tenacious was he of this Opinion, that though it be but common reason, and the vulgar Rule of Policy for a Prince to arm, and suspect his Neigh∣bour, who puts himself into a Warklike posture; yet this Great Personage, though in other things profoundly wise, and circumspect, was so de∣luded, that he replyed to the Residents Advices to this effect, That it was the Office of a prudent and experienced Minister to discover with dili∣gence the resolution of the Cabinet Councils of Princes, and not to give ear or credit to what is the common Voice or vogue of the Vulgar.


The Spring drawing near, the Vizier prepared all things for action, nominating and appointing such, who in his absence were to supply the Of∣fices of State: 
Ishmael
 Pasha, then Pasha of 
Bu∣da,
 was designed for 
Chimacam,
 or Governour of 
Constantinople,
 and 
Mustapha
 Pasha, Captain Pasha, Brother in Law to the Grand Vizier by Marriage of his Sister (and now the present Vi∣zier) was made 
Chimacam
 at 
Adrianople,
 near the Person of the Grand Signior. All other pre∣parations for War went forwards, Thirty pieces of Cannon from 
Scutari,
 and fifty from the Sera∣glio, most of a vast bigness and weight, which had served in the taking of 
Babylon,
 with great store of Ammunition and Provisions of War, were transported up the 
Danube
 to 
Belgrade,
 and the Princes of 
Moldavia,
 and 
Valachia,
 had now Commands sent them to quicken their diligence in making their preparations of War, and in providing Sheep, Beef, Rice, and all sorts of Victuals for supply of the Camp; and general Proclamation was made in all places, That all Soldiers, who received on Asper of pay from the Gr. Signior, were to prepare themselves for the War.


About the middle of 
February
 the Horse Tail was set forth at the Viziers Gate; (which is the usual signal of the Camps motion within the space of a Month) so that none may excuse him∣self from the War for want of due and timely intimation. And though the time for departure nearly approached, yet the Grand Signior was so impatient, that he would scarce expect until the Equinoctial,
 which was the Term formerly appointed and published for this expedition; re∣solving sometimes to proceed before, and leave the Vizier to follow him, letting fall words of∣ten, That such as loved and honoured him would keep him company. But this hasty resolution, and eager desire of his Journey, the Vizier, Multi, and others of his Counsellours, did mode∣rate, perswading him to a little longer patience: to which, though with some difficulty, he assen∣ted; yet he could not forbear from his Horses back, and constant exercises abroad, nor could he be induced to take one Nights repose longer in his great Seraglio at 
Constantinople,
 but lodged at 
Daout
 Pasha, a small Palace about four miles distant from 
Constantinople.
 Which ex∣travagant manner of living most People at∣tributed

to his wandring humour, and delights in hunting, riding, and such like exercises, ha∣ving his sole pleasure in the Woods and Fields: But others, who judged with better Foundation, did conceive, That the Grand Signiors choice of other places of Residence rather than his Im∣perial Seraglio, proceeded not so much from his own unsetled humour, and course of living, as from an apprehension of some Designs, and mu∣tinous Treasons of the Janisaries against him: For to speak the truth, since the death of 
Ku∣perlee,
 the Militia began again to be corrupted; and if we may believe the opinion of the most principal 
Turks,
 the Vizier undertook this War to employ the busie spirits of the Soldiery, which began to grow resty and insolent through idleness, and by that means secure his own life, and establish his Condition and Fortune.


The Equinoctial being come, the Grand Sig∣nior would not have one days longer patience; for though the Season was wet and rainny, yet the Tents were pitched; and though the Wind was so violent and forcible as overturned almost the whole Camp, yet no difficulties and incon∣veniencies of Weather could give one hour of intermission to the Sultans desires: Wherefore on the Ninth of this Month,
 the Grand Signior departed from 
Constantinople,
 attended with his Court, his principal Officers of State, and with what part of his Army was then a in readiness to march. The magnificence of the show they made, was according to the usual Solemnity, yet worthy the sight of a Stranger, and perhaps not incurious to the Reader in its Relation.


First,
 marched with a singular Gravity, the several and distinct Orders of Civil and Military Officers in their proper Habits and Caparisons, the Santones in their wild dress followed by the Emirs, or such as are of the Kindred of their false Prophet; the Great Vizier and Musti rode in rank together, the Vizier on the left hand, the most honourable place amongst the Soldiery, being the side to which the Sword is girt, as the right is of greatest esteem amongst such as are of the Law, being that hand which guides the Pen: The Trappings of the Viziers Horse were plared with Gold, and before him were carried three Horse-tails, called in 
Turkish (Tugh,)
 and behind him came about Three hundred and fifty Pages, all Young men well mounted, and armed with Jacks and Coats of Male: Next followed the Mi∣nions of the Court, or Seraglio, (
viz.
) the Paicks with Caps of beaten Gold, and embroidered Coats, the Solacks with Feathers, armed with Bows and Arrows; these two last are of the highest degree of Lacqueys, which more nearly attend the Person of the Grand Signior; these were fol∣lowed by Nine led Horses of the Grand Signior, richly adorned with precious Stones, and Buck∣lers all covered with Jewels of an unknown value. Immediately before the Person of the Grand Sig∣nior was led a Camel carrying the Alcoran in a Chest covered with cloth of gold: The Gr. Signior himself was clothed in a Vest of cloth of gold lined with a Sable incomparably black, held up from the sides of his Horse by four Pages; his Person was followed with great numbers of Eunuchs, and Pages with long red Caps wrought with Gold about the head, carrying Lances and Mails, with two Locks, one on each side of their Head, which are worn by such only as are of the Royal Cham∣ber: After these crowded great numbers of Ser∣vants, with the chief Comp. of Saphees, com∣manded by the 
Selictor Aga,
 in number about 1800. And in this manner and order they marched to their Tents.


The Tents were raised on a small Hill, as may be judged about Four Miles distant from 
Con∣stantinople,
 and about Two Thousand in num∣ber ranged at that time without order, only the Grand Signior's seemed to be in the midst, and to over-top all the rest, well worthy observation, costing (as was reported) One hundred and eighty thousand Dollars,
 richly embroidered in the inside with Gold, and supported by Pillars plated with Gold. Within the
 Walls of this Tent (as I may so call them) were all sorts of Offices belonging to the Seraglio, all Retire∣ments and Apartments for the Pages, 
Chioskes
 or Summer-houses for pleasure; and though I could not get admittance to view the innermost Rooms and Chambers, yet by the outward and more common places of resort, I could make a guess at the richess and greatness of the rest being sum∣ptuous beyond comparison of any in use amongst the Christian Princes. On the right hand hereof was pithced the Grand Viziers Tent, exceedingly rich and lofty; and had I not seen that of the Sultans before it, I should have judged it the best that my eyes had seen. The ostentation and magnificence of this Empire being evidenced in nothing more than in the richess of their Pavilions, sumptuous beyond the fixed Palaces of Princes, erected with Marble and Mortar.


On the Sixteenth of this Month the 
Aga
 of the Janisaries first raised his Tents,
 and began his march; the next day followed the Grand Signior, Vizier, and other Officers, and Spahees. At which time all 
Asia
 was full of Soldiers flocking from all parts of the East, as from 
Aleppo, Da∣mascus, Arabia, Erzirum,
 and 
Babylon:
 So that for a long time Boats and Barks were continually imployed to ferry the Souldiery from 
Scutari
 in∣to 
Europe:
 And the High-ways, Villages, and all parts of the Road towards 
Adrianople
 were filled with Soldiers, as if all 
Asia
 had issued out to devour and inhabit the 
German
 Possessions. And for greater expedition in the march of the Army, Proclamation was made of a general Rendezvous at 
Sophia
 at the
 
Biram,
 then within Three weeks time, where they designed to soil their Horse, and refresh themselves before they fell in earnest to their business. But before the Grand Vizier departed from 
Adrianople
 to pro∣secute a War in 
Hungary
 against the Emperor, he called Signior 
Ballarino
 to his presence, as if he would treat with him of matters tending to an adjustment with 
Venice;
 when at the same time he had 20000 men in a readiness at 
Scutari
 to march into 
Dalmatia,
 and to joyn with other Forces in 
Bosna
 and 
Croatia;
 but this dissimula∣tion and appearance of Treaty served only to discover on what Terms a Peace might be ob∣tained, in case Affairs in 
Hungary
 should be so pressing as to require an application solely of Arms to that Country.


Not only had Signior 
Ballarino
 Affairs of pub∣lick trouble, but likewise something touched him of private concernment in his own Family; where the 
Turks,
 I know not upon what infor∣mation coming to fearch, found in his House two figures, one of a man, and the other of a woman made of Linen cloth, stuffed with Wool and Cot∣ton; the which were interpreted by the 
Turks
 to be Images of Sorcery and Inchantment; one re∣presenting the Grand Signior, and the other his Mother, were designed in a secret manner, by thrusting Needles and Pins into those parts, where the Heart and Liver is, to cause those whom they represent to dye with macerations and consum∣ptions, according to the Inchantment of 
Me∣dea. In jecur urget acus.
 And this suspicion

was augmented by the reports of the Neighbour∣hood, who hearing the Priest often recite his Litany, and sing Evening-song, avouched that they constantly over-heard the Charms muttered in such forms as are used by Magicians and Sor∣cerers: Wherefore designing to take the Priest, who was the Father Provincial of St. 
Francis,
 and punish him for his Witchcraft, the good man fair∣ly fled, and kept himself out of harms way, un∣til Signior 
Ballarino
 could quiet the minds of the 
Turks
 by some Art, which he more forcibly pra∣ctised upon them by a stronger charm of Money and Presents than that which was the subject of their complaint.


In the mean time all fears and dangers of 
Can∣dia
 vanished, because the 
Turks
 bent their For∣ces and chief of their strength against their Ene∣mies at Land: To provide against which, the Senate of 
Venice
 sent into 
Dalmatia
 the Baron 
Spaar
 for General, with many other Officers un∣der him, namely the Marquess 
Maculani,
 Count 
Ettore Albano, Carlo Martinengo,
 and 
Roverelli,
 Count of 
Caudes,
 the Cavallier 
Grimaldi, Echen∣felt,
 and others. Into 
Friuli, Francisco Morosini
 was dispatched in quality of Proveditor General with supream Power and Authority, and in this manner all matters were as well pro∣vided and secured by Land, as they were by Sea.


The 
Biram
 chanced to happen out this Year towards the end of 
April,
 by which time the Vi∣zier, and most of his Army, assembled according to Proclamation at 
Sophia;
 where having conti∣nued some time, and consulted well in what manner to put their designs in execution, they proceeded in their March towards 
Buda,
 and the Confines of 
Hungary;
 but in the way the Vizier was encountred by a Messenger from the Em∣peror, offering all reasonable Propositions of Peace, if possibly a stop might be given to the farther progress of that vast and formidable Ar∣my. All matter, were proposed which probably might give satisfaction; the Fort of Count 
Serini
 (the grand Eye-sore of the 
Turks
) was proffered to be demolished, with other Conditions which before the March of the Army were never pro∣posed or demanded. But the Vizier gave little ear to these fair Overtures, but proceeded for∣wards in his Demands, as he did in his March: Requiring now, not the demolishment of the Fort, but the Surrender of it entirely with all the Strength, Artillery, and Ammunition into the hands of the Grand Signior. Had this condition been granted, it is probable the desires and pre∣tensions of the 
Turks
 would not have stopped here, but have risen, as the spirits of their Ene∣mies had condescended, and exceeded all the hopes and advantage which they imagined pro∣bable and feasible to be obtained by the War. Wherefore this Message proving fruitless, the Bringer of it was permitted Licence to return in∣to 
Germany:
 But the Resident was refused dis∣mission, being detained in the 
Turkish
 Camp, as an Instrument to mediate a Peace, when both sides should grow weary of the War.


About this time the 
Tartars
 were greatly in∣fested by the Cossacks, who were then very for∣midable and strong,
 approaching near the City of 
Osac,
 the Key and chief Fortress of 
Tartary,
 under the Commann of a Fisherman of the 
Boristhenes,
 who having had great successes, and collected a considerable sum of Money, became a dangerous Enemy: By Sea also they commanded absolutely, roving uncontrouled, having a Fleet of Saykes and Gallies near an hundred and fifty Sail, against whom the Tartar 
Han
 or King of 
Tartary
 craved of the Grand Signior forty sail of Gallies that year to oppose them. But this Force of the Cossacks was soon abated; for it pleased God, that passing out of the 
Palus Moeotis
 through the narrow pas∣sage of 
Colchos
 into the Black Sea, the best part of this Fleet suffered shipwrack; with which they were so dismayed, that the twelve sail of Gallies (which was the whole Force the 
Turks
 could spare this year for that Sea) gave a check to the remainder, and forced them again to the Banks of the 
Boristhenes.
 The rest of the 
Turkish
 Fleet, consisting, together with the Beys Gallies, in all but of thirty Sail, departed from 
Constantinople,
 with design rather to make some appearance of a Fleet, and a noise amongst their own people, and collect the Contribu∣tions of the Isles in the 
Archipelago,
 than out of hopes of effecting any thing against the 
Venetians;
 and so it succeeded; for this Fleet remained the whole Summer at 
Mytilene,
 not daring to appear abroad for fear of the Enemy.


Though the 
Tartars
 were so hardly beset by the Cossacks, yet their danger at home was not a suf∣ficient excuse to disingage them from their assi∣stance in the War of 
Hungary.
 For the Vizier marching towards the Frontiers, sent one Mes∣senger after the other to hasten the Tartar 
Han
 with all speed possible to the Wars. But the 
Tar∣tars
 seeming not so willing, or so ready as the 
Turks
 expected, more positive commands, and se∣vere threats, were dispatched than before, that laying aside all excuses or delays, they should with all the Force of their Country attend in this present War against the Emperor,
 or otherwise the Tartar 
Han
 was to be deprived of his Govern∣ment, and his Son constituted in his place. These severe menaces reduced the 
Tartar
 to great straits; fearful he was to displease the Sultan, not knowing what ill consequences might proceed from thence; but more apprehen∣sive he was of the approaches of the Cos∣sacks, and of the displeasure of his own People, who were resolved to see this fire of War extin∣guished in their own homes, before they would attend the designs, or satisfie the Lusts of a stranger Prince. In this Dilemma the Tartar 
Han
 finding himself, made use of fair words and pro∣mises, ingaging his word. That after the harvest was past, no obstacle should prevent his com∣pliance with the Sultans expectations; for at pre∣sent it was impossible, in regard that should their People at this season be diverted from gathering the harvest, the Corn and Fruit would remain on the ground, and so occasion a Famine and destruction of their Country. And herein the 
Tartar
 had some reason; for these People go not to the Wars, as other Nations, who leave a suffi∣cient number behind to cultivate their Country, and perform all other Offices and Imployments in a Common-wealth: But these making their chief livelihood and subsistence on the prey and robberies they make on their Neighbours;
 as many as resolve to eat Bread and live, who are men not old or impotent, able to bear Arms, betake them∣selves to their Horse and Bow; so that when their Army is abroad, their Towns and Villages are only inhabited, and defended by their Women. But the 
Turk
 whose desires are never satisfied with reasons, or withstood by words, or with any thing besides the execution of his Commands, dispatched another Message more full of threats and resolution than formerly,
 carried by the Em∣brahor, or Master of the G. Signiors Horse, mena∣cing nothing but Fire, and Sword, and Destructi∣on to the 
Han
 and his Country, if he longer de∣layed to perform his Duty. But by this time

the Harvest being almost gathered, and their fears against the Cossacks partly extinguish∣ed, the 
Tartar
 promised with all expedition an Army of Seventy Thousand men,
 un∣der the Conduct of the Prince his eldest Son, who whilst they were putting themselves in order, and assembling for the War; reports were murmured, as if the 
Turks
 were in a Treaty of Peace with the Emperoor, and matters in a fair likelihood of composure: At this news the common Souldiers amongst the 
Tartars
 were not a little startled, fearing that they who are free Booters, and have no other pay than their pur∣chase, should by such a Treaty be forced to re∣turn empty; and therefore before they would proceed, sent to advise the Sultan of these their fears; supplicating him, that if he should think fit to conclude a Peace, and so oblige them to return into their own Country, that he would not take it amiss, if upon their march home, they should make themselves good upon his Subjects of 
Mol∣davia
 and 
Valachia,
 whose persons and Estates they resolved to carry with them, as a just prey and recompence for their loss of time and labour. The Sultan who sets a small value on the Lives and Estates of his Christian Subjects, judged this Proposition but reasonable, so long as upon these terms he might obtain the benefit of the 
Tartars
 assistance, who are the best Horse to forage, de∣stroy, and make desolate a Country.






The Story of 
Asan
 Aga the Mosayp or Favourite, and other instances of the uncertainty of the 
Turkish
 Richess, and Glory


THE Great Vizier being by this time ar∣rived on the Frontiers with a very consi∣derable Army; the G. Signior at 
Adriano∣ple
 continued his usual pleasures in Hunting, Ri∣ding, throwing of the Gerit or Dart, and in other pastimes and sports of this nature; at which time casting his Eves upon one 
Asan
 Aga, a sprightly youth of his Seraglio, a 
Polonian
 by Nation, to be more forward and active than any of his Court, took an affection to him, so sudden and violent, as might be judged neither well founded, nor long durable; for the Grand Signior having heard, that there were examples amongst the Emperors his Predecessors, not only in the ab∣sence, but in the presence also of the Vizier, of maintaining and constituting a Favourite, in Turkish called 
Mosayp,
 did own publickly the Election of this person for his Friend and Com∣panion; so that this Minion was on a sudden so highly ingratiated in the favour of his Prince, that he always rode equal with him; Cloathed as rich, and mounted as well. as the Sultan himself, as if he had been his Coadjutor, or Companion in the Empire. The Queen Mother, the 
Kuzlier
 Aga, and other rich Eunuchs of the Seraglio, the Chi∣macams of 
Adrianople,
 and 
Constantinople,
 with all the Great Officers and principal Ministers, were commanded to make Presenr of Money, Jewels, and other Sacrifices, to this rising Sun; whom now every one so courted and adored, that he became the only talk and admiration of the whole Town; no other discourse there was but of 
Asan Chelabei, Asan
 the fine accomplisht Gentleman, 
Asan
 the only Creature of Fortune, and Idol of the whole World. This high and sudden promotion of this Youth, greatly displeased the Queen Mother, 
Kuzlier
 Aga, who had Creatures of their own to perfer, and by their means became the Envy and Emulation of the whole Court, so that there wanted not such who posted the news to the Vi∣zier, as him, on whom the growing greatness of 
Asan
 might have the most dangerous reflection: But the Vizier duly considering, that the deep impressions this Youth had made in the affections of his Master, were not to be removed by plain dealing, but by some more occult Artifice and dissimulation, took occasion to write to the Grand Signior, in favour of 
Asan
 Aga, extolling the pru∣dence of his choice of so compleat and hopeful a Youth for his Favourite; but that it was pity, so pregnant parts as those with which 
Asan
 was en∣dued, fit to promote his Masters Service and In∣terest, should be Encloistred, and Buried in the softness and delights of his Seraglio; and therefore his Counsel was, to have him preferred to some government, and degree of a Pasha, to which his Abilities and Education, in the Nursery and Dis∣cipline of the Court, had abundantly accomplish∣ed him. 
Pessimum genus inimicorum, laudantes.
 Nor were the Queen Mother, and 
Kuzlier
 Aga, all this time wanting in their contrivance to un∣dermine him, but not with a design spun with so fine a Thread, prosessing themselves openly his Adversaries: For which Courtly Policy, the Vi∣zier only received a check, and some few verbal reproofs, for intermedling with what so nearly concerned his Masters Fancy and Affection: But the 
Kuzlier
 Aga, was by one word from 
Asan
 (whom he had discovered to be his Enemy) deprived of his Office,
 and had therewith lost his Life, had not the Queen Mother pow∣erfully interceded for him, and gained an ex∣change of his punishment from death to ba∣nishment in Grand 
Cairo
 in 
Aegypt.
 The Baltagibashee also (who is the Captain of that part of the Grand Signiors Guard,
 who car∣ry Hatchers, and are empyloyed in cutting Wood for the use of the Seraglio) being discovered to be a Confederate in the same Plot against the Favourite, was condemned to the same punishment, and immediately both of them dispeeded away to the place, where they were to spend the remainder of their days. Grand 
Cairo
 hath always been the place of Banishment for unfortunate Courtiers, or rather of such who have with much greatness, plenty, and contentment sometimes enjoyed the Fruit of their great Richess, gained in the Sun∣shine and summer of their Princes favour. To this City also was this 
Kuzlier
 Aga exiled, who in the enjoyment of his Office for several years, had amassed a most vast Wealth, incredible to be spoken, and much to be wondred, that a Negro, whose hue and person is contemptible amongst all, whom God hath created of a Colour diffe∣rent from those who partake more of Light, and are of nearer similitude with the Sun, and Nature of an Angel; one whose Original was a Slave, and his price never above a Hundred Pieces of Eight, should be loaded with such Goods of Fortune, and enriched with the Treasury of a Prince: His Retinue consisted of about 900 Horse, (besides Ca∣mels, and Mules for his Baggage) amongst which a Hundred were led Horses, worth Seven or eight hundred Dollars a Horse, and that he might still seem to live by his Princes Bounty, a thousand Aspers a day was to be his constant pay, to be issued out of the G. Signiors Revenue in 
Egypt;
 by which we may in part calculate the greatness of this Empire, when so vast Richess is ac∣counted but a reasonable proportion for so vile and

mean a Slave: Howsoever the Grand Signiors Treasury suffers little hereby, for this wealth and pomp is but lent him to keep, and look on; he is uncapable to make a Testamen, or constitute an Heir; the Grand Signior himself succeeding to all the Estate he hath given him, and the im∣provement of it. This Negro being proceeded as far as to 
Constantinople,
 had his Companion the Balragibushee, recalled from him with design to be put to Death, but afterwards by mediation of some powerful Friends, who took advantage of the gentle and benign humour of the Sultan, his pardon was obtained, and he preferred to a small
 Pashalick in the lesser 
Asia.
 Howsoever the Eunuch proceeded in his Journey to 
Grand Cairo,
 where being arrived, after three Days, was by the Imperial Command stript of all his wealth and greatness, which amounted unto Two Millions of Dollars, to be restored again to their first Master, who uses to lend his Slaves such gaieties and Ornaments, only to afford the World occasion to see and admire the vastness of his Wealth, and contemplate the vanity and unconstancy of Richess and Worldly glory. This poor Negro thus devested of all, returned to his primary condition of a Slave, in which he was born, and for many years had lived, and was now banished, forsaken, and disconsolate in the upper 
Egypt;
 whither going scarce with sufficient to preserve him from Famine and Beggery, the Beyes of 
Egypt,
 out of compassion, bestowed on him an Alms of twelve Purses, being Eight Thousand four hundred Dollars, according to the Account of 
Cairo,
 now the only support and sustenance of his Life.


This Victory gained over these great Perso∣nages, and foyl given to the Queen Mother her self, was not carried by this young Favourite with that prudent equality of mind as was de∣cent; but being puffed up with pride and glory, adventured to a judgment and censure of the deepest matters of State, which touched not a little the jealousie and scorn of the Great Vizier, who therefore wrote to all those grave Sages, to whose Counsel he conceived the Sultan gave any ear or credit; representing with extraordinary passion and fervency the dangers he apprehended might befal his Master, and his Empire, whilst both were subject to the unexperienced Counsels of 
Asan,
 a Youth both in years and knowledge. That it was much to the disparagement of the Supream Office of Vizier whilst was with Thousands of 
Turks
 on the Frontiers contending for the Glory and Enlargement of the 
Ottoman
 Dominions, subjected to millions of dangers and labours; to be supplanted by a Boy, fit only for an attendants in his Masters Chamber; and to have the privacy of the Emperors State Counsels and policy rifled by a Youth, whose years had not fitted him for the knowledge and continence of an ordinary Secret. These reasonable Com∣plaints of the Vizier's were by some of his wise Friends, whose Age and Gravity had produced something of Reverence towards their Persons, not without hazard and fear communicated unto the Sultan, the violence of whose Love being with time moderated and abated, he began to consi∣der the reasonableness of this Discourse, and so on a sudden, to the great admiration of all, cast off his Favourite, creating him a Kapugibashee, or chief Porter, with a hundred and fifty Aspers a day Sallary.






The Ruine of 
Samozade,
 the Reis Effendi, or Chief Secretary of State to the Great Vizier.


AND since we have related a Story which partly represents the unconstancy and ty∣ranny of the 
Turkish
 Greatness, it may yet please the Reader, should we add another, tho' a little out of its due order, not less remarkable, and worthy of Record, than the former.


When 
Newhausel
 was besieged, called by the 
Turks
 and 
Hungarians, Oyar,
 and divers attempts made on it in vain; 
Samozade
 the Reis Effendi, with less caution and wisdom than he did usually practise in other matters, wrote a Letter to the Chief Eunuch of the Women, then in the Serag∣lio at 
Adrianople,
 to this effect. That if the Grand Signior desired to have that Fortress taken that was then besieged, he should chuse a more able Captain for his Army than the present Vi∣zier, a Person who had only been educated in a Tekeh, or Colledge, and studied in the specu∣lations of Law, and not in the Oda's of the Ja∣nisaries, or Customes and Exercises of the Camp: And therefore if his Majesty thought fit to chuse another General, he could not cast his eyes on any more able and deserving than 
Ibrahim
 Pasha his Son in Law, a Person qualified for the Office of Vizier, being skilful in all points both of War and Peace. This Eunuch being the person that had succeeded to the former lately exiled, ha∣ving received this Letter, immediately without farther Art or Prologue, read it to the Grand Signior, at which though at first he was startled, yet not as yet weary of the Vizier, but ftill con∣serving a kindness and esteem for him, took the Letter from the Eunuch, and sent it to the Vizier, permitting him to inflict what punishment he judged most agreeable to his own preservation and vindication of honour. The Vizier, having received this Letter, seemed not in the least to be surprized with the perfidiousness of 
Samozade,
 but in a cool temper recollecting all the Applica∣tions and Addresses (which we have mentioned before) at his first entrance into this Supream Office, and judging from thence, that he was not a Person capable of friendship, or a steadiness to his Interest, sent for him, and for 
Ibrahim
 Pa∣sha his Son in Law to his presence, and first ha∣ving upbraided his Treachery, and want of Inte∣grity, in return to all the Caresses and Endea∣vours he had used to win his Faith, caused both their heads to be struck off by the Executio∣ner.


This 
Samozade
 was one of the most wise and best practised Secretaries of State that ever served the 
Ottoman
 Empire, and one whom our 
English
 much lamented, being perfectly acquainted with the particulars of our Capitulations, and Constituti∣on of our Trade; and had not his extraordinary Covetousness blemished his other moral Vertues, he might have been esteemed a man rare, and a Minister not unworthy the greatest Monarch of the World. The Richess he had collected du∣ring the time of his State-Negotiations were in∣credible and immense, for he spared and lost no opportunity of gains, which rendred him the more liable and obnoxious to the stroke of Justice. His Goods were now seised on for service of the Sultan, his Master, as justly confiscated for Trea∣son; his Estate was found to amount unto three Millions of Pieces of Eight in ready Money; he had sixteen hundred Camels, four Hundred

Mules, Six hundred Horses of the best sort, be∣sides ordinary Horses of service proportionable to those of value. In his Chests and Stores were found Four thousand Girdles, or Sashes, of the best sort of Silver, never worn; Seven and twen∣ty pounds weight of Pearl, three hundred Dag∣gers (or 
Turkish
 Hanjars) most set with Dia∣monds and Rubies, besides Ninety Sable Vests, each whereof might be vauled at a Thousand Dollars; his Swords and rich Furniture were without number, or account, with a Cart-Load of the best and finest 
China;
 over and above all this, remained to his Son a Revenue of about Ten pounds Sterling a day, who being condemned to the torture to confess the hidden Riches of his Father, at his first examination discovered One hundred and twenty five thousand Zaichins of 
Venetian
 Gold.






Of an Avania brought upon the 
Dutch
 Nation.


BEfore we proceed on with the Relation of the War in 
Hungary,
 where we for a time shall leave the Great Vizier, it will not be from our purpose to digress a little in recounting certain in∣termediate Accidents, which had reference to our own and the 
Dutch
 Nations Interest at the 
Ottoman
 Court. And first I shall begin with the 
Dutch,
 to whom a considerable trouble and misfortune be∣sel, by means of a Ship of their called the Em∣peror 
Octaviano,
 which designing to lade 
Turks
 Goods at 
Alexandria
 for 
Constantinople,
 had her Licence and Dispatches obtained by means of the 
Holland
 Resident, the Sieur 
Warnero.
 This Ship being accordingly laden at 
Alexandria,
 whereon also the Grand Signior himself had Thirty thou∣sand Dollars Interest, and being ready to depart, was near the Port surprized by the 
Venetian,
 and 
Maltese
 Corsairs, and so taken. This News was posted over land from Grand 
Cairo,
 and the Car∣go sent of the Goods, importing Fourscore and four thousand Dollars, which in the Month of 
June
 arrived at 
Constantinople.
 The persons in∣terested in this loss being many, in the nature of a Tumult applied themselves to the Grand Sig∣nior, and demanded sentence against the 
Dutch
 Resident for reparation, alledging that he had recommended the Ship, and Com∣mander, who had combined with the Cor∣sairs to surprize him, and that the Resident had engaged for the faithfulness of the Captain, who had betrayed their Goods, not endeavouring to defend himself so much as by the shot of one Musket. The Grand Signior being likewise con∣cerned herein himself, was easily perswaded to grant his Order and Sentence, That the loss of all should concern the 
Dutch
 Resident, and his Nation, requiring the Chimacam of 
Constantinople
 to summon the Resident, and intimate his plea∣sure therein, exacting a time limited for the pay∣ment. The Resident being called to several Au∣diences thereupon, denied to have had any hand in the employment of this Ship on the this Voy∣age, and that their Capitulations, to which the Grand Signior had sworn, acquitted him from being responsible for the misdemeanors of any of his Nation, for whose fidelity and good behavi∣vour he had never personally engaged, and thereupon positively refused to make him∣self liable for payment of this Money, to which he was neither obliged by the Law of Nations, nor his own private Act. Notwith∣standing which, the 
Turks
 sentenced the Resident to be liable to make satisfaction, in regard that when the Ship was first freighted, he appeared before the Chimacam at 
Constantinople,
 and being asked whether the Commander of this Ship was an honest man, and one who might be intrusted with such a concernment of the 
Turks;
 his Answer was, That he believed he might, and that he was always esteemed faithful and honest to his Trust: which in the 
Turkish
 Law amount∣ing to as much as if he had said, he would be∣come his security, the Grand Signior confirmed the former sentence against the Resident, and with haste and fury dispatched a Kapugibashee to bring his Person to 
Adrianople;
 where being arrived, and continuing as yet constant to his first Answer, was committed to custody of the Chaousbashee, or Chief of the Pursuivants, where they gave him time until after the Feast of the little 
Biram,
 to consult his own good and security of his Nation within the 
Turkish
 Dominions. The Feast was no sooner ended, but the Grand Sig∣nior sent immediately to know his untimate re∣solution, declaring, That if he continued still obstinate against his Power, he had commanded that he should be committed to that Dungeon which had some few years before been the Lodging of other Christian Ministers. The Re∣sident terrified at the thoughts of such an Impri∣sonment, declined from his former constancy, ingaging to pay the Money in an Hundred and five days time, for no longer would be granted; so violent and unreasonable the 
Turks
 were in their demands, against the Law of Nations, the particular Capitulations, and the common reason and justice of the World. This Money was for the most part taken up by the 
Dutch
 Na∣tion in 
Turky
 at Interest, and afterwards the debt extinguished by Money lent them by the States, sor payment of which a particular Imposition was granted on all Goods brought from 
Turky,
 until the Debt to them was cleared, with an Interest of one 
per cent.
 for the year. By which it may be observed, how little are esteemed the Persons of Christian Representatives in the 
Turkish
 Court; who having proved with what tameness some Princes have taken the affronts offered to the Per∣son of their Ambassador in former times, and now observing with what patience the States of 
Hol∣land
 have sustained the like insolence and injury in their Resident, they may possibly profess their Function sacred, but yet in matters of their own interest will never be induced to vouchsafe them that respect or just treatment which is due to them.






In what state the Affairs of 
England,
 in reference to the 
Turkish
 Court, stood about this time with 
Algier,
 and other Parts of 
Barbary.


IN the preceding year we declared how a Peace was concluded between 
England
 and 
Algier:
 For better confirmation whereof, and se∣curity of our Merchants Estates in the 
Levant,
 upon occasion of a future breach, it was judged necessary by His Majesties Council, That the re∣spective Articles last made and concluded with 
Algier, Tunis,
 and 
Tripoli,
 should be distinctly

described and ratified by the Grand Signior, with this Clause at the Conclusion of each, 
viz.
 
That in case the foregoing Articles were not kept by these his Subjects respectively, but should con∣trary to the meaning thereof through Piracy be broken, that then it should be lawful for the King of 
England
 to chastise those People by his own Arms and Force, without Impeachment or Breach of that good Peace and Amity which Intervenes between His Majesty of Great 
Britain
 and the 
Ottoman
 Emperor:
 And this was sup∣posed might always be a Plea in defence of the 
English
 Nation in 
Turky,
 when at any time His Majesty provoked by the Injuries of those faithless and piratical Nations, should take due Revenge upon them, not only on the Seas, but also on the Land, subverting those very Cities and Fortresses, which are the Nests of Piracies, and the common Chastisement and Gaols of Christendom. When these Articles came to the hands of His Majesties Ambassador the Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 with Orders to have them ratified and subscribed in the manner foregoing, the 
Turkish
 Court was then at 
Adrianople,
 to which place on this occasion the Lord Ambassador made a Journey from his usual Residence at 
Constan∣tinople;
 and having acquainted the 
Chimacam
 with the whole matter, and the Propositions rightly apprehended by him, they were offered, and the next day communicated in behalf of the Ambassador to the Grand Signior, who readily promised compliance with His Majesties desires, ordering the Articles and Conclusion of them, to be ingrossed and prepared for the Imperial Assent. Howsoever some considerable time ran on before they were delivered out, in regard that being matters of State relating to War and Peace, they could not be fully granted without Privity and Knowledg of the Grand Vizier, who was the supreme Counsellor, and therefore we were forced to attend thirty five days before an Express could go and return from the Frontiers with the Answer expected, which was as easily granted by the Vizier, as before it was entertain∣ed by the Grand Signior. On 
August
 5. the Con∣firmation of the several aforesaid Articles were consigned unto my self in presence of our Lord Ambassador by the hands of the 
Chimacam,
 being my self designed in Person to deliver them; for which Service a Frigat of His Majesties Navy at∣tended at 
Smyrna:
 so that very Evening I depart∣ed, and arrived at 
Smyrna:
 the 
15th
 of 
August.


In my Journy from 
Adrianople
 to 
Smyrna,
 omit∣ting the Geography of the Countries, and the pleasent view I had from the top of a Mountain between 
Malagra
 and 
Gallipoli,
 from whence I could survey all the 
Hellespont,
 and at the same time take a prospect of the 
Propontick
 and 
Ionian
 Seas, I shall only relate two passages which be∣fel me in this Journey, not unpleasant to be re∣membred.


The first was at a small Village called 
Ishecle,
 at the foot of the Mountain 
Ida,
 not far from the Ancient 
Iroy,
 now named by the 
Turks Kauzdog,
 which signifies the Mountain of Geese; the Peo∣ple that inhabit here, are of a rude Disposition, great Thieves, and of a wild and savage Nature; at my entry thereupon I was advised by those that were with me, that it was necessary to take Mules to carry my Baggage through the Moun∣tains, and to press the People to convoy me to the next Government by Virtue of a Command the Grand Signior had granted me for the secu∣rity of my Travels; so that arriving at this place by break of day, I went directly with all my Attendance, being about eighteen or nineteen Horse, to the 
Kadi
's House, where knocking hard at the Door, a Servant looked out at the Win∣dow, and spying so great a company, wholly affrighted, ran to his Master, and awakening him with such dreadful news, he had scarce any Soul or Life remaining to render an Answer; for he was one of those, who three times a day was used to take his Dose of 
Opium,
 which gave him a strange kind of Intoxication or Drunkenness; during the Operation of which, men have their Spirits violently moved and agitated, that after∣wards it leaves them so wearied and languid, that in the morning when they first awake, they remain like dead Stocks, their Members are be∣numbed, and can scarce turn from one side to the other. In this conidtion the News of new Guests surprized this 
Kadi,
 when wholly feeble he called to his Servant to reach him his Box of 
Opium,
 of which when he had taken his usual Propotion, and that it began to work, his Life returned a∣gain to him and he began immediately to reco∣ver, so that he had Courage to open his Gates and receive us in: when he had read the Com∣mand, and found no hurt in it, the Man was tran∣sported with Joy and 
Opium,
 and was so kind, chearful, and of a good humour, that I could not but admire at the change; he told me, that he lived in a barbarous Country, and was sorced to use that for Divertisement and as a Remedy of his melancholly hours. I easily perceived the effect it had upon him, for he seemed to me like a Bed∣lam; in which humour he called all his Neigh∣bours about him, and after a wise Consultation, they provided me with two Mules, and five Men on foot with rusty Muskets without Powder or Shot, to guide and guard me through the Moun∣tains. I had not travelled two Miles before all my Guard were stollen aside, and taking advan∣tage of the Woods and Mountains, were fled from me, so that I found my self with no other than my own People, in an unbeaten Path, and a way unfrequented; the man excepted who drove the Mules, who for sake of his Beasts was obliged to a farther attendance. We travelled in this manner through the Mountains about four hours, when near a Village called 
Suratnee,
 we met one of the Principal men on Horse-back, carrying a flead Mutton behind him, which upon Exami∣nation we discovered to be carried for a Bribe to the 
Kadi
 of 
Isheclee,
 that so he would be his Friend, and favour him in his Cause: And further upon inquiry, finding that our Entertainment was likely to be mean at 
Suratnee,
 we forced the Gentleman to return with us, and to sell us his Mutton at the market-price, and so for that time we disappointed our 
Kadi
 of his Fee or Reward: and being upon the rise of a Hill descending to 
Suratnee,
 so that the People could see us at a distance, they like true Sons of 
Kauz-dog
 for∣sook their Habitations, and fled, which we per∣ceiving posted after them, and catched two of their men, whom we brought under Shart, (or the Country-mans Oath, which they account very sacred, and will by no means break) to be true and faithful to us, to serve, and not leave us for so long time as we should remain in their Village, and accordingly these men were not only serviceable, but diligent: so soon as they discovered me to be one who would pay justly for what I took, and was not a 
Turkish
 Aga, or Servant of Great men who harrass the People, and take their Service and Meat on account of free Quarter, the whole Village returned again from their places of Refuge amidst the Woods, so that I neither wanted Provisions nor Atten∣dance.




Another passage happened unto me of better Civility and Entertainment in the Plains of 
Per∣gamus,
 where not many Miles from that Ancient City. I arrived about six a Clock in the Evening at certain Tents or Cots of Shepherds, being on∣ly Hurdles covered with Hair-cloth, lined within with a sort of loose Felt, a sufficient defence against the Sun and Rain; the 
Turks
 call these People 
Euruchs,
 and are Shepherds who with their Wives, Children and Cattel, Live and Inha∣bit, where they most delight, or like the Shepherds of Ancient days, remove their dwellings to those Places where they find most plenty of Water and Pasture. Amongst these Cors so soon as I alight∣ed from my Horse, I was received and saluted by the Aga or Chief, with great Humanity and Kindness; for so soon as he understood who I was, and that I was imploied in publick Affairs, he presently places me under some neighbouring Trces, and called for Carpets and Cushions to sit on, which were more Fine and Rich, than agreed with the outward appearance of Men wholly unaccustomed to a City-life. After some Dis∣course had with me, which I remember to have been very Courteous and Inquisitive of my Condi∣tion and Business, he provided Provender for our Horses, and in a short time ordered Bread and Eggs to be brought for to stay my Stomach, supposing that hard Travels had sharpened my Appetite. About an hour after that, he invited all my Company, and then we fed very plenti∣fully of several Dishes, which the good Hous∣wives had dressed within the Precincts of their poor Tents; whilst the Shepherds had in the Field killed a lat Kid, and were then roasting it whole at the suel of a Tree which they had fell'd; this Roast-meat they cut into quarters, and with Bread and Salt put it into a Linen-cloth, deliver∣ing it to one of my Servants for our Breakfast the next morning. Having thus well refreshed my self with the Charity of these good Shepherds, I arose with the Moon about eleven a Clock at Night; but before my Departure, I demanded what I had to pay; to which the generous Shep∣herd replied, That my Acceptance was a suffici∣ent Payment, for that all Men were obliged to be Civil and Hospitable to Men who travelled the World like me for publick Service; and withal desired me to speak well, wheresoever I came, of such poor Men who led their Lives in the Fields, who were instructed in these Principles, 
viz.
 to hurt none, and to be humane and helpful to all Mankind.


In a few days after my Arrival at 
Smyrna,
 I imbarked on the 
Bonaventure
 Frigat, Command∣ed by Capt. 
Berkeley,
 afterwards Sir 
William Berke∣ley,
 and shaping our course first for 
Tripoli
 in 
Barbary,
 we came to Anchor before the Town the 
29;
 and immediately going ashore, we were conducted to the Presence of the Pasha of that Country, whom I acquainted with the occasion of this Address, delivering into his hands two Copies of the late Treaty of Peace, one confirmed by the Hand and Seal of His Majesty our Gracious So∣veraign, and the other of the Sultan; both which he received with singular Respect and Re∣verence, promising to maintain the Peace sacred and inviolable; and so being dismissed fairly from him, we speedily repaired on Board, and setting Sail again that Night with a prosperous Gale, we anchored in the 
Bay
 of 
Tunis
 on the second of 
September;
 and the next day being landed, we in the first place made our Addresses to the 
Dey,
 who bears the Office of Prince or Governor in chief, tho in the 
Arabian
 Language the word signifies as much as Uncle, to whom I tendred the Confirmations of Peace in the same form and manner as before at 
Tripoli:
 the 
Dey
 received them with Respect and Honour, promising to continue the Peace; that part which was from our King, he received himself; but that which was from the Grand Signior he advised me to deliver to the Pasha; for coming from his Master, it might more nearly concern him than any other; the Pasha having seen and read, the Hattesheriff returned it again to the 
Dey
 to be placed amongst the Records and Registers of the Divan, and so making a Visit to all the great Men in Power, giving them notice of our Business, that so none might take Exceptions, or judg themselves neg∣lected for want of Addresses; we the same Night departed from 
Tunis,
 and proceeded forward in our Voyage to 
Algier.
 But before we arrive there, I have time to acquaint the Reader of the Pestilential Fever which then affected our whole Ship. When we departed from 
Smyrna,
 we had fourteen Sick of the Autumnal Distemper, but be∣fore ten Days, we had ninety five out of a hun∣dred and sixty Men, which lay Sick on their Beds and Hamocks; and we seared so general a Weak∣ness, that we should not have had Strength suffi∣cient to have Sailed our Ship; for I think there was scarce any amongst us in perfect Health. But God shewed his Strength in our Weakness, so that in ten Days, having buried nine of our Men, he was pleased with the change of our Climate, to renew our Health, and in Answer to our Prayers, as it were by a Miracle, to restore us to all the Health, and Strength, and Comfort, that we could desire.


At 
Algier,
 that Den of Thieves, and Harbour of Faithless Men, and all Impiety, we arrived the 
10th
 of 
September,
 where immediately with assistance of the Consul, we designed to tender the Confirmations of the Peace unto the Divan, then the supreme and Absolute Power. But whilst we imagined the Peace firm, and improbable that those Articles which were concluded and agreed but the last Year, should so easily and soone be forgotten; we found the Scene of Affairs greatly altered, and fears of an unexpected Rup∣ture; for the Ships of 
Algier
 roving in the Seas, had lately sent in nine small 
English
 Vessels with∣out a Pass from the Duke of 
York,
 for want of which, they pretended by a new Agreement they ought to be prize; of which, six by means of the Consul being released, three only remained under Detention at our Arrival; when immediately we applied our selves to 
Shaban
 Aga, a 
Spanish
 Renegado, then Cape or Chief of their confused Divan; to him we first disclosed the import of our Message, and shewed the Confirmations of our Peace subscribed by the King of 
England,
 and the Grand Signior. After he had read them, a Divan was called, and the Confirmations openly published; at which time it was assented and agreed, that the Articles ought to be maintained, and the Peace continued; but to have this esta∣blished by firm Authority, it was farther referred to the Great Divan, which is a Grand Assembly of the People, who usually meet together every 
Saturday
 of the Week. In the mean time, ha∣ving had an Acquaintance formerly with the Pa∣sha of this Place, sent hither by the Grand Signi∣or, we were desirous to make him a Visit, the better to discover in what nature they Honour and own the 
Ottoman
 Port; but before we could be admitted to his Presence, we were obliged to demand License of the Divan, which they granted with some unwillingness, and with the caution of two or three Witnesses of our Discourse. We were scarce welcomed into the Room, and the usu∣al

Salutations passed, before we were interrupted by the Officers, and not suffered to proceed; so little esteem they made of the Pasha, to whom not∣witstanding they allowed twelve thousand Dol∣lars a Year for his Maintenance, so as to carry the fair and specious outside at the 
Ottoman
 Court, of receiving a Pasha from thence; but were so far from permitting him to intermeddle in the Government that they confined him like a Priso∣ner not suffering him to stir Abroad without Per∣mission and Consent of the Divan, and that ve∣ry seldom, tho he often pleaded his Health was much impaired by his Restraint, and craved Enlargement, rather for necessity than his Pleasure.


The Day of the great Divans Assembly being come, the Confirmations of the Peace was again read, and well approved, and so laid up in the Repository of their Writings; and promise made us for Releasement of our Ships. But let us now observe the levity and unsteadiness of this popu∣lar Government; for being the day following appointed to receive our dispatches,
 and discharge of the three Ships; there arose unexpectedly at the Divan, certain Scruples and Jealousies amongst them, which immediately quashed all our Nego∣tiations, and instead of confirming the Peace, produced a War. For the Divan being met, they were afraid to release the Ships, lest the Sol∣diers who had sent them in, being then abroad, should call them to question for it at their re∣turn; and not to release them, might be an oc∣casion of a War; which not succeeding accord∣ing to their desire, the causers thereof might be called into question, and punished for it; of which still remained the fresh memory of late Examples. In this 
Dilemma
 of their Affairs, they resolved to make the Act herein, to be of general and publick Assent; and to that end they Assembled a Grand Divan, calling the Captains of Ships and Gallies, then in Fort, unto their Council; who without Hesitation, or questioning other Matters, decla∣red, that the three 
English
 Ships were lawful Prize; and that it was no longer requisite to maintain the second Article of freeing Strangers Goods on 
English
 Vessels; it neither being the design nor interest of 
Algier,
 to benefit all Chri∣stendom by their Peace with 
England:
 this Sen∣tence was followed by the whole Rabble of the Divan, with cry and noise; to which the wiser sort, notwithstanding our Plea, and Reasons to the contrary, which lasted for full two hours, were forced to condescend, and concur in the same Vote. Howsoever by Importunity, and some∣thing of the force of Reason, which in the most blind and obscure minds of Men, hath something of forcible Violence; we obtained the release of the three Ships, upon discharge of the Strangers Goods, and payment of their Freight. But the second Article of Peace, forbidding the search of 
English
 Ships for Strangers Estates, or their Persons, was declared null, and no longer to be maintained; nor the Peace likewise, unless His Majesty would accept it upon that Con∣dition, to which end, they wrote this following Letter.






The Letter of the Government of 
Algier
 to His Majesty.


GReat and Christian Prince, King of
 Eng∣land. 
After Health and Peace,
 &c. 
Since we have made Peace with You, unto this day there have no Injuries nor Damages been offered by Ʋs. Your Ships that have been as Prizes, for Your sake we have let free, not offering them the least Injury, nor diminishing any thing from them in the least, until such time as Your Consul gave Ʋs Counter-passes, that what Ships were found with them, to be let free, and those that are without them, to be brought in: And we have found divers without them, which for Friendship sake which is between Ʋs, We have let go free. Now from henceforth, if that we find any of our Enemies Goods or Men in Your Ships, we shall take the Goods and Men, paying the Freight to their Port. And we shall desire you, as soon as you shall receive this our Letter, that you will send your answer hereunto, for we shall think it long until we receive it from You; and for the future, what Ships shall be brought in without a Pass-port, we shall take them, and detain them here, until such time as we have an answer from You; which pray send without delay. The end of the Month
 Sefar, 1074. 
which was then in the Month of
 Septem∣ber, 1633.


In this manner a second War broke forth in the space of two Years, by which a Person may judg of the inconstancy and unsteady humour of this People; who but three days before, gave us all the evidence of fair Correspondence and Friend∣ship; and it is probable, that when they entered the Divan, they came not with Resolutions or Thoughts of War; however accidents and occa∣sional Discourses each with other, following the cry and humour of some rude Savage Person, which leads the rest, carried all things with Vio∣lence towards a Breach: So that by what preced∣ed, and from these following Reasons, it may be concluded impossible to maintain a firm and last∣ing Peace with this People.


First, Because these People are composed of the worst Sort or Scum of the 
Turks,
 and worst of Christians, which are Renegadoes, who have renounced God and their Country, and a Ge∣neration of People who have no Religion, nor Honour; Peace cannot be longer expected or maintained, than fear or interest enjoins them to compliance.


Secondly, The Government of 
Algier
 being popular, and in the hands of a vile Commonal∣ty, who are ignorant Persons, guided by no Rules or Principales; unsteady in all their Coun∣cils, not resolving or consulting any thing be∣fore they enter the Divan, do commonly fol∣low that Resolution, which they perceive to be carried on with the greatest noise; and therefore are a People not capable of Peace or Friend∣ship.


Thirdly, This irrational Commonalty is over∣awed by a heady Soldiery, who are only then affrighted into a Peace, whilst a stronger force compels them into good Manners. But when that Power and Punishment is withdrawn, they again harden their hearts like 
Pharaoh,
 and then when the Temptation of rich Merchant-men presents it self, their natural Inclination to Piracy returns, and their Covetousness again prevails, an then they curse the Peace, and the makers of it, and without remorse break their Articles, and their Faith, having neither Honour nor Con∣science to restrain them. Wherefore unless the

Heads of the chief Causers of the War he given in satisfaction, or Money paid for the expence, and Hostages given for security of it, it can never be expected that a lasting Peace should be maintain∣ed with this People; the Proof of which, hath been made appear by the sequel of affairs, and by those Wars which have ensued since this time. And now let us return to the Wars in 
Hungary,
 and become Spectators of those Transactions, which were then the general Concernment of the Eastern and Western World.






The Proceedings of the War in 
HUNGARY.


WE lest the Grand Vizier on his March to∣wards the parts of 
Hungary,
 with an Ar∣my, as computed, to consist of Eighty Thousand fighting men, and of about Seventy Thousand designed for Pioniers and other necessary services of the Army. In this march the Vizier out of design to slacken the warlike Preparations of the Christians,
 and to discover the inclinations of the Emperor to Peace, desired a Treaty, that if possible, matters might be reduced to terms of ac∣commodation. The Resident of 
Germany,
 was then in the Army, but he, not being impowered singly for any such Treaty, the Baron of 
Goez,
 then with 
Ali
 Pasha at 
Temeswar,
 was sent for, and being arrived, were both called into the Viziers Tent at 
Belgrade,
 to whom it was proposed, That in Case the Emperor desired a Peace, he should resign into the hands and possession of the Sultan 
Zekelhyd, Zatmar, Clausenburg,
 alias 
Colosvar,
 with the late built Fort of Count 
Serini,
 without which, no Sacrifice could appease the anger, and give a stop to the progress of the 
Ottomon
 Arms. Whilst these Propositions by Post were dispatched to 
Vienna,
 the Vizier proceeded in his Journey to 
Strigonium,
 now called 
Gran,
 to which placer, af∣ter sixteen Days time, the Messenger returned with an Answer from the Emperor, which showed an inclination towards an acceptance of Peace on the terms proposed, but with instructions to his Ministers to moderate by their discreet manage∣ment (what was possible) the rigour of the de∣mands. For by reason of the disaffection of the 
Hungarians,
 whom the Emperor had lately dis∣gusted by demolishing several of their Churches, and discountenancing the 
Protestant
 Religion which they professed; and by reason of the Phlegm of the Princes of 
Germany,
 whom diffe∣rent interests made slow and unactive in their preparations against the common Enemy; the Emperor was wholly unprovided to oppose the viloence of this over-flowing Torrent, and be∣came an unequal match for the 
Ottoman
 Force. The 
Turks
 perceiving that the 
Germans
 began to condescend, and yield to any conditions, which might purchase their quiet,
 started a farther de∣mand of Fifty thousand Florins of Yearly Tribute, and two Millions of Crowns for expence of the War, to be paid by the Emperor to the Sultan. These proud and unexped Proposals startled not a little the Baron of 
Goez,
 who readily made an∣swer, that he clearly perceived now, that there were no intentions to a Peace, since the Vizier was pleased to make the matter so difficult and impossible, for that it were as easy to bring Hea∣ven and Earth to meet, as his Master to meet the G Signior in the Concession of this particular. These extravagant demands a wakened the Impe∣rial Court, who now observing the 
Turks
 without their Vizard, to march hastily to surprize them, vigorously roused themselves to make that con∣venient provision and defence by War, which the straitness of time permitted them: So that in the first place they Assembled a Diet at 
Ratisbonne,
 where it was resolved to raise four Armies, the first for the Guard and defence of 
Moravia
 and 
Silesia,
 under the Command of Count 
Susa,
 a Native of 
Rochel.
 The second under the Com∣mand of Count 
Raimond Monteculi,
 for safety of 
Raab, Newhausel,
 and 
Komorra,
 and the Frontiers of 
Hungary.
 The third under Command of Count 
Nicholas Serini
 for defence of 
Croatia.
 The fourth composed solely of 
Hungarians,
 command∣ed by the Palatine of that Country, which they reported to consist of Thirty thousand fighting men. Fifthly, It was ordered that all Garisons should be well provided of Victuals and Ammu∣nition; and that the Inhabitants of 
Vienna
 should take into every House a provision for a years maintenance, and such as were not able at their own Cost, were to abandon their Dwellings. And in the mean time the Villages round about were demolished, to the great amazement and confu∣sion of the People.


The 
Turks
 now bearing in their thoughts no∣thing but War, began to design and chalk out the best order and method for its prosecution. The principal places then in eye of the Vizier, were 
Raab,
 and 
Komorra,
 Fortresses of considerable strength, maintained and defended by Souldiers of known prowess and conduct, and provided equally with all sorts of Ammunition and Provi∣sions, agreeable to such considerable Bulwarks and Walls, not only of the 
German
 Empire but (I may say) of all Christendom 
Raab.
 called by the 
Ita∣lians,
 
Javarin,
 and by the 
Turk, Yanick,
 is scituated in a plain, level, and Champion Country; the Town it self very regular and compact, the Fortifications most exact according to the new model. and much improved in its strength since the recovery of it from the hands of the 
Turk,
 by whom it was once taken, in the year 1594. it hath its name from the River 
Rab,
 on which it is seated just on the meeting of the 
Danube.
 
Komorra
 is a stronger Fortress, erected in an Island of the River 
Da∣nube,
 called after the same name, which hath often been attempted by the 
Turks,
 but with ill success; at both which places I have personally been, and viewed them with much delight. Wherefore the Vizier considering the strength. and difficulty of these places, resolved to take due and mature consideration before he engaged himself in any enterprize, and to that end assem∣bled together in Consultation with him the most ancient and grave men, that were Natives of the Country; some of these being such who had lived in 
Rab,
 been Slaves there,
 and had well marked and observed the strength of that Fortress both as to Nature and Art, assured the Vizier, That the Work was immense, difficult, and dangerous, and not to be accomplished in the space of one Summer; and that the Winters in that Countrey were very cold and rigid, and ill agreeing with the temperament of the Asiatick Souldiery. The Vizier, though the farther considered that his Souldiers were as yet young and unexperienced, and that a foyl encountred at the first Enterprize, might be a discouragement from following the con∣tinued Tract and Course of this War, which must be sustained with labour and patience, and that to withdraw his Forces in the Winter would be a dishonour to the 
Ottoman
 Arms, a blemish in the beginning to his own Reputation, and an encou∣ragement of the Enemy: Howsoever, having a

violent Ambition and Desire to become Master of 
Rab,
 he could not rest satisfied in this Counsel before he had consulted with 
Ali
 Pasha, and other Pashaws of the Frontier Countries, who duly considering the matter as it stood, concur∣red in the same judgment that was formerly made of the difficulty of this design; and herein they were the more strongly confirmed, by the re∣port of certain 
Hungarians,
 whom some parties of Horse, under the Command of 
Ali
 Pasha, ro∣ving and sallying out near the Walls of 
Rab,
 had surprized and taken, who being brought bound before the Vizier, related, That the Town was well provided with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions, and the Garison reinforced by Count 
Montecuculi
 with supply of four Thousand men, and in this manner reported the Work as difficult as the 
Turks
 of the Countrey had formerly signi∣fied. This relation confirmed by so many hands, diverted the Viz er from this Design: for before that time imagining it a place which might easily be subdued, he proposed to himself, without any interruption, a clear and undisturbed March to the Gates of 
Vienna,
 which he swallowing also in his thoughts, hoped by his own success to repair the shame of 
Solyman
's flight from the Walls of that City, and besides the glory of forcing the Emperor from his Imperial Seat, he should atone for the sin of the 
Ottomon
 Cow∣ardice, and be the first who undertook to mend the actions, and outvie the prowess of the most magnificent, and most successful of their Sultans. But the Ambition of this grand design giving way to necessity, and to those other im∣pediments which obstructed it,
 after due and mature Consultation, 
Newhausel,
 called by the 
Hungariaus Oywar,
 was fixed upon as the place to be first attempted, and held up to the eye of the Souldiery, as the reward and prize of their va∣lour and hazard. Wherefore Boats were pro∣vided, and Planks, and Timbers for a Bridge to pass the 
Danube,
 which the 
Turks
 in a few days, according to their usual expeditions, had raised; so that the Army both Horse and Foot began to transport themselves as fast as was possible to the other side, but the multitudes crouded over in that disorder and haste, that Three or four Thou∣sand men had scarce passed the River before the Bridge was so broken and shattered that some time was necessarily required to repair it, before the rest of the Army durst adventure to follow their Companions. The Approach of the 
Turkish
 Army alarmed all that side of 
Hungary,
 but espe∣cially the Inhabitants of 
Newhausel;
 who ob∣serving the 
Turks
 to bend their Course that way, plainly fore-saw the Storm of VVar to be break∣ing on them: The News also of the fall of the Bridge, and thereby the Separation of a∣bout Four thousand 
Turks
 from the Body of the Army,
 was brought in by the Countrey people, who forsaking their Villages, fled for succour to the stronger Fortress of 
Newhausel.
 Hereupon 
Forcatz,
 the Governour of 
Newhausel,
 a valiant and experienced Souldier, though esteemed by the 
Turks
 unfortunate, taking this Alarm, judged that this occasion of cutting off that part of the 
Turkish
 Army which had past the River, was in no wise to be omitted, and therefore assembled a Council of VVar, which consisted of all the prin∣cipal Officers and Commanders of the Garison; (a∣mongst which was Colonel 
Volter,
 that command∣ed the Four thousand men, lately sent to rein∣force the Town) he declared that his Opinion was, immediately to make a Sally on that part of the 
Turkish
 Army, which had already passed the River, before the Bridge was repaired for Transportation of the others; which endea∣vours, by God's Assistance, succeeding well, might not only discourage the Enemy, but be a means to divert them from their present design upon their City. This Advice, thought he pres∣sed with heat of Argument, and violence of Speech, yet could it not prevail with the rest of the Council, which seemed wholly averse there∣unto, especially 
Volter,
 who declared, That his Commission was not to fight in the Field, but to conserve himself within the Walls, for mainte∣nance of his Garison: Some days passed in this Dispute, whilst 
Forcatz
 growing more eager and hot on this design, used opprobrious Terms, and expressions of infamy towards the other Officers, accusing all such of Cowardice and Treason, who refused to concur with him in this Enterprize and advantage on the Enemy, which Heaven seemed to reach out to them for their Delive∣rance, if their wisdom and courage afforded them only will and grace to lay hold on the op∣portunity. These sharp words and resolution of the Governour provoked the minds of the Offi∣cers to a condescention, and thereupon about Eight thousand men of Choice, and approved Souldiers, well armed with strout hearts, and hard Jron; not suffering themselves to be up∣braided with such reproach, in the silence of the Night, under the Conduct of 
Forcatz,
 (their own Commander, 
Volter
 remaining in the Town) took their way towards the 
Turkish
 Camp, and being armed with Firelocks, marched with all privacy, without lighted Matches, or sound of Drum or Trumpet. But whilst the forgoing Dispute lasted, the 
Turks
 had transported the gross of their Army over the River, and then lay on her Banks,
 resting securely undre their Pavillions. The Christians approaching near the 
Turkish
 Camp, with the first twilight, and dawnign of the Morning, (perceiving the Enemy unprovid∣ed, but not discovering their Force) dealt at first on-set, their shot most plentifully amongst them, and proceeding amidst the thickest, cutting, shooting, killing, and making havock of all be∣fore them. The amazed 
Turks
 having many of their Companions brought to their last sleep, before themselves were throughly awake, and some flying before they discovered the reason or the danger, an Alarm was given by the confu∣sed murmur of 
Allah, Allah,
 and that the Chri∣stians were upon them, reached the farthest Quarters of the 
Turkish
 Army, which immediate∣ly put themselves into Battalia, and order of fighting, whilst this handful of 
Germans
 proceeded forwards, dealing their blows amongst their Ene∣mies, cutting the Cords of the Tents, and destroying all before them. But by this time the 
Turks
 ha∣ving put themselves into a posture of Defence, the Horse and Foot came marching in a Body, extending their Wings in the from of a half Moon, so as to enclose this small number,
 and on all sides to assail them. The 
Germans
 seeing this formidable sight approach, and no safety in flight, encouraged each other to sell their Lives at as dear a rate as they could; all hopes of escape seeming desperate, they sought with that cou∣rage and obstinacy as amazed the 
Turks,
 and yielded not until their Spirits fainted with labour, and their Swords were blunted by the Bodies of their Enemies. The Count 
Forcatz
 hardly es∣caped, but by the help of his Horse, with some few others, fled to 
Newhausel,
 which unwillingly received him, wishing that the rashness of his Counsels had only proved his own destruction, and not involved so many brave and innocent Souldieres, who were only unfortunate for being

 over-powered by his command and perswasions: The rest overwhelmed with multitudes, yielded; for though they behaved themselves beyong the power and courage of men, yet the numbers of the Enemy prevailed at length over these Chri∣stian Champions, whose Gallantry was more eminent and conspicuous in being subdued, than the Glory of their Enemies in the Victory. In this Skirmish few escaped, amongst which Four hundred Gentlemen were slain, and about eigh∣teen hundred Prisoners reported to be taken, a bad 
Omen
 at the beginning of this War. This Rout being given, the 
Turks
 triumphed in Blood,
 and suc∣cess and returned with their Captives, and Tro∣phies back to 
Strigonioum,
 where the Vizier mount∣ing a Throne of State and Majesty, treated these valiant Souldiers, not like men of War, or Captives takrn in open Field, but as a Judge con∣demned them to dye by the hand of the Hang∣man or Executioner, passing a formal Sentence of Death upon them, as if they had been Thieves or Assassinates arrested by the hand of Justice. The Sentence being passed, and the 
Turkish
 Army drawn up, these valiant Christian; were ranked in order and file to dye, who had so lately with Swords in their hands, ranged themselves in Battel against their Enemy; and so soon as the Executioners sell to their work, and the horrid Massacre was begun, the Guns were fired, and the whoule Camp resounded with barbarous Mu∣sick and shouts. In the mean while the most su∣perstitious amongst them triumphed, that God was now destroying the Infidels, manifesting the truth of their Prophet, and doing his own work; not unlike the assertions and doctrines of those pretenders to Religion, who have always hal∣lowed and excused their cruelties with the Name of God, and sanctified the blood they have shed by making their Enemies 
Amalekites,
 and by pre∣tence of false Lights and Prophecies countenan∣ced their most impious Sacriledge in God's Churches, and Invasions of their Neighbours Rights. The merciless Executioners had pro∣ceeded to bereave of life about Thirteen or Four∣teen hundred persons, the Vizier standing a Spectator with zeal to his Sect and Prophet, un∣til the 
Turkish
 Souldiery who inhabit the Borders, glutted with so much cruelty towards their Neighbours, began to murmur, and at length to speak aloud, That to destroy Captives in cold Blood was an action against the Law of Arms, and might be revenged by their Enemies with like examples of cruelty, since none there pre∣sent, being all Souldiers, were secure from the misfortunes and mutabilities of War. The Vi∣zier over-hearing these whispers of the Soldiery, gave a stop to the cruelty of the Executioners, and sent such as survived to different Prisons in 
Buda, Ad
ianople,
 and 
Constantinople.
 I have seen not far from 
Strigonium
 the heads of these Wretches thus miserably butchered, thrown up into a heap, the Beards and Hair of those that lay undermost still growing; the Earth which sucked in their blood, became thence stenched up and barren, and the white bones and carkasses of their bodies lay dispersed and scattered in a large Field; so that I could not but call to mind the massacred Legions under the Conduct of 
Quintilius Varus
 in 
Germany;
 and those 
albentiaossa,
 and the bar∣barous Altars flowing with the 
Roman
 blood; and I could as passionately fancy to have seen the an∣gry 
Germans
 return to appease the Ghost; of their Country-men with decent Burial, as I was sen∣sible of 
Germanicus
 in zeal, when he adventu∣red to contaminate his Augurs Office by his too forward Humanity and Religion towards his Country and Parentage. But this cruelty of the Vizier was recompensed by Count 
Serini
 not long after, who having had some success against 
Ar∣naut
 Pasha and his Army, of whom he had slain six hundred men, and such as he took alive, in cold blood he dismebred and tortured, and having of some cut off their hands, and plucked out their eyes, sent them to report the reason of this inhumane and merciless usage to the Vizier.


In the mean time 
Forcatz
 advised General 
Montecuculi
 the Governour of 
Rab
 of this defeat, and how the flower and strength of his Garison was destroyed; and that if he were not imme∣diately supplied, he should be forced to abandon his Fort, and leave all to the fury and mercy of the Enemy.
 Hereupon a Thousand 
Germans
 were sent for succour with all sorts of Ammuni∣nition and Provisions requisite; but the 
Turks
 after their Triumph before 
Strigonium,
 returned and marched on so fast towards 
Newhausel,
 ha∣ving passed the 
Danube,
 that certainly they had intercepted this Recruit, had not 
Forcatz
 amused thier minds, and for a while stopped their hasty approach, by advancing a white Flag to the top of the Walls, as if he had had a design of Treaty and Surrender of the Town upon Conditions: So that here the 
Turkish
 Army made a halt, and for Three or Four hours time remained with ex∣pectation when Conditions for the Surrender should come; every one wondering to see the Flag of Truce erected, and so much silence in the Fort, and yet no appearance of a Message. In this interval and breathing of time, the Suc∣cour safely arriving within the Town, the white Flag was changed to colours of defiance, to the great astonishment and anger of the 
Turks:
 Whereupon the Vizier drawing somewhat nearer, began to intrench and begirt the Town on the 
4th
 of 
August,
 which was defended by three prin∣cipal Officers, 
viz
 Count 
Adam Forcatz,
 the Marquess 
Pio
 an 
Italian,
 and one 
Lucatelli
 an old and experienced Souldier. But the Vizier, be∣fore he would offer any violence to the Town,
 thought fit to summon them in this stile: 
That through the Grace of God and the Miracles of our Prophet, who is a Son of both Worlds, and by whom there is Happiness and Glory, I that am the first of the Council, and General of the mest Mighty Emperor of the Turks, that is the King of all Kings on the Earth, To you
 Adam Forcatz 
that are the Chief among all the Nobility of
 Hungary, 
do make known, That through the Command of my most Gra∣cious Lord, the most terrible, the most puissant, and most mysterious Emperor, I am come with his Forces before
 Newhausel 
to reduce it to his Obe∣dience. Wherefore if you shall deliver up the place to Us, you shall have liberty to march out with what belongs unto you from the highest to the lowest, and he that would rather stay shall keep his Goods and Estate: But if you will not yield, we will take it by force, and every man of you, from the highest to the lowest, shall be put to the Sword. If the
 Hun∣garians 
did but know the good intentions of the mighty Emperor, they and their childrian would bless God for him. Peace be to the Obedient.
 The Christians not submitting to these Summons, the 
Turks
 continued to make their nearer approaches, and being now at a convenient distance, raised two great Batteries, on which they mount∣ed a Hundred Pieces of Cannon, and from thence made such constant shot as shaked the Churches, and almost levelled the most lofty Buildings with their Foundations. The 
14th.
 of 
August
 was designed for a general storm, so that before break of day Faggots and Rub∣bish

were brought to fill the Ditches, and scaling Ladders to ascend the Wails; but though the 
Ottoman
 Forces were puissant,
 and their Assault they made fierce and brisk, yet they were re∣ceived with that gallantry by the Defendants, that the Trenches early in the Morning were filled with the Carkasses of the Dead, and at last the 
Turks
 forced to give over the As∣sault, with the loss of great numbers of their men.


The Siege still continuing, and the 
Turks
 an∣gry, and inflamed with the disgrace of their late foil, endeavoured to redeem their Honour by their Attempts, filling up the Ditches with Rub∣bish, serving themselves therein of the Christian Captives lately taken: The Defendants on the other side, by the dictates of Nature and Reason, were directed to maintain their Houses, Wives, and Children from rapine and violence of an un∣just Enemy; so that both Parties moving from different Principles, used all the Art and Valour possible for destruction each of other: The noise of Cannon from the Forts raised by the 
Turks,
 re∣sounded continually in the Air, and from the Town the shot were often so fortunately placed, that daily, besides great numbers of ordinary Soldiers, many Persons of Note and Quality amongst the 
Turks
 were slain.


But the 
Turks
 having before this Town a grea¦ter number of Soldiers than either could come to fight, or what was thought necessary to subdue it the Vizier selected from his Army a very con∣siderable Force to enter and spoil 
Moravia
 and 
Austria;
 of these were Six hundred 
Tartars
 join¦ed to a strong Force of 
Turks,
 who by the gui∣dance of the Natives passing the River 
Waegh.
 spoiled and destroyed all the Country round about, carrying men, women, and children into slavery, leaving what was not conveniently por¦table, in ashes. But in passing the River, they incountred a considerable Body of 
Germa
s,
 both Horse and Foot, and being opposed by them, were at first forced to retreat again over the Ri∣ver with the loss of about Eight hundred Janisa∣ries; but the next Day renewing the F
ght with better courage and success, passed the River in despight of the Imperialists, whom they pursued almost as far as 
Presburg.
 
hese 
Turks
 were se∣conded by a greater Body of 
Tartars,
 every one after the manner of his Country, leading one or two spare Horses, made Inroads within five miles of 
Vienna,
 destroying and laying in ashes all places before them; things there resembling Dooms-day, consumed with fire, and not so much almost lest as marks or appearance of ha∣bitation.


These Troubles and Confusions in 
Hungary
 were the talk and amazement of all Christendom,
 and indeed little more they were than talk; for the Christian Princes farther distant, as less concerned stood at a gaze, expecting the issue of that Trea∣ty which was between the King of 
France,
 and the Pope; and the Princes of 
Germany
 (whatso∣ever was resolved at the Diet) like men surprized, knew not what Succours to afford: Some thought it now time to treat with the Emperor, and reco∣ver the Rights and Priviledges they thought their due, and to condescend to no Terms of confede∣ra e assistance against the common Enemy, un∣less with advantageous considerations to their State; and all in general acted with that negli∣gence and coldness, as if only the State of 
Au∣stria,
 and not the common Cause of 
Germany
 had been concerned The Election of a Gene∣ral for the Imperial Army admitting long de∣bate, was another retardment to the Prepara∣tions for the War; the Duke of 
Brandenburg
 was nominated, and sollicited to accept the supream Command; but the Title of being General of the Empire, or the Imperial Army, was a dispute undeterminable, and a difficulty not to be over∣come: And though the Enemy had passed their Frontiers, and triumphed in their Possessions, and threatned the subve
sion of all Christendom, Vet Jealousies, Niceties, and aery Formalities took up all the time; so that at length their Councils had no other reasult than an increase of Animosities and Difficulties amongst them∣selves.
 The Emperor also terrified with the Siege of 
Newhausel,
 and the near In∣cursions of the 
Turks,
 abandoned his City of 
Vienna,
 carrying with him the Records and greatest o
 his Richess to 
Lintz,
 to the greater apprehension, discouragement, and fear of the whole Country in general, and was an act which might have produced very fatal effects had not the Winter approached, and the progress of the Infidels been interrupted by the Valour, Vigi∣lance, good Fortune, and Conduct of Count 
Serini,
 who in requital of those Incursions the 
Turks
 made into the Christian Territories, en
ed the 
Turkish
 Borders near 
Komorra,
 and there with Fire and Sword destroyed all before him, de∣feated a Party of about Three thousan Ja∣nisaries, taking from them a good Booty of money and Provisions designed lor Relief of the Leagure before 
Newhausel.


During these varieties of success, the 
Turks
 still continued the Siege, and having now made a breach, and almost filled the graft with rubbish, Faggots and other implements, attempted a se∣cond storm on the 
28th
 and 
29th
 of 
August,
 but were repulsed with an extraordinary loss, by the couragious Gallantry of the Defendants:
 On the 
9th
 of 
September
 was given another more fu∣rious Assault, every Pasha leading his men in the Front, so that the Action this Day was so vio∣lently and couragiously performed, that the 
Turkish
 Ensign was advanced to the top of the Rampire of the Fort 
Frederick,
 where both sides coming to handy blows, the dispute continued a long time, but the courage of the Defendants at length prevailing, the 
Turks
 were driven head∣long rom the Walls, and their Colours wrested from them with the loss of about Five thousand men, and Four hundred Christians. Though the 
Turks
 were much abated in their courage by this days work, yet the Vizier obstinately continued the Siege, preparing speedily for another storm, in which he hoped to force the Christians to a Surrender. In the mean time, to facilitate the design of the 
Tu
ks,
 on the 
15th
 of 
September
 the chief Magazin of Powder (none knows how) took fi
e, and blew into the Air, by which blow fifty Soldiers and several Officers were slain, but the worst was, that the besieged were deprived of all their Powder, unless what remained in pri∣vate houses, which so dismayed the Inhabitants, that immediately with one voice they demanded a parly: The Women also began a confused tu∣mult, crying out for a Surrender, in which they were so impe
uous and violent, that they threw stones 
rom their windows on the Souldiers. A∣midst of this confusion the 
Turks
 disposing their Companies to make another storm, the Officers resolved upon a Treaty, which concluded with these following Conditions.


First,
 
That the Commanders and Garison should march out on the Seventeenth of
 September, 
with bag and Baggage, and have safe conduct as far as
 Komorra. 
And that for a convenience of the

Sick and Wounded, the Vizier should be obliged to provide Four hundred Carts and more, if there should be occasion.


Secondly, 
That as such as desire to abandon their dwellings, may have liberty to depart, so such as desire to abide may continue their habitations: And that the Religious and Ecclesiastical persons may per∣form their Functions as in former times.


Thirdly, 
That upon the Surrender of the princi∣pal Works, no
 Turk 
shall enter within the Town, until all such as intend to depart have quitted their stations.


Fourthly, 
That for performance of Articles, two Aga's should be given for Hostages; and that until the foregoing Articles were fully accomplished, all acts of Hostility should cease.


Fifthly, 
That the Garison might not be necessitated to march through the
 Turkish 
Camp, the
 Turks 
themselves were obliged to make them a new Bridge, or repair the old to pass the
 Niter.


These Articles, though punctually observed by the 
Turks,
 yet the 
Tartars,
 who are of a faithless and barbarous nature, upon certain pretences assaulted the Garison, as they marched out, and had doubtless moved the rest of the Camp Rab∣ble to imitate their example; had not many of the Pashaws at the Head of their Troops, kil∣led the most forward in this Rebellious attempt, whose perfidious insolence and riot could not yet have been restrained, had not the Garison quickned their pace, more like a flight than an orderly March. But the Vizier on the contrary, distributed Money to the Gari∣son, and especially to the 
Hungarians,
 with design (as is supposed) to allure and at∣tract their minds to a belief of the gentleness of the 
Turkish
 Y
ke; as if he compassionated the mi∣series of that Country, which was the Stage whereon the Tragedies of so many miseries and slaughters were acted. This Siege continued about the pace of Forty three Days; of the Ga∣rison marched out Three thousand five hundred sound men, and about Five hundred wounded; those Inhabitants who would remain, had pro∣tection and liberty. The Army which besieged the Town, consisted of Fifty thousand men, In the Town were found Sixty pieces of Brass Can∣non, but most broken and unserviceable, with little Ammunition, but with great provision of 
Hungarian
 Wines. The loss the 
Turks
 might receive, is computed to have been of about fifteen thousand men, amongst which was sl
in, the Spaheelar Agasee, or General of the Horse, 
Beco
 Pasha, Beg
erbeg of 
Romalia,
 Usaff, Pasha of 
Anatolia,
 and 
Ibrahim
 Pasha of 
Seyda,
 with sixteen Captains belonging to 
Buda,
 and nine to 
Constantinople.


The loss of 
Newhausel
 affected the 
Austrian
 Court with so dreadful apprehensions of the 
Ot∣toman
 Fortune and Fury, that they hastened the finishing of the Works, and Fortifications of 
Vi∣enna;
 cutting down all the Woods and Boscage there abouts, which might benefit or shelter the Enemy; and so great an impression did the fear of the 
Turks
 prevalency and power work on the minds of the 
Germans,
 that they not only Forti∣fied the Frontiers, but secured the innermost parts of 
Austria,
 which extend along the River, as far as within three Miles of 
Lin
z.


But above all, 
Possonium,
 which was upon the Frontiers,
 though not an open Town, yet of no strength or resistance was not neglected, but reinforced with a considerable Garison, and the Works restored and repaired, with as many addi∣tional Fortifications as time would admit but the Inhabitants had lost so much of their Spirit and Courage, by the melancholly relation of the fate of 
Newhausel,
 and the apprehension of the dreadful advance of the whole 
Turkish
 Force, that their constancy to the Emperor began to waver, and to entertain some thoughts of submitting to the mercy and clemency of the 
Turks,
 who had newly declared, that such as voluntarily submit∣ted to the 
Ottoman
 Obedience, should for Three years be exempted from all Tribute or Taxes. This consideration adjoined to fear, so prevailed on those of 
Possonium,
 that they shut the Gates against the Garison which was sent to recruit and defend them; some publickly declaring the ex∣tremity of their affairs had no other satety than in a surrender of themselves to the mercy and pro∣tection of the Vizier. Howsoever the Count 
Strozzi.
 with his 
Italian
 Artifices, so wheedled the grosser humour of the 
Hungarians,
 that they were per∣swaded to admit him and his Regiment within the Town, where he disposed all things with that Conduct, and built those Forts and in a short time so apparently render'd the Town tenable that the Inhabitants taking Courage resolved to defend themselves, in obedience to their Prince, to the ul∣timate point of Estates and Loves.
 In the mean time the 
Turks
 made themselves Masters of 
Leventz,
 a Town, though renable and not contemptible for its strength, yet was by the Peoples fears, and al∣lurements of the V
z ers promises and fair Propo∣sitions, committed to the mercy of the 
Turks,
 and swore in Fealty to them the 
23d
 day of 
Septem∣ber.


By this time the news of the taking of 
New∣hausel,
 was arrived at the 
Ottoman
 Court, where it was entertained with so much joy, that a Du∣nelma, or Festival, was appointed for the space of seven days through the whole Empire; which according to the fashion of the 
Turks,
 is Celebra∣ted by adorning the Gates, and outward Walls of their Houses, so soon as it begins to be dark, with grate store of Lamps and Candles, during which time the Nights are spent with Musick and Banquets, as the Days are with Visits and Pre∣sents, and 
Corban,
 (which is an Alms which rich men make in flesh to the poor sort, and is given either at the little 
Biram,
 which is called the Feast of 
Corban,
 or upon some publick Thanksgiving, which is performed in this manner.)
 He that makes the 
Corban,
 first lays his hand upon the head of the Sheep or Lamb, makes a short Pray∣er, and then in the Name of God cuts the throat, the Butcher afterwards fleying off the skin, the Corbanist divides the flesh into small pieces, to as many poor as flock to receive it. In the heat of these Revels and Banquets, every one spake high in praise of their fortunate Arms, and Con∣gratulated each with other, the prosperous be∣ginnings of this War, promising to themselves the following year, rather a time of Peregrination or Travel through the pleasant Countries and Cities of the Christians, than blood and sweat in obtain∣ing the possession of their Enemies. Nor were such imaginations vain or absurd for the Commonalty to entertain; in regard it was vident to the World, in what manner the 
Ottoman
 Arms roved through 
Hungary
 uncontrouled, without an appearance of any consideraable Force to give them the least stop or interruption; so that under the very Walls of 
Rab
 and 
Presburg,
 and on the Banks of the 
Danube
 near 
Komarra,
 Incursions and depredation were made, and great numbers of People of both Sexes, and of all Ages, were carried into slavery, the Country all round laid waste, the Corn and Hay burnt; with all other miserable effects and Concomitants of War.




In this manner all places seemed to fall down and yield at the very rumour of the 
Turks
 ap∣proach; for not only 
Leventz
 surrendred it self, but likewise 
Nitra,
 though over-topped by a strong and an impregnable Castle, was by the Cowardice of the Commander betrayed at the first Summons of the 
Turks;
 for which action, the Captain afterwards, by express Command of the Emperor, suffered Death.


After all these successes, though no opposition appeared in the Field, to obstruct the luxuriant and wanton march of the victorious Squadrons of the 
Ottoman
 Army; and not only 
Hungary,
 but 
Austria,
 and the lower 
Germany
 was Alarmed and terrified with the rumour of the 
Turkish
 num∣bers; and though the Vizier (as it is said) began this War with the ambitious thoughts of posses∣sing 
Vienna
 it self, and out-vying the Acts of 
Soly∣man
 the Magnificent: Yet it seemed strange, that being come thus far, and almost in prospect of his hopes, that he should give a check to his Fortunes, and not advance towards 
Vienna,
 to which now the passage seemed wide and open; but it was almost a miracle, that he should not make a Visit to 
Possonium,
 before which, had he only displaid his dreadful Arms, it had surren∣dred at his first Summons and Apearance. In∣stead whereof he attempted 
Schinta,
 the Maga∣zine of the Emperors Arms and Artillery, but found not the same easy entrance as he did with the Governour of 
Nitra;
 but instead thereof, being stoutly repulsed after several Assaults, concluded the enterprize too difficult, and requiring more time and blood than could be countervailed by the acquisition of that place. Wherefore raising his Camp, he employed a considerable Party to take 
Novigrade,
 a Castle scituated on a high Rock, encompassed with a Ditch of 34 Foot deep,
 Gari∣soned with Six hundred Soldiers, and provided sufficiently with Victuals and Ammunition; how∣soever by ill fortune, and worse Conduct, this place also was resigned into the hands of the 
Turks.


By this time the Winter approaching,
 and the season of the Year beginning to be unfit for action, the Great Vizier retreated as far as 
Belgrade,
 to take up his Winter Quarters with the gross of his Army: Where remaining with full satisfaction and glory, contemplating the successes of the past Year, and promising to himself greater renown, and exaltation of his mighty acts, for that insu∣ing; he so contemned the Force of his Enemies, that he Licensed great numbers of the 
Asian
 Spa∣hees, who came as far as from 
Baylon
 and Grand 
Cairo,
 to return home to their own possessions. Howsoever, to vex the Christians with continual Alarms, the Vizier ordered a flying Body of 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 to the number of 30000. under the Command of
 
Chengiogli,
 to pass into 
Stiria
 and 
Craotin,
 the Country of Count 
Serini,
 and there to burn, lay waste, and depopulate all before them. Count 
Serini
 was now newly returned from 
Hungary,
 and supposing the season for action finished, had lodged the greatest part of his Forces within their Winter Quarters, and securely laid himself to repose; when an Alarm came of the approach of Thirty thousand Horse; the Count rowsing his great Spirit from its ease, collected as many of his People into a Body, as the shortness of time would permit, which were not above 480 men; and with these he betook himself to the River 
Muer,
 to give a stop (if possible) to the passage of the Enemy, placing Centinels in all places where the River was fordable. On the Seventeenth of 
November,
 the Christians espyed the 
Turks
 Encamped on the other side, and at the same time discovered Two thousand of them to have passed the River; on which,
 
Serini
 immediately made that furious Assault, assisted with the Courage of Captain 
Chirfaleas
 (a Per∣son who had oftentimes given glorious proofs of his valour against the 
Turks
) that he soon put them to open flight and they seeking to pass the River, and missing the place where the River was fordable, threw themselves headlong into the Wa∣ter where the most part of those perished who es∣caped the Sword. The 
Turks
 on the other side were so amazed at this stupendious Valour of 
Se∣rini,
 that their Courages failing them, they de∣sisted from their farther attempt upon 
Croatia;
 so that this poor Country seemed as it were for the present, to be reprieved, by Miracle, from a total destruction.








THE HISTORY OF Sultan Mahomet IV. THE XIII. EMPEROUR OF THE TURKS.


The Third BOOK


Anno Christi, 
1664.
 Hegeira, 
1075.


THE Month of 
January
 was now well entred with its rigid Frosts, when 
Apafi
 Prince of 
Transilva∣nia,
 beholding his Souldiers in their Winter Quarters, and all things quiet and still about him, judged it seasonable for his establishment to dis∣cover himself with some lustre to the World, seated in the usual Throne of the 
Transilvanian
 Princes; which sight appeared so universally grate∣ful to the People, that they began to be ena∣moured of their Prince, and to applaud his Per∣son, his Prowess and Vertues, and to cast an ill and envious Eye on those Cities which were Gar∣rison'd with 
German
 Souldiers. About which time the Fortress of 
Zechelhyd
 revolted from Obe∣dience of the Emperor unto 
Apafi
 the Prince:
 For the Souldiery of that Garrison having long Ar∣rears of pay due to them, made a Mutiny, and expelled their Collonel 
Dempenbal
 from his Office, and pillaged his House, placing the Quarter-Ma∣ster of 
Strozzi
's Regiment in his stead. The news of this Sedition flew quickly to 
Vienna,
 from whence immediately a Messenger was dispatched with an Act of Pardon from the Emperor, upon submission, and proffers of full satisfaction of all Arrears: but the Souldiery finding themselves on∣ly paid with words, hearkened to the more ef∣fectual Propositions of 
Apafi,
 who taking hold of this opportunity, sent every Souldier ten Dol∣lars with a Suit of Cloaths, promising larger and more constant Pay than they received from the Emperor, with which the Garrison being satisfied, surrendred up their City on the 
20th
 of 
January.
 But whilst other Armies remained in their Quar∣ters, and other Commanders gave themselves up to ease, and drowned themselves in Wine and Banquets; and whilst Jealousies, Envies, and Ce∣remonies, disturbed and confused the resolves of Diets and private Councils; the generous and vigilant 
Serini,
 having received advices from 
A∣drianople,
 that the 
Turks
 design in the next Cam∣pagna, was to convert the whole heat and fury of the War upon 
Croatia,
 and through that Country to open a passage unto 
Friuli;
 his active spirit conceived that heat and flame, that the Winters cold could not chill his hot and eager desires from entring into the open Field, and com∣mencing some attempt and enterprize on his E∣nemy. Wherefore on the 
16th
 of 
January,
 he began his march from 
Serinswar,
 with an Army of about 25000 men; and in the first place, marching along the Banks of the 
Dravus,
 shewed himself before 
Berzenche;
 which upon conditions of marching away with Arms, Bag, and Bag∣gage, was surrendered to him. 
Bakockza
 was likewise yielded, and a Palancha on the Ri∣ver quitted upon report of the Counts ap∣proach, leaving behind them Eight brass Guns in the Fort. From hence he marched towards 
Esseck,
 otherwise called 
Oseck,
 which is the only pass from the upper to the lower 
Hun∣gary,
 having a Bridge of Wood over a Moor or Fen, about six or seven miles in length, which once I remember, with my Horse, I was an Hour and three quarters in passing (as I

observed by my Watch), and reported to have been six years in building. This Bridg 
Serini
 re∣solved to burn,
 which cost the 
Turks
 300000. Dol∣lars, and six years time to build; imagining that to rebuild it again, was a Work of that time, as could not be repaired in one Summer, and that by this means the 
Turks
 would be disappointed of all Action the following Year,
 and the Empire have time to breathe, and assemble the utmost of their Strength and Force together; wherefore ta∣king opportunity of the hard Winter, when the Marsh was frozen, and a strong Wind to carry the Flame; he sent before him 2000. Dragoons, and 3000. Croats, which encountring 6000. 
Turks
 at the foot of the Bridg, set for Guard of that place, were so ill treated by them, that they had been wholly cut off, had not a considerable Force of Horse and Dragoons come in to their assistance, by whose Resolution they not only routed the 
Turk,
 but took the 
Palancha,
 which was the Defence of the Bridg, and having gained it in hot Blood, put all to Fire and Sword; after which, Fire being set to the Bridg in divers places, in a short time it was consumed, and re∣mained in Ashes. The news of this Exploit was received at 
Vienna
 with great Joy; believing that for the following Year, they had disappointed the 
Turks
 of a Passage; but by the sequel it will appear, how much they erred in the account made of the Diligence of the 
Turks,
 who in forty days repaired that which they esteemed a work of some Years; and as I observed, it was all built of new Timber, and on another Foundation dif∣ferent from the old. From this place 
Serini
 marched to 
Quin{que} Ecclesiae,
 or 
Five Kirk,
 at whose near approach, the 
Turks
 set out a white Flag on one of the Towers, signifying a desire of Parly, as if they had had intentions to surrender on Terms and Articles of Agreement; the Chri∣stians with this Confidence marched near the Walls, where the 
Turks
 espying their Advantage on their Enemies now under command of their Guns, fired upon them, and did severe Execution, killing amongst others, several principal Officers, of which were General 
Hammerling,
 and Count 
Harberstein;
 which perfidious Action so transport∣ed 
Serini,
 that he resolved on a furious Assault, and performed it with that Gallantry, that on the 
5th
 of 
February
 he took the Town by Storm and Force of Arms, and in Recompence of their treacherous Stratagem, put all the Inhabitants to the Sword, and gave up the Town to the Pillage and Plunder of the Souldiery, and aftewards set∣ting it on Fire, rendred it the most horrid Specta∣cle of Fire and Sword that had as yet been seen or known in this present War.


These Successes of 
Serini
 gained him the Repu∣tation of a valiant and fortunate Prince, and his liberal hand in frankly bestowing the Booty and Pillages amongst the Soldiery, invited great num∣bers to follow his Banner. His active Spirit and Vigilance gained him likewise a Reputation amongst the 
Turks,
 that their principal Fear and Dread was of 
Serin-Ogli,
 as of a watchful and politick Enemy; for in every place he made great Havock and Spoil, being reported to have laden two thousand five hundred Carts with Slaves, Goods and Ammunition, and to carry with him an hundred fifty five Pieces of Cannon taken out of small Forts and 
Palancha
's, and to have laid waste all the Country between the 
Dravus
 and the 
Danube.
 In these Incursions, and victorious and dreadful Travels through the Enemies Country, the valiant 
Serini
 at length arrived at 
Sigeth,
 a Fortress consisting of a new and old Town conjoyned by a Bridg which crosses a famous Marsh or Fen, ennobled by the Attempt made thereon by 
Solyman
 the Magnificent in the year 1565. with an Army of six hundred thousand Men; in defence of which 
Nicholas Serini,
 the great Grandfather of the present Count, im∣mortalized his Fame and Memory with the loss of his Life, and renowned the Place it self by his Feats at Arms. At this place 
Serini
 was re∣solved to revenge the Blood of his Ancestors, and sacrifice great numbers to the Ghost of his Grandfather; to which end he sent the Count 
Olack
 before him with part of his Army, to Sum∣mon the Enemy, and prepare the way to his own more effectual Force; 
Olack
 had ordered all things accordingly, when 
Serini
 full of Glory and Spoils arrived him in his Leagure, and joyn∣ing together, appointed a day for a general Storm; but whilst these things were meditating, and that 
Sigeth
 was reduced almost to the last Extremity, advice came of the near approach of a Body of twelve thousand 
Turks
 and 
Tar∣tars;
 to encounter which, the Attempt was ac∣counted difficult, considering the loss and diminu∣tion of the Christian Forces, which by continual Actions, and the bitter Sufferings of the Winter Season, were reduced to a number inferior to that of their Enemies; and wanting all sorts of Provi∣sion and Ammunition, it was resolved, as most expedient, to raise the Siege, which was the next day performed, and the Sold
ery taken into Garisons to Repose and Recruit themselves. But whilst by the active and zealous Spirit of this great Champion, most matters proceeded succes∣fully on the side of 
Croatia,
 the Christian Af∣fairs on the other side, by the negligence of some Ministers, ran into evident Ruin and Disorder. For 
Claudiopolis,
 which not many years past had defended it self so valiantly against the 
Turks
 under the Command of the Governor 
Retani,
 did now, wanting pay, (the Sinew and Life of the Soldiery) follow the late Example of 
Zechel∣hyd,
 and surrendred it self into the hands of 
Apafi;
 and tho the Complaints and Murmurings of the Soldiers gave a sufficient time of warn∣ing to make due Provisions against a Misfortune so imminent and plainly appearing; yet the want of Expedition at 
Vienna,
 and the unprofitable Application only of empty Words and Air to feed the penury, and satisfie the Appetite of starving Men, was a Remedy so little avail∣able, that the Garison submitted to 
Apafi,
 and yielded to Conditions whereby they might Eat and Live: the Story of which Place, compa∣red with that of 
Zechelhyd,
 was so shameful and pungent to Men capable of any impres∣sions of Honour or Duty, that at length it awakened the 
Germans,
 and admonished them to provide better for 
Zacmar
 and 
Tockey,
 and o∣ther Frontier Garisons, lest they also should incur the like Fate and Misfortune with the two for∣mer.


By this time the Actions of 
Serini
 were rumour∣ed in the Grand Signiors Seraglio, and the re∣port of them became common in the mouths of the Vulgar; wherefore full of Anger and Dis∣dain, the Sultan wrote severely to his Vizier, re∣proving him of negligence for suffering 
Serini
 so freely to Range his Countries without controul, to the great Dishonour of his Empire, and Damage of his People: whereupon the Vizier not as yet having received his Recruits, nor pre∣pared so early for the March of the gross of his Army, dispatched notwithstanding a conside∣rable Force to precede him, with Orders either by stealth to surprize 
Serinswar,
 or else to lay Siege unto it. This Army marching by the way

of 
Bosna,
 the news thereof was brought to Count 
Peter Serini,
 appointed by his Brother to stand Centinal on the Guard of his Country,
 whilst he in Person was busied in 
Hungary,
 who immedi∣ately thereupon, with what Force he could collect, ambushed himself at the narrow Pass of a Moun∣tain called the 
Morlac,
 where he had not long attended, before the 
Turks,
 without order or care, entred with their whole Body; but being on a sudden surprized by the Count, were wholly de∣feated, leaving two thousand dead on the place, with many Prisoners.


The Month of 
March
 being now well entred, the Frosts began to thaw, and the Air become more mild and moderate, when Count 
Nicho∣las Serini
 entertained thoughts of laying Siege to 
Kanisia:
 But to lay the Foundation of this Design with the better Judgment, it was thought first necessary to view the State and Scituation of the Place;
 wherefore the Count in Person, accompa∣nied with about fourteen Officers, went one day to take a survey thereof; but he was not so pri∣vate in his Design, but that it was known to the 
Turks,
 who secretly laid five hundred Men in wait to take him, and upon the near approach of 
Serini,
 started from their Holes with Shouts and Out-crys; but the Count was so well mount∣ed on his 
Croatian
 Courser, that he out-ran them all, and got Refuge in the Thickets of a neighbouring Wood, where three hundred of his own Horse alarmed at a distance by the Echo's of the cry, came in to his Succor, and making Head against the 
Turks,
 routed and de∣feated them, killing and taking many Prisoners; amongst the Slain was found one armed Cap-a∣pe, with a silk Twist, or Cord of divers Colours about his Waste, who was, as reported by the Captives, to have been one who resolved to have taken 
Serini,
 and with that Cord to have brought him bound to the Feet of the Vizier. 
Serini
 having thus escaped, resolved to Revenge himself of the Affront, and therefore made most dreadful Spoils and Confusion in all Places round 
Kanisia;
 so that the People flying thither for Sanctuary, were refused Entertainment by the Pasha, who at that time labouring with scarcity, and expecting a Siege, had no need of unnecessary Guests.


Serini
 having now fully resolved to lay Siege to 
Kanisia,
 thought fit first to signifie the De∣sign to his Imperial Majesty; for which purpose he dispatched away the Engineer General with Letters to the Council of War of the Lower 
Hun∣gary,
 containing a perfect Relation of the Success and Progress of his Arms in that Winter, and how he had laid waste and desolate all that cir∣cumference of Land which lies between the Ri∣ver 
Dravus
 and 
Serinswar,
 by which means 
Ka∣nisia
 was already straitned with Famine, and that now was the only Season to recover that Fort∣ress, if the Design were put into immediate Exe∣cution, before the 
Turks
 arose from their Winter-quarters, or had time to afford a powerful Re∣lief. The Resolution of 
Serini
 was so well plea∣sing to the Council, that by the same Messenger they signified their Approbation thereof to the Emperor, then at the Diet at 
Ratisbone,
 humbly desiring, that this Design might proceed, which would undoubtedly take effect, if the Count were provided only with thirteen thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse; but then the Siege was to be laid before the beginning of 
April,
 lest the early motion of the 
Turkish
 Camp should blast and defeat the too late beginning of this Action. The particular Journal of 
Serini
's Suc∣cess was not less pleasing to his 
Caesarean
 Ma∣jesty, than his present Heroical Resolution a∣gainst 
Kanisia;
 who thereupon gave Orders to the General Council to supply him with all Provisions, Ammunition and Men which were requisite for this Siege, and was graci∣ously pleased himself to express in a Letter to the Count, the Sense he had of his Merits and Valour, which he applauded and extolled in the Words following.


POstquam mihi Architectus Militaris de Vassemboij eximios Vestros progressus fa∣mosique Pontis Essolciensis exustionem, & caetera a Vobis edita Virtutis Militaris singularia specimina longa serie exposuisset, supervene∣runt Vestrae de 
19.
 Februarii, & omnia bre∣viori, quam tantorum gestorum magnitudo capit, enarratione confirmantes. Posuit fortunatus iste progressus labescenti rei Hungariae firmum adminiculum, erexit consternatos meorum fide∣lium animos, & futurorum foelicium succes∣suum non exiguum jecit fundamentum. Pro∣inde haec Vestra egregia facta non minus mihi grata & accepta accidunt, quam in Nomi∣nis Vestri perennitatem, & augendam apud Posteros memoriam redundant. Spero omni∣no per Divinam assistentiam, virtutemque, & experientiam Vestram ejusmodi ultiores foelices successus, atque hostilium armorum debellatio∣nem.


According to this Order of the Emperor, the Resolution of the Council of War was established on the 
10th
 of 
March,
 and 
Serini
 published, That on the 
8th
 of 
April
 he would begin the Siege; but in regard the 
Germans
 in 
Stiria,
 and the Forces of the 
Rhyne,
 by reason of the Absence of their General, the Count 
Olack,
 could not be so soon ready, the time of the Siege was defer∣red until the 
30th
 of 
April,
 on which, or the first of 
May,
 the Town was formally beleagured, not so much with hopes of Success, as with Design to maintain the Reputation of the Imperial Arms, and to divert the gross of the Enemies force from the more easie and delightful Plains of 
Hungary,
 or the plenteous Confines of 
Vienna,
 to a Coun∣try less happy or fruitful, encompassed with Fens and Marshes, poisoned with bad Airs and Vapours, and made more miserable already by the Desolations of War. But let us leave 
Serini
 at his Siege before 
Kanisia,
 and travel a while with our thoughts to the Diet at 
Ratisbone,
 and understand what is there forming and designing towards Preservation of the Commonweal of the Empire. The taking of 
Newhausel,
 and the Progress of the 
Ottoman
 Arms, had awaken∣ed the 
German
 Princes with that Sense of the common Danger, that a Diet was assembled at 
Ratisbone
 to consult of the most effectual means that might give a stop to the uncontrouled In∣cursions of the 
Turk.
 And not to trouble the Reader with the Names of all those Princes and Ambassadors which there appeared, it will be sufficient to signifie, That besides his 
Cesarean
 Majesty, there were present, as his Plenipo∣tentiaries, the Elector of 
Mentz,
 and Arch-Bi∣shop of 
Saltzburgh:
 And tho many Princes show∣ed themselves with Glory and Splendor; yet none appeared with that Pomp and Magnificence as the Elector of 
Bavaria,
 who for number of Coaches, richness of his Liveries, and compleat Government of his Retinue, was so neat and po∣lite,

that he seemed not only to exceed every Court in particular, but in Elegance and Mag∣nificence to equalize them all together. Upon Debate of matters in reference to this War, the Count of 
Olack
 was unanimously chosen General for the Confederates of the 
Rhine,
 but the more hot disputes between the Protestants and Papists about Election of other Generals kept matters in longer suspence; yet at length the Marquess of 
Baden
 was chosen Marshal General in behalf of the League, the Marquess of 
Durlach,
 and the Bishop of 
Munster
 his Councellours, and Dire∣ctor; of the War;
 and Count 
Francis Fucher,
 Ge∣neral of the Ordnance. But in the Levies of their Forces they concurred more freely and willing∣ly; for besides the Imperial Forces, which con∣sisted of 41600 Foot, and 13900 Horse, the Al∣lies and Confederates furnished 13850 Foot, and 3350 Horse; the Auxiliaries of the Empire made up a Body of 16991 Foot and 4037 Horse, be∣sides the Forces of 
Saxony,
 and 
Brandenburgh,
 and the Succours of 
France;
 so that, by Gods Provi∣dence, the Christian Army was this year esteemed equal, if not more numerous than the multitudes of their Enemies.


The next matter under consideration was the nomination of Ministers to be sent abroad to im∣plore assistance from Christian Princes more re∣mote;
 the Count 
Piccolomini
 was to negotiate in the Courts of 
Italy;
 but having taken a Distemper in his Journeys, died after a short sickness at 
Milan.


Also the Count 
Colalto,
 sent to his Majesty of Great 
Britain,
 died in his Journey before he arri∣ved at 
London;
 notwithstanding which the gene∣rous Piety of His Majesty was not wanting with a liberal Hand to contribute towards the Promotion of the Christian Interest.


From 
Poland
 nothing more could be obtained than Terms of Courtesy,
 and Demonstrati∣ons of Good Will and 
esires, for that their Forces being employed against the 
Moscovite
 to recover the lost Countries of 
Lituania,
 could not possibly attend the Service and Command of his Imperial Majesty, tho they could not but at the same time reflect on their Premures and Ne∣cessities with Shame and Confusion which disabled them from answering with like returns the grateful Memory they still retained of the assistance against 
Sweden.


To his Most Christian Majesty Count 
Strozzi
 was employed,
 before whose Arrival at 
Paris
 the common Report and Vogue was, That that King resolved to contribute an effectual Assistance to the Christian Cause in that present Conjun∣cture; which pious Disposition 
Strozzi
 so hap∣pily improved, that he obtained from his Ma∣jesty a Grant and Promise of four thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, raised and pay∣ed at his own Charge, to be united with the Troops of the Rhinish League: And farther, His Majesty was so gracious herein, that he pub∣lished a Declaration, That what Person soever would serve the Emperor against the 
Turk,
 his Resolution and Action therein should be accept∣ed by him, in the same manner as if the Ser∣vice were immediately tendered to himself. Up∣on which many Persons of Quality resolved up∣on this Expedition, amongst which was the Duke of 
Buglion,
 the 
Marquis de Villeroy,
 the Abbot of 
Richelieu,
 and m
ny other Heroes, and Persons of Bravery, who ventured their Lives with no other Consideration than that of Honour and Religion. But before I pass from this Emb
ssy, give me leave to report a Com∣plement which Count 
Strozzi
 passed upon this King, which some say did savour a little too much of Flattery and Affectation. The matter was this: Count 
Strozzi
 being admitted to his Audience,
 so soon as he entered into the Cham¦ber, I know not whether it was feigned or real, he seemed to be struck with such an Amazement and Fear, that for a while he was not able to pronounce a word Articulate or Intelligible; but at length recollecting himself, he began with a trembling Voice to excuse this Hesitation of his Speech, having his Senses dissipated, and his Eyes dazled with the Rays and Splendor of so much Majesty; and with that, as in a Rapture or Ec∣stasie broke out into an Admiration of the 
French
 Monarchy, the report of whose Greatness and Glory, tho arrived to the utmost Confines of the Universe, came yet far short of that real Majesty which he saw and admired, whose dreadful and mysterious Throne was sufficient to revive the dead Ashes of the 
Sabean
 Queen to prostrare her self before this new 
Solomon,
 much excelling the Wisdom, the Richess, the Virtue, and Happiness of the former. And thence de∣scending with the like sagacious Obsequiousness, to confute the malicious Reports of malignant Tongues, who, envious of the harmony of Chri∣stian Spirits, represented His Majesty as ill-affe∣cted to the 
Austrian
 Family; whereas to the contrary, he could testifie to have found that excess of Affection, and admirable Disposition in His Majesty towards the Emperor his Ally, as rendred his Embassy abundantly happy and successful, which joined to the Zeal His Maje∣sty had towards the Christian Cause, was like Friendship united to Charity, and moral Virtues made perfect by spiritual Qualifications. In fine, he compared his Christian Majesty to that Glo∣rious Sun, which communicating his light to the Christian World, affords the most benign Influence to the Catholick Climate; with much better reason therefore ought 
Germany
 to par∣ticipate so great a Circle of those Rays, as may serve wholly to obscure and darken the dim and barbarous Light of the 
Ottoman
 Moon. In sum, 
Strozzi
 knew so well how to manage his Discourse, and play the Orator, that he obtained considerable Assistances, and returned to his Master the Emperor with full Demon∣strations of all obliging Terms, and courteous Tre
ments. And having thus understood what Preparations are making in 
Christendom,
 let us pass over into the 
Turks
 Quarters, and see what is in the mean time tr
nsacting in those Dominions.


At this time the Rumour of a Rebellion and Mutiny amongst the Great 
Beghs
 at Grand 
Cairo
 in 
Egypt,
 afforded matter for Trouble and Consultation at the 
Ottoman
 Court; for that those 
Beghs
 who have great Possessions and Power in that Country, made Seizure of 
Ibrahim
 Pasha, and imprisoned him, being about the Expiration of his three years commonly allotted to that Govern∣ment; and therefore near upon departure. The demands they had upon him was for no less than three thousand Purses of Money, which according to the 
Cairo
 Account, are reckoned seven hundred and fifty Dollars a Purse, and pretended to be taken from them against Law and Justice; and that without Restitution thereof they resolved not to restore him his Liberty. This Insolence against so 
minent a Pasha, qualified with such absolute Power in his Government, and one related to the Grand Signior by Marriage of his Sister, compared with the late neglects and disobedience of that People who for some years had failed in the full payment of their Tribute, were interpreted as evi∣dent Symptoms of Disaffection and Malignancy, which that People entertained against the 
Ottoman


Subjection. Wherefore the Sultan immediately dispatched away the Master of his Horse to 
Cai∣ro,
 with full Power to apease this Rebellion, and with Lenitives to moderate the Fury of the People, who seemed to be too Licentious and Unbridled to be governed by a Musselim or De∣puty: Wherefore the Selictar Aga was elected Pasha, and to depart with all Expedition. In the mean time this Messenger, to make greater haste, took post through 
Asia
 with thirty in his Company, and in a short time arrived at Grand 
Cairo,
 where, with fair terms, and Restitution of some Money from the Pasha, all matters were re∣duced to an amicable composure, only the punish∣ment of the chief Mutiners, with a fair Coute∣nance, deferred for a Season, was afterwards ac∣cording to the 
Turkish
 Fashion, when time and opportunity presented, remunerated to those fa∣ctious Spirits with a severe Interest, and Satisfa∣ction to Justice.


Not long after, 
Ibrahim
 Pasha having obtain∣ed his Liberty, returned from his Govern∣ment of 
Cairo
 to 
Constantinople,
 where refreshing himself some time with the Embraces of his young Sultana, an Imperial Command for imme∣diate payment of four hundred Purses of Money to the Grand Signiors Treasury, disturbed his delightful quiet.
 The Pasha made a present payment of one half, but desired time for the Remainder, either for want of that instant sup∣ply, or else in hopes of ease of his Fine. But the Sultan, who is impatient of any delay in his Slaves, which savours of obstinacy or disobedience, tho never so reasonable, dispatched another Com∣mand, enjoining present Compliance, and as a Penalty for the late Neglect, raised the Demand from four hundred to six hundred Purses, which if not as readily payed as required, the Kima∣cham of 
Constantinople
 was impowered to com∣mit him Prisoner within the four Gates of the Seraglio, the fatal Prison, from whence few find other Release than by Death. The Pasha not being able to comply, was there restrained of his Liberty;
 and yet had the good fortune in a few days to obtain his freedom, by the endeavours (as some suppose) to the Great V
zier, who having by this Act weakened his Power and Treasure, did afterwards as an instrument of his Deliverance, conserve his Life, and obtain for him the Govern∣ment of 
Darbiquier,
 where being remote and ob∣scure at so far a distance, could never be capable to shadow, or by his great popularity and affable comportment endanger the present happy state of the V
ziers Office.


Matters growing now towards Action, by re∣turn of the Spring, the Grand Signior, to incou∣rage his Vizier in a continuance of his duty, sent him a Horse and a Sword as a Testimony of his favour and good esteem of his Person; and Or∣ders were issued out through all the Empire for publick Prayers to be made some days before the Vizier began his March towards the Enemy. This appointment of publick Devotions occasioned matter of argument and dispute between the Muf∣ti, and a Shegh or Preacher, one that was always near the Grand Signiors Person, and therefore on Confidence of his familiar Access to the Pre∣sence of the Sultan, and on Presumption of his Sanctity and Priviledg of his Office, took Liber∣ty to oppose and contradict the Oracle of the 
Ottoman
 Law.
 The Problem in question was, Whether Prayers appointed for success of the 
Ot∣toman
 Arms, according to the Law of their Pro∣phet, were to be made privately, and in every Mosch or Oratory apart, or in a general Assem∣bly of the whole City. The Mufti maintained the last Position, citing in favour of his Opinion the Testimony of divers 
Arabick
 Doctors, and the customs of the present and past times. The Shegh on the contrary was for Devotions to be performed in every Mosch, declaring. That the Assembly of all the People of a City into one Body did nothing avail or inforce the Power of Prayer; for they being true believers, were all illuminated, and had no need of helps to make their Prayers more fervent or more accepta∣ble. The Argument was hot on both sides; and tho the Mufti had got another Shegh on his part, who might pretend to as much of Illumi∣nation as the other, and j
yned to the Mufti's Opinion, who is the Mo
th and undoubted Inter∣preter of the Law, might seem able not only to resolve the knottiest difficulties, but to impose an Assent on them with greater Authority; yet the Shegh having the Grand Signor on his side. pre∣sently got most of Reason, and forced the Mufti to recant his former Opinion as Erroneous, and to banish the other Shegh his Companion, pretend∣ing that he was now convinced, and had sooner discovered the truth, had not the Imp
st
r, the false Preacher deceived him by his 
e gned Illu∣minations. This Victory gained the Shegh much applause and esteem with the Grand Signior, so that he vented what Doctrine he pleased and all he said was taken for Divine Ruies and Pre∣cepts. He was born abou
 
Van
 on the Confi es of 
Persia,
 so that he is called 
Vanni Efendi,
 and is of the 
A
m
nian
 Race: he preached every Fri∣day at 
Adrianople
 in one Mosch or other. where the Grand Signior was for the most part present; and tho the greatest part of his Sermons were stuffed up with Praises of the 
M
bomeian
 Religion, and Invectives against Christians, sen∣tencing all polluted and profane who ass
ciate with them, and exclaiming against the Abomina∣tion of Wine; yet it is confidently reported, that he is no strict Observer of the Law he pro
esses, the which his Disciples and Familiars are ready to excuse in him, saying, That it may be lawful for him to dispense with such matters, in regard his Illuminations and high Prerogatives of Sanctity have infranchised him from observance of the meaner and less substantial points of their Law.


The 
Turks,
 who are as much given to Predi∣ctions and Interpretations of old Prophecies, as ever the 
Egyptians
 were, busied themselves this year more than ever, to know the Event of this War. Some, who had studied ancient 
Arabick
 Predictions, had extracted certain Astrological Figures, and from thence framed strange Fancies, according to the humour or melancholly of the Astrologer; one whereof coming to the Grand Signiors ears, mentioning divers things obscure∣ly, and in general of the great Effusion of Blood, but that at last the Advantage and Victory should remain to the 
Tu
k,
 and that the Grand Signi∣or himself should shortly make a Journey; the Grand Signior troubled here
t as much as ever 
Pharaoh
 was about the Interpretation of his 
ream, sent for one of the Chief Just ces of the Law, called the Kadilescher, and with him con
eried concerning this Prediction: all things Pleased him well; but only the latter part of making a Journey. Whither that Journey should be, he could not imagine his Arms were so prosperous in 
Hungary,
 that he conceived the Vizier had no need of his Presence either to animate or re∣cruit his Army; and to any other part, he knew not what could move him from his delightful and beloved City of 
Adrianople.
 I he Kadiles∣cher supposing that he might put that Interpreta∣tion

thereon which might not be ungrateful, repli∣ed, Perhaps, O Emperour, he may mean that you shall again return to your sublime and happy Port of 
Constantinople.
 The Grand Signior sud∣denly touched herewith,
 burst into choler: How, said he, to 
Constantinople!
 what joy, what com∣fort can I have there? Hath not that place been fatal to my Father? What benefit had my Un∣cle from thence? or any of my Race? Have not all my Princes Ancestors been subject to a thousand mutinies and Rebellions in that place? I shall sooner than return thither, set fire to it with my own hands, and rejoyce to see that City with my Seraglio brought to ashes. And that we may farther discover the strange aversion the Sultan had to 
Constantinople,
 and his resolution to change the Seat of his Empire, it is observable, that he built a small Seraglio not far from 
Adrianople,
 in imitation of that near 
Constantinople,
 called 
Odout Pasha;
 the place to which he most frequently re∣sorted after that City fell under his dislike and ha∣tred. The Village where his Pallace was built was called 
Chiomlichoi,
 or the Village of Pots where earthen Vessels were made: but the Grand Signior changed the name, and called it 
Odout Pasha,
 with which name before the People were well acquainted, and that it was accustomed to their mouths, two poor silly Country men mi∣staking, and calling it simply by the former name, were apprehended by some of the Bostangees, and brought before the Grand Signior as contem∣ners of the Imperial Command, and by his im∣mediate Sentence were put to death.


About the end of 
May
 the Grand Signior had a Son born to him of one of his Women,
 for joy of which seven days of 
Dunalma,
 or rejoycing were appointed through all the 
Ottoman
 Domi∣nions; but especially at 
Adrianople
 the Solemnity was greatest, all sorts of Artisans endeavouring to outvy each other in their Shows and Pastimes to entertain the City. At the Gate of the Seraglio was erected a magnificent Pavilion for the Grand Signior, before whom were shown rare artificial Fire-works invented by the most ingenious Masters thereof amongst the 
Jews;
 one of which firing a Rocket, which not ascending with usual strength, unhappily fell on the Vest of the Grand Signiors Favourite, standing at the door of the 
ent; at which the young Man being surprized, sent to find out him who fired it, which happening to be a poor 
Jew,
 was condemned immediately by the Grand Signiors Sentence to receive eighty Blows on the Soals of his Feet; but as report went, this young Fa∣vorite not appeased with this slender Punishment, obtain'd the Sultans command to put him to Death.


But to return to the 
Turkish
 Camp. The Vi∣zier was astonished to understand that 
Kanisia
 was besieged, and wondred much at the rashness of 
Serini,
 in attempting a Work so difficult without probability of success;
 howsoever being advised, that the Garison was ill provided of Victuals and Ammunition, he gave order for its supply. In order to which eighty Carts laden with Provisions convoyed by a considerable number of Turks, were conducted by way of 
Sigeth;
 but being inter¦rupted in their passage by 
Serini
's Soldiers, were routed, put to flight, and their Provisions taken. In the mean time the Besieged made many vigorous Sallies, and some not without loss to the Christians; and to defend themselves the better, uncovered the tops of their Houses, and made their Lodgings under ground, secure from Granadoes, or shot of the Enemies Batteries. On the other side the Ammunition and Arti
ery 
rom the Emperour came not so timely as was expected; nor were the Bom
oes and Granadoes so artificially made, but that many of them spent themselves in vain: the Succours likewise of men fell very short of the numbers promised; and Souldiery being drawn from their Winter Quarters before the colds were past, or the pasture grown, began to murmur; but nothing discontented them so much as want of Pay, the just complaint of Souldiers, which discouraged them more than the difficulty of their adventure: against all which 
Serini
 pro∣vided as much as he was able out of his own Purse, continuing the Siege more out of reputa∣tion than probable hopes of success; for his Ar∣my was at least diminished two thousand in its number, of which four hundred Hungars, and two hundred Germans were lost in the first As∣saults made upon the Suburbs, and he rest perish∣ed by sickness, and the vigorous and frequent Sallies of the Enemy. Howsoever 
Serini
 seemed not to doubt of the success, if he could but be for some time secured from the advance of the Vizier, who now began to draw his gross and numerous Army out of their Winter Quarters into the open field; and therefore with the other Officers before 
Kanisia,
 signified their advice to the Emperour and General Council of War, That it was necessary that the Imperial Army should be as early in the Field as the Ottoman; and for the more methodical government of Affairs, that the Army should be divided into three Bodies, one to recruit the Forces before the Town, a second to march to 
Osek,
 and hinder the Enemies passage over the 
Dravus,
 and a third to take the Field, and apply assistance where it was judged most useful. This counsel being well accepted by the Emperour, Orders were immediately is∣sued forth to General 
Montecuculi
 to begin his March, with design to obstruct the Turks passage over the 
Dravus;
 for that the success against 
Ka∣nisia
 was of that high importance, as might just∣ly require the imployment of all the Christian For∣ces in its concernment. Wherefore one Post was dispatched after the other to 
Montecuculi
 to solli∣cite his speedy March, and to give a stop to the Viziers Progress. But he answered, That he at∣tended General 
Sporch,
 whom he every day ex∣pected to joyn with him; but this Answer prov∣ing by the effect to be nothing more than a pre∣sent excuse, gave occasion of suspicion, and pro∣duced that discontent in the minds of the most zealous, as spread a rumour through all 
Germany
 much to the disreputation of 
Montecuculi.
 Time thus being protracted, and no Forces appearing to recruit the Leagure, at length advice came to the Generals, when they were just going to din∣ner, that the Vizier with a most numerous Army was within
 three Leagues of the Town. For the Bridge of 
Osek
 was against the common opinion again rebuilt, planked, and compleated with new Timbers in the space of forty days, many hands making light work; which when first founded, was the work of six years: which Expedition was the more remarkable, in regard that this Bridge was not formed out of the Ruines of the old, nor founded on the same ground, but new framed out of the Woods with as much comliness and or∣der as befits a Bridge of that nature and length, passing over a wild Marsh or Fen. The news of the Viziers so near approach was strange to 
Serini,
 who by the calculation made of his March, did not yet expect him for several days, but the Vizier ap∣prehending the straitness in which 
Kanisia
 might be, leaving the gross of his Army, made more expidite Journeys with a Body of twenty thousand Horse, which not being unknown to 
Serini,
 his daring spirit was once resolved to give him Bat∣tel, in which opinion was also Count 
Strozzi;


but 
Olach
 dissenting and refusing to ingage his Forces, the Siege was raised, and all the Forces with good order retreated to 
Serinswar,
 where they arrived the day following, leaving to the Ene∣my a great quantity of Powder, Match, Shovels, 20 Carts of Meal, and Two Iron Guns broken.


No Pilgrim ever followed his way with more devotion to the sacred Shrine,
 than the Vizier was willingly led in pursuit of his Enemy to the Walls of 
Serinswar,
 being the place to which his intentions inclined, as the beginning and con∣summation of the War. Over against this envied Fort there is a little Hill strong by Nature, in∣compassed with a narrow Ditch, yet not so nar∣row, as that a Horse can leap over it, nor yet so shallow as to 
e forded. This Hill 
Serini
 pro∣posed to the rest of his Collegues or Coadjutors, 
viz. Olach
 and 
Spaar,
 as a place commodious to incamp their Army, because lying open to the River, could easily be relieved, and would serve as a Redoubt or Out-word to the Fort, in which upon all extremities they might find Sanctuary and resuge: But the apprehension of the Viziers Numbers, and his near approach had made that impression of fear in their minds, that no safety seemed to remain, unless they could see the River 
Mura
 between them and their Enemy. Nor was 
Serini
 more sucessful in his perswasions to assault the Enemy, whilst they were wearied with their March, and busied in ex∣tending their Tents, the other Generals being of opinion, that it was too great a hazard for them alone to venture their Forces in so unequal a Combat, by they ought rather to expect 
Mon∣tecuculi,
 by the addition of whose Forces the lot of War would be less hazardous, if not wholly certain. In this manner great Enterprises have been disappointed, which have wanted only re∣solution to make them successful, Fortune being commonly favourable, if not a Servant, to bold and daring Spirits; the disunion also of Generals hath been the overthrow of the wisest Counsels, and Wars have been ovserved never to have thrived where the Heads of Armies have been of dissenting humors or different interests.


This timidity on the Christian part raised in that manner the spirits of the 
Turks,
 that with∣out stop or opposition passing the River 
Muer,
 they arrived at 
Serinswar,
 where they immediate∣ly fell to their Mattock and Spade, breaking ground for their Trenches, which by continued labour they so diligently attended, that in Se∣venteen days they arrived at the very Ditch of the Fort: Only whilst the 
Turks
 were transport∣ing their Numbers over the River, the generous spirit of 
Strozzi
 not enduring to see their passage so easie and open, valiantly opposed himself and his small Force against the greater power of the Enemy, and so resolutely performed the Action, that he killed Five hundred upon the place,
 till at length being unfortunately shot by a Musket∣bullet in the Forehead, he gloriously, together with one 
Chisfareas,
 a renowned 
Croatian
 Cap∣tain, ended his days in defence of his Countrey and the Christian Cause.


In this interim General 
Montecuculi
 arrived with his Army, and was received by Count 
Se∣rini
 with all evidences and demonstrations of re∣spect and hearty welcome, and between both passed an appearance at least of friendly corre∣spondence. But as to the present Engagement, 
Montecuculi
 was of opinion. That the opportuni∣ty was over slipt, which should at first have been performed, rather by way of surprize than open Battel, before the 
Ottoman
 Army had arrived to its full numbers, consisting now of an hundred thousand fighting men. To which reasons 
Seri∣ni
 replied, That the Christian Cause,
 and the States and Confines of the Empire were not to be maintained by men that carry their thumbs at their girdles, or by Armies made resty with ease, and wanton with luxury. That those Ar∣mies were raise not to consume and exhaust the Revenues of their Princes, and Exchequers of their States, without making satisfactory amends by a valiant defence of that Interest which they owned. That the Enemy had not been before that time attempted, was no fault or neglect of his, who under the very Walls of 
Kanisia
 re∣solved to give them Battel; but that the other Generals supposed it more prudence and caution to protract the Engagement till his Arrival, who being now happily conjoyned with them, nothing ought to deter them from a glorious Attempt on the 
Turks,
 who not consisting of above Thirty thousand men, ill disciplined, and worse armed, were not able to withstand the prowess of their Veterane Army, which far exceeded them in num∣ber, discipline, and courage. These or such like expressions 
Serini
 used; and to prove what he averred, he dispatched a confident Person of his own, who spake naturally the 
Turkish
 Language, with a Letter to the 
German
 Resident, then en∣tertained under custody in the 
Turkish
 Camp, to know of him the true state and number of the 
Turks,
 which Messenger soon after returned with this short account.


Nisi memortuum velis, amplius non rescribas, hic vix sunt triginta millia, nec illa satis electa,
 quid vos a pugna deterret? Tormenta Arcis nimis in al∣tum exploduntur.
 Which in 
English is
 thus. 
Un∣less you desire my death, write not back to me again, here are scarce Thirty thousand men, and these ill provided, what then should deter you from an En∣gagement? The Cannon in the Castle are too high mounted, or shoot over. Serini
 gave this Letter to 
Montecuculi,
 who replied, That so soon as Gene∣ral 
Sporch
 came up with his Forces,
 he would immediately draw up the Army into Batalia; 
Sporch
 being arrived, he then resolved to expect Marquess 
Baden,
 and so deferred the Battel from time to time, until the 
Turks
 advantaging them∣selves by these delays, had worked themselves un∣der ground to the very Walls of the Castle. At length 
Montecuculi
 entring into 
Serini
's Fort (it is not known upon what reasons of jealousie, or dis∣content) cleared 
Serini
's Forces of the Garison, and dispossessed the Governour; which when 
Se∣rini
 perceived, full of anger and displeasure, he quitted the Camp, and retired himself to his Resi∣dence at 
Chiacaturno,
 with intent to make his just Appeal and Complaint to the Emperor's Court.


The 
Turks
 availing themselves of these delays and discontents, proceeded forward in their work, so that having Mined to very Walls, on the 
9th
 of 
June,
 they blew up one of the half Moons, at which the Defendants were so terrified, that with amazement they left open one of their Sally Ports, at which the 
Turks
 entring, put the whole Garison into disorder, consisting of 1900 fighting men; so that now no sasety remaining, but in flight, they forsook their Fort, and croud∣ing over the Bridge in confused heaps, broke it down with the over-pressure of its burden; by fall of which, many perished in the Waters, and about Three hundred and fifty which remained, were cut off by the Sword; this was the fate of 
Serini
's Fort, built with Art,
 and lost by Cowar∣dice and ill Conduct, which the Year before, only with Twenty 
Germans,
 and One hundred and fifty 
Hungurians,
 withstood a most impe∣tuous and fierce storm of the Enemy, but

now was less tenable than a Palancha, the Gari∣soned with 1900 Men, of whom in this last Assault one alone had Courage to fire his Mus∣ket, but none adventured to draw a Sword; unless certain Vol
tiers, and 
French
 Officers, whose Courage only renowned their own Deaths, and served to up
raid the Cowardice of their Companions. In the Fort were only found five small Field Pieces, one whole Cannon, a great Mortar Piece, and two small ones belonging to Count 
Serini;
 there were also one Mortar Piece, and two small Field Pieces, like to those of 
Seri∣ni,
 belonging to the Emperor; tho other Guns of weight or value were carried out of the Fort, as being judged not long tenable, and de∣creed to be abandoned to the Enemy. 
Serins∣war
 being thus taken was immediately demolish∣ed by the Vizier, and razed to the Ground; ei∣ther because he would seem to maintain his Word or Vow he had made; or because he would not multiply Garisons, when the present Occasions required rather the active Force of a moving Army.


But before we proveed farther,
 it seems perti∣nent to our purpos, to declare the Reasons and Grounds of the preceding neglects and discoun∣tenance passed upon 
Serini
 by the Grandees of the Imperial Army, which not being vindicated by the Emperor, seem to have been cast upon him by his express Order or at least to have been willing for some private respect, to have the Person of 
Serini
 abased, and his Actions obsc
red. It is therefore to be noted (what before hath been said) That the first pretence the 
Turks
 made for this War, was this Fort of 
Serinswar,
 raised against the Capitulations and Articles of the last Peace, for which, tho the Violence against 
Va
adin
 may be pleaded as equal, if not ex∣ceeding the present Breach, to which this was only subsequent, and seemed to be but a just Recompence or Effect thereof; yet because it was that stone of Scandal and Offence, which drew after it that deadly War, in which the Emperor unwillingly engaged against the 
Ottoman
 Power, and caused him freely to intimate unto 
Serini,
 his desire rather to see that Fort demolished, than the Peace interrupted; to which 
Serini
 yielding no Ear, drew upon himself the deserved displea∣sure of his most gracious Prince, who permitted the act of his Obstinacy and Disobedience, to be∣come a just Snare to his own Folly. But perhaps, that Displeasure which was Justice in the Empe∣ror, might be Envy, and Emulation in his Mi∣nisters, who beholding with jealous Eyes his Acti∣ons and Successes the Winter before, which en∣raged his Enemies, and exalted his Name to that Glory in all the Courts of Christian Princes, that the Pope honoured him with Medals of Gold; the King of 
Spain,
 with the Order of the Golden Fleece; the 
French
 King as a Demonstration of his Esteem, with a Token of ten thousand Crowns; and Cardinal 
Francis Barberini,
 with a Pension of eight hundred Crowns a Month; and all other 
European
 Princes, at least made the most part Applications to him by Congratulatory Letters, admiring his Virtues, and applauding his Successes; permitting their Gazets and Diur∣nals, Weekly to divulge and publish his Praises. From whence may rationally be collected, the true occasion of that Envy, which by cold assistances, and slow succors, obstructed as well the taking of 
Kanisia,
 as the valiant defence of 
Serinswar,
 which was decryed, not only as a Fort erected without due and matue Consideration, but without art, or regular Proportions, which might render it tenable; accusing at the same time as well the Rashness and Temerity of 
Serini
's Counsels, as his want of Judgment and Experience in Military Affairs.


But to leave now the sad subject of the Christian misfortunes, occasioned by their own quarrels and dissentions, which the Grand Enemy of Gods Church always endeavoured to sow for advance∣ment of his own Kingdom: Let us cast our Eyes on the other parts of unhappy 
Hungary.
 The Siege of 
Kanisia
 being raised, and 
Serinswar
 taken and demolished, success had swelled and puffed up the minds of the 
Turks
 to a height that nothing seemed difficult or impossible to their desires. On the other side, controversies and delays gave that advantage to the Enemy, that nothing could be expected, but losses, slaughter, and in the end, a total-ruin. But God who pitied the miseries of poor 
Christen∣dom,
 cast his Eyes of mercy on the Frontiers of the upper 
Hungary,
 granting some more happy sucesses to the Christian Arms, conducted by the Valour and Fortune of Count 
Soise,
 a 
French
 Gen∣tlelman, who having the Command of an Army distinct from that of 
Montecuculi,
 began his first attempt and enterprize upon 
Nitra,
 where several Persons of Quality,
 and Officers of the 
Turkish
 Ar∣my, were assembled to consider of the Affairs of War. 
Soise
 having taken his convenient measures, and made his due approaches, began to batter the Walls, a great part of which in a short time he shook so shroadly, that he opened a very wide Breach, and continually plying Granadoes into the Town, so affrighted the besieged, that imme∣diately they offered a Parly, which 
Soise
 accepted, (and the rather, upon advice, that 
Varadin, Sol∣noc, Temiswar,
 and the places adjacent, were col∣lecting Forces to raise the Siege, and relieve the Town) entered into Treaty, and concluding up∣on Conditions, the Town surrendered, and the 
Turks
 marched out with the Colours folded, and Muskets under their Arms, leading their Horses, had Convoy as far as 
Chomar.


Soise
 having obtained this success, entered into Consultation about recovery of 
Newhausel,
 but having not Forces judged sufficient to attempt the difficulty of that place, he turned his endeavours and designs upon 
Lewa
 or 
Leventz;
 but in the way thither, he was casually engaged with a Body of fourteen thousand 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 who were marching to the relief 
Nitra,
 and fell in unawares upon his Rereguard; whereupon 
Soise
 commanded the Regiments of hsi Major Gene∣ral 
Guarnicri,
 and of the Collonels 
Caprara
 and 
Zeitsch,
 and the Horse and Dragoons of 
Bran∣denburgh,
 then marching in the Van, to face about, and Charge the Enemy, which they performed with that Courage and Vigour, that they routed and pursued them as far as the River 
Giava.
 At which place 
Soise
 Encamped with his Army, and in an advantagious Situation made a line of Cir∣cumvallation about his Camp, strengthening it with some Pieces of Cannon. The 
Turks
 having re∣covered a convenient Retreat upon the River, re∣mained opposite to the Christians, and having there reinforced themselves with additional Recruits, returned again to give them Battel, and in three places with extremity of Fury and Despair. as∣saulted the Christian Camp: Fortune for a long time remained doubtful on both sides, till at length the admirable Resolution of the Christians overcame, leaving a thousand 
Turks
 extended on the place; many were drowned and the rest fled, leaving a rich Booty for reward to the Conq
¦rors.


The Christans in this manner being successful, resolved not to check the current of their For∣tune, but without delay,
 proceeded to 
Lewa,


which having been for some time battered with great Guns, surrendred it self to the merev of the Conqueror; in which was found a considerable quantity of Meal, and twenty great pieces of Ar∣tillery.


In the mean time, the difference between the King of 
France
 and the Pope (on occasion of the insult offered at 
Rome
 by the 
Corsi,
 to the Em∣bassadors House and Person) being this Year composed; those Forces of the 
French
 being in all about 3000. Horse, sent first into 
Italy
 to avenge this Affront, under the Command of the Count 
Coligni,
 were ordered to pass into 
Hun∣gary,
 by way of 
Venice,
 to the Assistance of the Emperor; to which, several Gentlemen, Volun∣tiers of the same Nation, joining themselves, formed a Body of 4000. Horse well appointed, Valiant and desirous of Action. The Pope also, whose words expressed and breathed out nothing but holy Zeal against the common Enemy, pro∣mised a supply of 10000. Foot, and 3000. Horse, which were to pass by way of 
Trieste
 into 
Croa∣tia,
 according to the Promise and Assurance of the Nuntio at 
Vienna:
 for acknowledgment of which religious and considerable Succour, Count 
Leisle
 was dispatched from the Imperial Court, in a private Character, to pass those Offices of grateful Acceptance, as were due to so high a Merit and Sense of the Christian Cause. But scarce was 
Leisle
 arrived at 
Venice,
 before he understood (to his great Admiration) that the holy Army was by Order of the Pope disbanded,
 for which no other Cause was assigned, than only, that at 
Rome
 it was seriously debated, and in the end, it was concluded, that the Expence was to great to be charged on the Ecclesiastical State; and that the Sold
ery also were themselves un∣willing to be so far separated from their own Country; all which at 
Vienna
 were understood to be frivolous Pretences, and the causes thereof at∣tributed to the sinister Offices of a Person ill af∣fected to the Emperors Interest, by which the Pope and 
Don Mario
 his General, falling from their Resolutions and Promises, Count 
Leisle
 was revoked from his Employment, and the Imperial Interest, and hopes disappointed of so considera∣ble a Succour.


Howsoever, that the Pastoral care might not seem to be altogether dormant and careless of the Universal Flock, the Pope having disbanded his Army,
 could not do less than to supply the defect thereof with Money; for raising of which, he charged the Ecclesiastical State through all 
Italy
 (the Dominions of 
Venice
 only excepted, whose Wars already with the 
Turks
 exempted them from farther Taxes) with an Imposition of 6 
per Cent.
 of their yearly Revenue, under the noti∣on of Tenths or Tithes, which in all amounted to the sum of 700. thousand Dollars, which by Bills of Exchange, was remitted by way of 
Venice
 to the Imperial Court. In the mean time, the French Troops were arrived in 
Hungary,
 under the Command of the Count 
Coligni,
 which join∣ing themselves with the General 
Montecuculi,
 followed the motion of the Viziers Army. The 
Turks
 designed to pass the 
Danube,
 for recovery of 
Lewa
 or 
Leventz,
 and in their way to de∣stroy and lay desolate the Country of Count 
Ba∣dian,
 and in virtue and strength of that and for∣mer Successes, to pass forward to the Subjection of 
Possonium
 and 
Vienna.
 But God who disposes the Affairs of this World, and gives Laws and 
ounds to the Licentiousness and unlimited Pride and Avarice of Mankind, took off the Wheels of the 
Turkish
 Chariots, and caused them to move slowly and warily, having an Eye always barckwards to the Forces of 
Montecuculi,
 who at∣tended them along the Banks of the River 
Muer,
 of 
Mura.


But whilst these two great Armies marched in view of each other, the 
Walachian
 and 
Moldavi∣an
 Forces joining with a considerable number of 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 under the Command of 
Chu∣saein
 Pasha, resolved to assault, and again to recover 
Leventz,
 which tho scarce setled, being so lately taken by the Christians, yet valiantly repulsed two fierce Assaults of the Enemy, with that Courage and Bravery, that 2000 were Slain under the very Walls. By which time,
 it being the 5/15 of 
July,
 Count 
Soise
 passed the 
Nitra
 with his Horse and Foot, and thence hastning his March with all Expedition, he first Encamped at the Foot of a Hill called St. 
B
net,
 from whence he discovered the Enemies Body from the Top of a Mountain, and thence approaching nearer, threw up some Earth and Works by the Banks of the River 
Grava;
 the next day having found a fordable place of the Water, 
Soise
 in less than two hours passed the gross of his Army; which the Enemy observing, left their Siege, abandoned their Trenches, and displaid their Army in open Field, which consisting of 25. or 30. thousand fighting Men, appeared much more numerous than the Christians. For to these Forces, under the Conduct of 
Husaein
 Pasha of 
Buda,
 were join∣ed the Pasha of 
Anatolia
 and 
Cidizade,
 the Pasha of 
Temeswar,
 four Boluchees of Spahees, and a good Force of 
Tartars,
 together with the Militia of 
Moldavia
 and 
Valachia,
 under their respective Princes, which composed an Army, as was com∣puted, of above 25000. Men. Upon approach of 
Husaein
 pasha, the Christians gave way, and retreated, intending to receive their Enemies in a larger Field, and afford an occasion to the
 of greater Confidence in Execution of the Design they came to Act. The 
Turks
 supposing the Christians to be fled for fear, with more boldness marched forward. And believing this Retreat to proceed rather of Fear than Policy, continued to contemn the Pusillanimity of the Christians; and lest it should argue too much regard and esteem of their Force, vouchsafed not to send Scouts abroad, either to view their Camp, or to prevent surprisal; but some of their Officers wisely con∣sidering, that a Soldier ought never to despise his Enemy, they were perswaded to send a conside∣rable Body of Horse, to view and discover the Enemies Force, who in the way, meeting with a party of the Christians, after a small Skirmish put them to Flight, and taking some Prisoners, brought them before the General; the Prisoners upon Examination confessed, that Count 
Susa
 was fully resolved the next Morning to give them Battel, and declared the number and courage of his Army to be such, as altered the Opinion 
Husa∣ein
 had conceived of the Cowardice and Weak∣ness of the Christians power; so that that whole Night the 
Turks
 past with watchful and vigilant Guards, their Arms ready, and the whole Camp in a posture of Defence.


The next Morning being the 
9th
 of 
July,
 the day breaking discovered the Christian Army at so near a distance, as that their several Motions might be discerned; and putting themselves in Array for the Battel, made two Wings of Horse; each Wing consisting of 3000. Horse the most armed Cap-a-pe, and well provided; the Foot marched in the Body of the Army, well appoint∣ed and fitted with all sorts of Ammunition and Arms, and so raised with chearful Courages, as rendered them in appearance to the 
Turks,
 a Warlike and formidable Army. The 
Turks
 like∣wise

drew themselves into Battalia, desirous to try the fortune of the day; the right Wing was Commanded by the Prince of 
Valachia,
 and the left by the Prince of 
Moldavia.
 The Body of the Army was composed of 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 almost all Horse, except 2 or 3000. Janizaries, sent as an Auxiliary Force from 
Newhausel
 and 
Strigonium.
 These two Armies thus ranged in a Posture of Defiance, stood in view each of other, until 
Husaein
 Commanded his Men to pass the Marsh or Fen, which was between them and the Christians: but several would have perswaded him the contrary, lest the success of the day not proving to Expectation, the Marsh should be a disadvantage to their Flight, and an occasion of greater Slaughter in the pursuit; to which 
Husaein
 Couragiously answered, That Men who would Conquer were to look forward, and not behind them; those that would save their Lives by flight, were fit to perish in it; and that for his part, he was resolved to cut off all hopes of safety from his Army, but what consisted in their Swords and Vi∣ctory over their Enemies. The 
Turks
 having thus passed the Marsh, made a halt and faced the Christians until Noon; who moved not a foot from their ground, that so they might obtain the advantage of the Sun; which in the Morning being in their Faces, would upon declining be an offence unto the 
Turks.
 In the mean time, no question but both Generals made their Orations to their Soldiers, encouraging them to Fight in Defence of their Faith and Religion; of their Countries Glory and Sasety; suggested with those Arguments and Rhetorick, as was agreeable to the Principles and Condition of both Parties; and which we may well suppose according to the Li∣cence of Historians, to have been in these words, or to this effect.




The Speech of Count 
Susa
 to his Army.


WHen I see, and consider before us (Fellow Soldiers) those Enemies who are the object of our Fury and Rage, I conceive words more necessary to moderate the heat of your Anger, so as to Fight with Discretion, rather than to raise your Spirits to that height of Warlike Courage, in which consists the safety and glory of this days Fortune. For these are they, who lately in cool Blood against the Laws of Arms and Nations, unhumanely butchered our Countrymen and Kindred, and made no difference between Captives of War, and Ma∣lefactors; but like Thieves and Murderers, sentenced brave Men to Death, who had no o∣ther crime, than that they unhappily fought in defence of their Country. These are they, who in the very times of Peace, consume your Borders, and rob your Markets; and whose Capitulations of Peace, make yet all acts of ho∣stolity lawful: These are the grand Enemies and Despisers of the Cross of Christ; against whom whosoever dies, is both a Conqueror and a Mar∣tyr. This Army before your Eyes, consists in part of 
Moldavian,
 and 
Valachian
 Christians, forced to this War by compulsion, not of choice; the rest are either 
Turks
 educated in the soft∣ness of 
Asia,
 or 
Tartars
 who never made ad∣vantage by Battel, but by flight these are they with whom you have this day to contend before the Walls of 
Lewa,
 where many of your Wives, and Children, and Friends, are immured, and are Spectators of your Virtue and Courage: Let us therefore valiantly address our selves to this Battel, on the success of which the for∣tune of 
Hungary
 and 
Germany
 depends.






The Speech of 
Husaein
 Pasha to his Soldiers.


WHilst our General the Grand Vizier is so successful in his Arms abroad, ha∣ving subdued the strong Fortresses of
 Oywar 
and
 Serinswar, 
and struck a Terror and Amaze∣ment to all the Enemies of our formidable Em∣peror; let not us be unactive, or want our share in the renown and same of Triumph and Victo∣ry. I shall not need to put you in mind of the glorious Exploits of your Ancestors, whose Va∣lour and Virtue, which formed this vast Empire round about us, you ought now to imitate, and give the World new proofs, how emulous you are to exceed the Courage and Bravery of former times. The other Divisions of the
 Ot∣toman 
Power have contended hitherto with their Enemies on unequal terms, and droven them forth from their shelters of Trenches and Bulwarks; but here you have an open Field to fight, nothing between you and the naked Breasts of your Enemies; we stand in equal unmbers and terms with them; nothing can win the day but only Valour; and nothing lose it but meer Cowardice. These are the shattered Compa∣nies we have expelled last Year from
 Oywar, 
and the Companions of those, whose Bodies and Heads we have heaped before
 Strigonium: 
should we submit to be subdued by these whom our
 Osmanlees 
have so often Conquered; we should not only stain our selves with the highest infamy and shame, but give a turn to the Ʋni∣versal Fortune of the
 Ottoman 
Arms.




By this time it was Noon, and the Sun turning it self from the Christian to the 
Turkish
 Army, a warning Piece was fired from the Christian Camp, at which sign their whole Army began to advance, and with chearfulness to approach the 
Turks,
 who stood ready to receive them.
 At the first onset the Christians poured a plentiful Volly of shot on the 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 which com∣posed the main Body; at which immediately they put themselves to Flight, leaving the two Wings to an unequal Battel, who resisted not long before they followed the Example of their Companions, leaving their Baggage and Cannon, with the Honour of the day, unto the Christi∣ans; who in the pursuit slew the 
Turks
 without Compassion or Resistance; filling the Fields with dead Bodies, and the Rivers with Blood, until Night, which is the shelter of the distressed, gave a stop to their farther Slaughter:
 such as escaped betook themselves to 
Strigonium,
 where they were refused either passage over the Water or Provisions, or any other Refuge or Entertainment after their wearisome Flight; for 
Strigonium
 it self was judged now in Danger, and the next at∣tempt after the foregoing Victory; and therefore

there was no Reason or Policy to unfurnish themselves of necessary provisions to supply or relieve a discouraged and cowed Army.
 Where∣upon the 
Moldavians,
 and 
Valachians,
 finding themselves half famished, forced their Princes to return home, being glad of the occasion to acquit themselves of the 
Turkish
 Wars, in which they were used more like Slaves than Soldiers. The Princes though sensible of the danger this unli∣censed departure, and desertion of the Wars might bring upon their persons, were yet neces∣sitated to yield to the violence and mutiny of their Soldiery: In their march homewards they encountred no difficulties or opposition, unless at the 
Tibiscus,
 where a small number of 
Turks
 would have denied them passage, but were soon dispersed by the Sword of the resolved Soldeiry, who having conducted their Princes to their usual Courts, made an end betimes of this years Campagna. 
Husaein
 Pasha in the mean time, being denied entrance at 
Strigonium,
 fled to 
New∣hausel,
 where his presence was most acceptable for reinforcement of that Garison, which now was in some danger of being recovered by the Christians. Of the 
Turks
 were killed in this Fight 6000, of the Christians 150; none of Quality, excepting one 
Kovari,
 a worthy and stout 
Hun∣garian
 Captain; 4000 Carts were taken, laden with all sorts of Provision and Ammunition for War; about 100 Colours, and a great number of Tents, and Arms of all sorts; twelve pieces of Cannon, about 1000 Horse, and 140 Ca∣mels, straying in the Fields, without care of Keepres, or Riders, with great Droves of Cattel of all sorts, and other good booty and spoil, which remained as a reward to the Conqueror. The number of Prisoners was not great, by rea∣son that the Souldiery, in heat of the Pursuit, and in revenge of the 
Turks
 Cruelty towards the Garison of 
Komar
 the less, who lately in a bar∣barous Cruelty they had put to the Sword, were wholly inclined to slaughter and destruction, only about 700 
Moldavians,
 and 
Valachians,
 were spared until they came in sight of 
Strigonium,
 where they erected several Gibbets, and hanged them thereupon, with their Muskets about their Necks, requiting (as they supposed) part of the Viziers Cruelty, and executing part of God's Justice upon those who profess the Name of Christ, and yet fight under the Banner of 
Ma∣homet.


Soise
 animated with the foregoing success,
 de∣signed to attempt 
Barcan,
 a Palancha opposite on the other side of the 
Danube
 to 
Strigonium,
 and to that end embarked Ten thousand five hun∣dred of his men on Four Gallies, and Forty Gal∣liots, carrying the Teutonick Colours, in regard that religious Order had amply contributed to∣wards the building of those Vessels, when they were on the Stocks in the Arsenal of 
Vienna.
 The Soldiers were so fleshed with the former Victory, that nothing seemed difficult or hazardous; so that that Count 
Marfet,
 without Orders of the Ge∣neral, rashly in a Bravado fell in upon the Town, without any advantage of Earth, or other shelter, but with open Breasts exposed himself and Sol∣diers to all dangers; but the attempt being too difficult, he was, in sine, shot through both the Cheeks, and forced to retire with loss and dis∣reputation: This attempt was seconded by the Duke of 
Holsatia,
 and his Infantry, who bring∣ing some small pieces of Cannon to the very Pa∣lizadoes, began to batter the houses, du∣ring which about a Hundred and fifty Janisa∣ries made a vigorous Sally, but were repul∣sed with a sufficient loss, so that the Chri∣stians making good their ground, brought up and planted four Cannons, and two Mortar Pieces, and firing at the same time some Grana∣does, so plyed their work, that the Inhabitants looking on their condition as desperate, gave fire themselves to their Wooden Buildings, passed the Bridge, and recovered 
Strigonium.
 The Town thus abandoned, the Christians had no difficulty to get possession, but entring quietly in, seized what was remaining of value, and adding to the flames, by other fires, in a few hours reduced all to Ashes; which being done,
 
Soise
 marched back to 
Komorra,
 to resresh his men, and take Coun∣sel what ought to be the next design and enter∣prize to be taken in hand. And here for a while was a pause, or full point of the actions of 
Soise,
 who not wanting Adversaries in the Imperial Court, emulous of his happiness and fortune, instilled such suspicions and scruples into the mind of the Emperor and Council, as caused 
Soise
 to give up his Commission, that he might seek a life private, and free from the evil Tongues of the envious, until afterwards his Virtues dis∣persing those malignant Clouds, he was restored to the good Opinion of his 
Cesarean
 Majesty, and honoured with the Charge and Command of the strong Fortress of 
Komorra,
 where I my self had once the honour to make him a Visit, and was courteously received by him. This ill success of the Pasha of 
Buda
 arrived the Viziers ears, whilst he was attempting to pass the River 
Rab,
 in which were many difficulties, in regard the Banks were defendedby the Christian Palancha's, which in every adventure cut off considerable numbers of men. At which loss of men, and time, and the ill success near 
Lewa,
 the Vizier being greatly moved, made another attempt on the 
27th
 of 
July;
 advancing with the Gross of his Army as far as 
Kemend,
 where the River runs narrow and shallow, but by the valour of the 
Hungarians, Germans,
 and 
French
 conducted by General 
Montecuculi,
 an 
Italian
 Born, were re∣pulsed with some Slaughter.


On the first of 
August,
 the 
Turks
 made ano∣ther considerable attempt, having planted Guns on the Banks of the River, which shot into the Christian Camp, and passed over in one place Six thousand Janisaries and 
Albanians,
 and near a Village called 
Chiesfalo,
 where the Water was narrow and shallow, very considerable numbers of Horse crouded over. At which formidable sight, the Christians collecting their Forces to∣gether, retreated to a more spacious place, where might be open Field sufficient for both Armies to draw up and join Battel. About half the Army having now passed the Water, the other part, in which was the Vizier, remained still on the other side, intending the next Morn∣ing to follow and advance to the Body, which was gone before; but it happened, by God's Pro∣vidence, that that very Night there sell such a Deluge of Rain,
 as immediately made the River to swell above its Banks, and become altogether unpassable without a Bridge or Floats; so that the 
Turkish
 Army being now divided by the Wa∣ters, were uncapable of yielding any sudden assistance each to the other. Howsoever, the Vi∣zier judging that that part of his Army which had already passed, was an equal Match for the Christians, entertained not the least diffidence of good success, at least supposed they might be able to decline a Battel, until by abatement of the Waters (which could not be long at that Season of the Year) he were enabled to pass, and join his main Body with them; and therefore full of hope and confidence, having at first dis∣comfited

the forlorn hope of the Christians, which consisted of a thousand men, dispatched immediately Messengers to acquaint the Grand Signior of his success and passage, which News he knew would be the more grateful, because the Grand Signior by daily Letters and Com∣mands urged him to proceed in his March, and not to suffer the impediment of a narrow Ditch to be an interruption to the whole 
Ottoman
 Force, which in former times was not restrained by the depth or breadth of the Ocean. The Grand Signior having received this Intelligence, as if the intire Victory and Triumph over the World consisted in the passage over the 
Rab,
 was transported with such an extraordina∣ry joy and assurance of Victory, that to antici∣pate the good News a solemn Festival was or∣dained for the space of seven days, and seven nights, called by the 
Turks, Dunalma;
 in which time the whole nights were made light with Lamps and Candles,
 and made chearful with great Guns, Vollies of Muskets, Sound of Drums and Trumpets, revellings and what other So∣lemnities might testifie joy and triumph. But scarce three Nights of this vain Dream had pas∣sed, before the Grand Signior awaked by intel∣ligence, contrary to his assured expectation, of the Defeat and Destruction of a considerable part of the Viziers Army, shamefully commanded the Lights to be extinguished, and the remain∣ing four Nights designed for Joy, to be convert∣ed to Melancholly and Darkness: And though the rashness and vain sancy of the Governours was the sole cause of this precipitate mirth, yet as great men love always to charge their errours and follies on the shoulders of others, so the Sul∣tan accused the Chimacham, through false In∣formation, to have been the Author of this shameful Decree; and in that fury, calling the Executioner, had certainly taken off his head, had not his young Minion or Favourite, now called 
Kul Ogli
 (promoted to the Perferment of 
Asan,
 before mentioned) with much ear∣nestness and Prayers interceded for his Life.


And indeed this Joy and Triumph was so∣much more ridiculous and shameful, by how much more fatal and destructive was the ensuing Event. For the 
Turks
 being now got over the River, had not, at first, time enough given them to cast up Earth, but were sorced by the Chri∣stians to an Engagement; for the Christian Army was drawn into Batalia to receive them. The right Wing consisted of the 
Austrian
 Forces, com∣manded by 
Montecuculi
 himself; the Left was formed of the Confederates of the 
Rhine,
 com∣manded by Count 
Olac,
 to which was adjoined Forty Troops of the 
French
 Cavalry, conducted by Monsieur 
Coligni,
 and the main Body was commanded by the Marshal General Marquis 
Bada,
 which composed a very formidably Body, and assailed the 
Turks
 with extraordinary Va∣lour; the Fight was very furious, and began about Nine a Clock in the morning on the third of 
August,
 and continued till Four in the After∣noon with variable fortune; during which time the Waters being abated, the Spahees passed over in several places, and charged the left. Wing of the Christians, and in other places they made attempts, only to divert the Army, whilst the Ja∣nisaries threw up Earth to secure a passage for the rest; which when the Christians espied, they at first resolved to sound a Retreat, but after∣wards perceiving that the Trench was but new∣ly begun, 
Montecuculi
 drawing up the Body of the Army into a half Moon, attacked the Janisa∣ries on all sides with that fury, ordering the Bo∣dies of Horse to contend with the Spahees; that the 
Turks
 now faintly fighting began to give ground to their Enemies, at which instant turn of Fortune, an outcry was heard, That 
Serini
 on the other side had set on the Viziers Camp; which so animated the Christians, and terrified the 
Turks,
 that the latter began to give back, and put themselves to shameful flight, leaving dead upon the Place Eight thousand of their Companions, and the Glory of the Day to the Christians. The 
Turks,
 who always fly disor∣derly, not knowing the Art of a handsome Re∣treat,
 crouded in heaps to pass the River, the Horse trampling over the Foot, and the Foot throwing themselves headlong into the Water, without consideration of the depth, or choice of Places fordable; those sinking catching hold on others who could swim, sunk down, and perished together; others were carried away by the ra∣pidness of the Stream, and both Men and Horse were carried down the River, and swallowed up in deeper places: The Water was died with Blood, and the whole face of the River was covered with Men, Horse, Garments, all swimming promiscu∣ously together; no difference was here between the valiant and the Cowardly, the Foolish and the Wise, Counsel and Chance, all being involved in the same violence of Calamity,
 
Non vox & mutui hortatus juvabant adversante unda, nihil strcnuus ab ignavo, sapiens a prudenti, consilia a casu differre, cuncta pari violentia involvebantur;
 so that the Waters devoured a far greater number than the Sword, whilst the Vizier standing on the other side of the River, was able to afford no kind of help or relief, but as one void of Counsel and Reason, knew not how, nor where to apply a remedy. This defeat though in Christendom not greatly boasted, by reason that the destru∣ction of the 
Turks,
 which was most considerable by the Water, was partly concealed to them, yet the 
Turks
 acknowledg that Ruine and Slaughter to have been of a far greater number than what the Christian Diaries relate, confessing that since the time that the 
Ottoman
 Empire arriv'd to this great∣ness, no Stories make mention of any Slaughter or Disgrace it hath suffered to be equal unto the calamity and dishonour of this. On the 
Turks
 side were slain that day, 
Ishmael
 the late Pasha of 
Buda,
 and Kimacham of 
Constantinople,
 by a shot from the Enemy passing the Water; the Spaheelar Agasee, or General of the Spahees; the Janisar Aga, the younger Son of the Tartar 
Han,
 and several othes Pashaws; 
Alibegh,
 Ge∣neral of 
Bosna,
 Thirty Capugibashees, Five and thirty Pages of the Vizier's, and Three hundred of his Guard, Five thousand Janisaries, Three thousand Spahees, Fifteen hundred Bosnacks, Eight hundred 
Albanians,
 Six hundred 
Croats
 and 
Hungarians
 of the 
Turks
 Subjects, Two hun∣dred and fifty 
Valachians
 and 
Moldavians,
 Six hundred 
Tartars,
 of 
Anatolia
 fifteen hundred, and about Four thousand other 
Asiaticks,
 from the farthest parts of the 
Turks
 Dominions, East∣ward; so that in all we may account Seventeen thousand slain on the 
Turks
 side; besides which were taken Sixteen pieces of Cannon, a Hun∣dred and twenty six Colours, with the Standard of the Viziers Guard, Five thousand Cemiters, most of which were embossed with Silver, and some beset with Jewels, with many Horses, of which six were sent as a Present to the Vizier. Of the Christians were slain near Three thou∣sand Men; those of note were, The Count 
Nas∣sau,
 Count 
Charles
 of 
Bracondorf,
 Captain of the Guards to Count 
Montecuculi,
 Count 
Fuchier


General of the Artillery of the Empire, Collonel 
Pleiter,
 with his Lieutenant Collonel and Ser∣jeant Major, and with many other Gentlemen of the 
French
 Nation, who deserve for ever to be chronicled for their Virtue and Valour. For herein the 
French
 Nation ought not to lose their just praise, having made proofs of their Valour, as well in this, as in other Battels; it being re∣ported, That Monsieur 
Coligni
 their General, killed Thirty 
Turks
 with his own hand.


The News of this Victory being posted to 
Vi∣enna,
 it is wonderful to consider with what Ap∣plauses, with what Honours, with what 
En∣comiums
 the Fame of 
Montecuculi
 was celebra∣ted; for besides the Triumphs, with Fires, sound∣ing of Bells, Banquets, 
d other demonstrations of solemn Joy; the Glory of 
Montecuculi
 was the Theme of every Ballad sung in the corners of streets; which Honours of the Commonalty were seconded by greater and more substantial of the Imperial Court, who conferred upon him the Title of Lieutenant General of the whole Army, a Dignity so eminent as is inferiour to none, except the Emperor, in order of the Militia; and was not without some scruple granted to the Arch∣duke 
Leopold
 by his Brother 
Ferdinand
 the Third; and withheld from 
Piccolomini
 Duke of 
Amalfi,
 until he had highly merited it, and made his way to it through bloody fields, where Provi∣dence first crowned him with Laurels of Success and Victory.


And here is just occasion for us to doubt, why 
Montecuculi
 should be thus admired and loaded with Honours, whilst the services of 
Serini
 and 
Soise
 were so far from being taken notice of, that they seemed to effect the disgrace and ruine of these Worthies, rather than to produce the fa∣vour of their Prince, and the applause of their Country, the natural Rewards of Valour and Virtue. And indeed I cannot but confess, I my self have wondred, when in the Court of 
Vienna,
 I have heard the Actions and Zeal of 
Serini
 so slightly spoken of, or contemned, when a Stran∣ger took the liberty but to descant on his acti∣ons, and to vent any thing which but savoured of his commendations. The reason of which, I ad∣venture to assign unto two causes. The first is, that Antipathy or natural aversion the 
Germans
 have to the 
Hungarians
 and 
Croatians,
 these endeavouring to maintain the Priviledges of a People, who have a free liberty of the Election of their Prince; whilst the others desirous to take occasion to weaken and impoverish them, would necessi∣tate them to yield their Kingdom to the Empe∣ror by an hereditary Right. The second is, the fury of 
Serini
 and 
Soise,
 whose zeal without consideration of irritating the 
Turk,
 or fear of moving the passion of the Lyon beyond the terms of an easie pacification, transported them to com∣mit all damage and ruine, which are the just concomitants of War; which rage seemed o∣ver violent to the Court at 
Vienna,
 and not to suit with the present Policy of the War, which was designed to be carried on rather in a defen∣sive than in an offensive posture; imagining per∣haps, that the good nature of the 
Turk
 might be complemented into Peace, and that gen∣tleness and generosiry might have the same ef∣fect upon them, as it had upon 
Saul,
 when 
Da∣vid
 had his life at his mercy, and yet spared him: according to which counsels of the Court, 
Montecuculi,
 squaring every particular of his mo∣tion, and thereunto adding success, mounted on the wings of Fame, and had his Glory celebrated without diminutions; but the hot and zealous temper of 
Serini,
 which Souldier-like understood nothing but down-right blows, knew not how to use that moderation and caution, which the Im∣perial Court judged an ingredient so requisite to the prudent management of the present War, that he was esteemed uncapable of command, who had not discretion enough to practice it: And this was the true reason that 
Serini
 was discoun∣tenanced, and that his Command was taken from him, and that his Appeal to the Court was without redress: Howsoever in regard that the Fame he had won carried him high in the esteem of all Christendom, he was entertained with hopes and fair promises; and even after the very Sattel of 
Rab,
 nothing was more commonly dis∣coursed than the giving 
Nicholas Ser
 
 com∣mand independent of any other General. But in the end it proved nothing but vai
 P
osals to humour the fancy of 
Serini
 himself
 and to sa∣tisfie the World, which admi
l 
 Person so qualified and deserving as he, 
 be made a subject of so much disgrace and 
.


With this News the 
Turk
 
 greatly ashamed and dejected, having but two days be∣fore demonstrated excesses of joy, congratulated the happy News one to the other, 
 
er their manner sent Presents abroad, derided the Chri∣stians upon the News, exprobriated them with a Thousand injuries, and applauded their own Virtue, Valour, and the righteousness of their Cause and Religion: But on a sudden Intelligence coming contrary to their expectations, such a dampness fell upon their spirits, that for some days there was a deep silence of all News at 
Con∣stantinople;
 they that the Day before sought for Christians to communicate to them the Miracles of their Victory, now avoided their Company, ashamed of their too forward joy, and the li∣berty they had taken to contemn and deride the low condition of the Christian Camp And now the ill News not being able longer to be con∣cealed, Prayers and Humiliation were appointed publickly to be made at all the great Mo
chs of 
Constantinople
 and 
Adrianople,
 where all Ema
ms with their young Scholars were commanded to resort, and sing certain Prayers appointed for such occasions.


The minds of the Soldiery after this defeat were very much discomposed,
 tending more to sedi∣tion than obedience. Every one took licence to speak loudly and openly his opinion, that the War was commenced upon unjust and unlawful grounds. That the total Eclipse of the Moon, which portends always misfortunes to the 
Turks,
 should have caused more caution in the Com∣manders in ingaging the Armies this year, until the malignancy of that Influence had been over∣passed. All generally accused the first Vizier as the Author and ill Manager of the War,
 
Ini∣quissima bellorum conditio est, prospera omnes sibi vendicant, adversa uni imputantur,
 and calling to mind the solemn Oath with which Sultan 
Soly∣man
 confirmed his Capitulations with the Em∣peror, particularly vowing never to pass the 
Rab,
 or place where the 
Turks
 received their defeat, without a solid and reasonable ground of War, concluded that this Invasion was a violation of the Vow, and an injury to the sacred Memory of that fortunate Sultan; and therefore that all Enterprises and Attempts of this War would be fatal and destructive to the Mussulmen or Be∣lievers, and the end dishonourable to the Empire.


This opinion was rooted with much superstition and strength of fancy in the minds of the Vulgar: And the rumors in the Camp that the Vizier upon a false Alarm of the approach of the Enemy to∣wards his Quarters, had commanded the Army to

retreat, administred fury and courage to the Chri∣stians, and fear and amazement to his own; from which errour and timidity was occasioned that slaughter which ensued; on which discourses and reports dangerous discontents daily increasing in the hearts of the souldiery, it is thought they would have vented their passion and revenge on their General, had he not at a publick Assembly of all the Heads and Commanders of the Army cleared himself freely, by charging the miscarri∣age of all upon the Grand Signior, having acted nothing but with Authority of the Imperial Com∣mand; promising with as much speed as honour and safety would permit, by agreement and com∣position of Peace, to bring the War to a conclu∣sion. And this contrivance and art was that (as is supposed) which for the present secured his life; for the Soldiery were greatly terrified and pos∣sessed with a dread of the Christians, and amaze∣ment upon every Alarm. For the old and expe∣rienced Commanders and Veterane Souldiers were either destroyed by the secret Proscriptions of the Vizier 
Kuperlee,
 or slain in the Engage∣ments of this Year; and the 
Asian
 Spahees and other Soldiers having Wives and Children, and Possessions to look after, were grown poor, and desired nothing more than in peace and quietness to return to their homes: So that nothing could come more grateful to this Camp, no largesses or donatives could pacifie the minds of the Sol∣diery more than the promises and expectations of a Peace.


The Sultan during these disturbances and mis∣fortunes was preparing for a hunting Journey to an obscure Village called 
Yamboli,
 about three or four days travel from 
Adrianople,
 designing to drive all those vast Woods along the Black Sea for Game, where he had a small ruinous Se∣raglio. The Queen-Mother, the Chimacam, with all the Court, were to accompany him. The Equipage and Pomp he went in, perswaded many, that the design of that Journey was grounded on other causes of Policy, than what were generally penetrated: Some conceived, that the Vizier contrived his Journey thither, to di∣vert him from opportunities of receiving intel∣ligence from Spahees, and others of the true state of the Camp, and management of Affairs: Others judged it might be to avoid in that obscure place the mutinous seditions of the Soldiery. On what consideration soever it might be, the Grand Signior having spent some time abroad, return∣ed again to 
Adrianople
 with all his Retinue, with∣out doing any thing more important than kil∣ling great numbers of wild Beasts, and enno∣bling those Wildernesses and Woods about 
Yam∣boli
 with the fame of his renowned Hunting. 
Ke∣blelee
 Pasha being slain (as we have said) before 
Serinswar,
 who was Husband to the Viziers Sister, the Vizier bestowed the Widow on 
Husaein
 Pasha of 
Silistria.
 And much about the same time the Grand Signior considering that his own Si∣ster, by the death of her old Husband 
Ishmael
 Pasha, slain in the last Battel, led a single life, conferred her in Marriage upon the old 
Maho∣met
 Pasha, whom before we have related to have been 
Kahya
 to the Vizier, late Pasha of 
Dar∣biquier,
 and now of 
Aleppo,
 who as an Honour charged with a weight of troubles and other in∣conveniences, seemed thankfully to receive her; and though he was a man of Ninety years of age, and had long since forgot the solaces of the bridal Bed, yet according to the custom of Marriage with a Sultana, he was ingaged to divorce his for∣mer Wife, with whom he had past the Summer and Winter of his age, and as a constant Husband, was still uxorious in his love. So that in the midst of Wars, where some found Graves, others found Marriage-beds, and reason of State found a Va∣cation to conjoyn 
Mars
 and 
Venus
 without inter∣ruption of ruder Enterprises.


The Great Vizier after his defear marched to 
Stultweissenburg
 or 
Alba Regalis,
 to recruit and refresh his Army, and expect the Recruit of the Pasha of 
Aleppo,
 who was said to bring with him about Eight thousand Soldiers.


From 
Sultweissenburg
 the 
Turks,
 with the gross of their Army, returned to 
Strigonium;
 and here the Vizier not unmindful of the shameful flight, and rebellious return of the Princes of 
Moldavia
 and 
Valachia
 to their own Countries without his order or permission, sent one Messenger after the other in great haste and fury, after the 
Turkish
 manner, to recal those Princes to the War; and that laying aside all excuses whatsoever, they should immediatly, with what Forces they could collect, repair again to the Camp.
 The Princes weary of the War, and fearful of the Viziers evil intentions to take away their lives, endeavoured to excuse their flight, alledging, that their People would not obey, or follow them to the Wars in any considerable numbers, and that now it being the end of the Summer, new Levies would be of great expence, and of little benefit, and disenable them from paying their yearly Tribute; of which (notwithstanding their consumption of Treasure in the last Expedition) they were like to find no ease or relaxation, though a burden too great for their harassed and impoverished Country to support. But these ex∣cuses were no arguments to resolved 
Turks;
 so that Commands came doubled and trebled one after the other full of threats and menaces, to march forward with what Forces they could collect, the Messengers assuring them, That there was no design prepared against them by the Vizier, but what was friendly and of good inten∣tion. At length the Princes not able to remain longer without a censure of Rebellion to the Port, with heavy Hearts and light Purses set forwards with about fifteen hundred men a piece, sending before such sums of Money and Presents, as they hoped might mollifie and prepare their access to the Vizier, whilst they themselves marched slowly, to afford longer time to the Operation of this Physick. The Prince of 
Valachia
 had in∣trusted about Forty thousand Zaichins to an Of∣ficer of his called his Vestiario, or Master of his Wardrobe, whom he had sent before him, therewith to make his access 
asie and safe to the Vizier: Of whose faith that he might assure himself the better, he made him swear before the Holy Altar, and take the Communion there∣upon, that he would be faithful and active in this Negotiation. The Vestiario thus departing,
 added to his religious Vows, common promises and protestations; but no shoner was he a few Miles distant from his Master, before he tired in his Vows, and altered his road from the Vizier, to the way leading to 
Constantinople,
 declaring as he went, That his Prince was become Rebel, and was fled, and that he, not to be Partner in his perfidiousness, was hasting to 
Constantinople,
 there to give evidence of his faith and submis∣sion to the 
Turks.
 This unexpected news com∣ing to the Prince, caused him to despair of all security and reconciliation with the Vizier, and force him by flight to make good the words of his treacherous Servant; so that taking with him his Wifeand remainder of his Wealth, passed through 
Transylvania
 with much difficulty, and at length arrived within the Emperors Territories, resol∣ving

to exchange an inconstant and dangerous Principality for a more secure and private course of life. But this impious 
Greek
 did not rest quiet with his ill acquired Estate without recei∣ving disturbance from the Boiars or Nobles of the Country; and 
Stridia Bei
 the new-made Prince, justly accusing him for having robbed the Pub∣lick Treasury, extorted from him the Sum of 150000 Dollars towards his Investment in the Principality, and ease of the Country, which was now wracked for payment of old debts, and the growing charges of the new Prince. And thus much of the Princes of 
Moldavia
 and 
Valachia.


At 
Strigonium
 great were the Consultations, what course was to be taken: The Christians were now Masters of the Field, and the 
Turks
 dis∣couraged, and now the Summer was so far spent, that it was too late to think of recovering their reputation that year with the hazard of a Battel. So that at length it was resolved to unite the shattered Forces of 
Chusaein
 Pasha, lately de∣feated by Count 
Susa,
 to the Army of the Vizier, and attend to secure 
Oywar
 or 
Newhausel
 with Pro∣visions, Ammunition, and Reinforcement of that Garison, whereby this War might conclude with some Trophies of advance, and inlargement of the 
Ottoman
 Borders, which in all their Wars is the design and Maxime of the 
Turks.
 So that marching thither, they gathered and collected all the Provisions possible, and having supplied the Garison, they returned again to 
Strigonium
 with all expedition, retaining still impressions of ter∣ror from the late ill success. And that they might march with less impediment, they sent their Ar∣tillery and heavy Baggage down the 
Danube:
 Such was the fear of the 
Turkish
 Army at present, that it is supposed, had the Christians eagerly pursued their Victory, they had not only de∣feated the whole 
Turkish
 Force with little oppo∣sition, but also without any impediment marched to the very Walls of 
Buda.


But what infatuation soever blinded the Chri∣stian Counsels, little or no advantage was taken, as if the design of the Emperor had only been to repel the Enemy from his Borders, or that he feared to irritate the 
Turks
 with a too invete∣rate and pertinacious prosecution of his Victories-Instead of which, the Vizier making some Over∣tures of Peace, and evidencing the realty of his intentions by his Presents of a Vest of Sables, and a Horse richly furnished, with which he flat∣tered and caressed the 
German
 Resident, the Ar∣ticles were accepted and embraced at 
Vienna
 with much greediness, and the Peace almost wholly concluded and clapped up in a moment, to the astonishment of the whole World.
 But as matters of this nature cannot succeed without just and due considerations, so on both sides cer∣tain causes concurred which inclined and dis∣posed things to an accommodation. For on the 
Turks
 part there wanted not such in the 
Otto∣man
 Court, who emulous of the Grand Viziers fortune and charge, endeavoured to remove him from the favour of his Prince, by accusing him in many particulars of negligence, and impru∣dence in the conduct of his Affairs. To answer which, his return with the Olive-branch of Peace in his mouth, and yet the Laurels of Conquest on his head, having added so considerable a For∣tress as 
Newhausel
 to the Dominions of the Em∣pire, and demolishment 
Serinswar,
 the Original cause of the War, were a sufficient conviction of the evil accusations of his Adversaries, and an argument irresistible, when inforced by the Authority of his own Presence. On the Em∣perors side, the demand of the City of 
Erfurt
 by the Elector of 
M
ntz,
 situated on his Confines, at a time of so much exigency as this, and se∣conded by hopes of assistance from 
France,
 and the Hans Towns on the 
Rhyne,
 whereby it was probable great turbulences might result, inclined the Emperor with much reason to Proposals of Peace; instructions for which, being conveyed to the Resident then in the 
Turkish
 Camp, from the 
Caesarean
 Court, after a short Treaty the Articles were agreed and concluded, as followeth.




First, 
That
 Transilvania 
remain with its ancient Limits and Priviledges under the Command of Prince
 Michael Apafi.


Secondly, 
That the Emperor of
 Germany 
have liberty to fortifie both
 Gutta 
and
 Nitra.


Thirdly, 
That the
 Turks 
shall not alter or inno∣vate any thing on the Confines of
 Hungary, 
or any other part bordering on the Emperor.


Fourthly, 
That
 Apafi 
pay Six hundred thousand Dollars to the
 Ottoman 
Port for expences of the War.


Fifthly, 
That all acts of Hostility between the Emperor, and the Grand Signior, and their Subjects, for ever cease.


Sixthly, 
That the two Provinces of
 Zatmar 
and
 Zaboli, 
granted to
 Ragotzki 
by his Imperial Ma∣jesty during life, return again to the Emperor, to which neither the Prince of
 Transilvania, 
much less the
 Ottoman 
Port, shall ever pretend.


Seventhly, 
That the strong Castle of
 Zechelhyd, 
which revolted from the Emperor, be demolished, in regard neither Party will relinquish his Right there∣unto.


Eighthly, 
That
 Varadin 
and
 Newhausel 
remain to the
 Turk, 
having conquered them by force of their own Arms.


Ninthly, 
That for confirmation of this Peace, Ambassadors be interchangeably sent with Presents of equal value.




On these Terms (of which none seems dis∣advantageous to the Christian Interest, unless the fourth Article, the dishonour of which seems to be covered with the name of 
Apafi,
 though the score was paid by the Emperor) the Peace was established, and the Vizier, as a beginning there∣of, gave liberty to many Christian Captives; some whereof were of Quality, and Proclama∣tion was made through all the Confines for a Cessation of Arms. Howsoever, some petty mat∣ters remained undecided, which were deferred until the Arrival of an extraordinary Ambassa∣dour, who was to exchange with the 
Turks
 ano∣ther Ambassadour in the Month of 
May
 follow∣ing; and in the mean time suspension of Arms, and all other Hostilities was confirmed. At which News all sorts of People amongst the 
Turks
 were greatly rejoyced, and the Publica∣tion thereof the more welcome, by how much the more unexpected. Whereby we may ob∣serve the alteration of that ancient Martial dispo∣sition, which was natural to this Empire, which whilst it was exercised in War, grew hardy, active and inured to warlike exercise, but now through idleness and want of War (except the 
Venetian,
 which affords the Soldiery no conside∣rable employment) their minds became resty, wearied with one year and a halfs labour, and dejected with the unprosperous success of one Summer.


But what Considerations soever the Emperor might have to conclude this Peace,
 the 
Hunga∣rians
 were highly dissatisfied with it, because it was founded on their proper loss; and that 
Newhausel
 was given for a price of the com∣mon quiet, which none but themselves paid

and yet all 
Germany
 enjoyed the benefit. That that Town was an appendage to the Kingdom of 
Hungary,
 and to which the Emperour having on∣ly the claim (as they pretended) of an Elective Prince, could not dismember any part without consent of the States thereof; and this position they maintained with that heat and fury, that they declared themselves disobliged from obser∣vation of the Articles, resolving to vindicate their own right in despight of all opposition whatsoe∣ver; and that since the Emperour had undertaken their Protection, he was bound to assert their freedom, and defend their Cities, even with the expence of his own Treasury, and at the hazard of his own hereditary Possessions. But to these ex∣orbitant Demands, the Emperours Council reply∣ed with these following reasons and moderation; That they themselves were the first Beginners and Promoters of this War; That His Majesty at their instance and request condescended to pro∣tect them as Subjects, not only with draining of his own Exchequer, and Blood of his Patrimoni∣al Dominions, but with the charge of hired and mercenary Strangers. In the mean time what assistance had the Hungarians brought to this War, or to their own defence? What Contributions did they ever make? What Forces did they e∣ver unite in the Field by a general assent of their whole Kingdom? Notwithstanding his Majesty was ready to continue the War, could they them∣selves propose either a safe way for the mainte∣nance of it, or that the present Conjuncture did not offer honourable Conditions of a happy Com∣posure. Moreover,
 That the King of 
Spain,
 his Uncle, and Father in Law, being aged and de∣crepit, leaving no other Heir than an infirm and sickly Child, to support the charge and weight of all his Kingdoms, it was requisite that at such a time as this, he should be free from all incum∣brances, either to assist the Infant in Administra∣tion of the Government, or to assert his own Rights (if so it should please God) in the Suc∣cession. And that now, since a Treaty was on foot for Election of a Successor to the Kingdom of 
Poland,
 it was necessary for his Imperial Ma∣jesty to bear his part in that Transaction; but above all, it was considerable, That the common Enemy being Rich and Powerful, God had seem∣ed to put his Victory into their Hands to no other end than to improve it unto a Peace, which being at this time neglected, the best that could ensue would be the miseries of War, which turning on the inconstant Wheel of Fortune with variety of successes, is always attended with Slaughter, Captivity, Fire, Sword, and a thousand other Calamities. These, and such like reasons, mo∣derated and mollified the exasperate spirits of the Hungarians, so that they seemed to aquiesce and be satisfied, and making a Vertue of Necessity, had patience where there was no other re∣medy.


The sudden News of this unexpected Peace did in like manner affect the French King, and the States of the Empire, judging it unreasonable for them to be interessed in the War, and yet un∣concerned in the Conclusion of the Peace. How∣soever, things being well represented, and as well received and understood; his Most Christian Maje∣sty accepted of the Reasons as just and satisfactory. In the mean time the French had a free liberty to make choice of their Winter Quarters,
 which they fixed upon in 
Bohemia;
 but their King being unwil∣ling to burden the Country with his Souldiers for a longer time than they were serviceable to them, he ordered them to march, and quarter in 
Alsa∣tia;
 but before their departure the Emperour honoured Monsieur 
de Coligni
 with his Picture in∣circled with Diamonds, and the other Officers with Gold Chains and Medals; ordering the Troops not to march above ten miles a day, and every Third to be a Day of repose, and to be en∣tertained all the way at sree Quarter, so as to return into 
France
 jocund and healthy, as they departed thence. But before they would bid adieu to those Countries, the General and Officers paid their Visit to Count 
Ni∣cholas Serini,
 presenting him with a Horse, Furniture, and Pistols, as a small Tribute to that Great Captain, whose Fame was cele∣brated through the whole World; ingenuously confessing, That the rumour of his name struck more amazement and terrour in the Enemy, than the Armies that actually faced them, and was more instrumental in ob∣taining the Victory on the Banks of 
Rab,
 than their weapons or courage which fought against them. But not long after this worthy Heroe 
Serini
 hunting one day separated from the rest of his At∣tendants in the Thickets of a Wood, behold, on a sudden was surprized by the rushing forth of a wild Boar, which raging, and made furious by some Wounds he had received, first struck him in the Knee, with which falling to the ground, the fierce Beast not giving him leisure to recover himself, ganched him again in the head with his broad Tusk,
 which proved so mor∣tal, that in a short time he expired in the Arms of one of his Pages. This was the end of this va∣liant Captain, who unconquered in many and re∣doubled Conflicts of his Enemies, was made the prey of an ignoble Beast. Such are the secret and occult Providences of Heaven, which men interpret or reflect on as they are governed by prejudice or interest. And so did the 
Turks
 at∣tribute the Fall of this their Grand Adversary to the righteousness of their Religion, and just∣ness of their Cause; as if he had been a Person unworthy to dye by the hand of a man, was con∣demned to be executed by that Beast, which is most abominated and detested by the 
Turkish
 Rites.
 He was a Person as mortal an Enemy to the 
Turks,
 as ever 
Hannibal
 was to the 
Romans;
 in Dangers most couragious, in War valiant, and patient of labour; in Peace courteous, and mo∣derate in his pleasures; his Diet was natural, ra∣ther than artificial; in Banquets, or Drinking Meetings, after the fashion of that Country, was sparing in Wine, and rather abstemious than in∣temperate; Musick and Dances were the Enter∣tainment of the softer and effeminate part of his Court, rather than his own Pastimes, whose Recreations were chiefly in the Woods, and in such Huntings as had something in them of si∣militude with Martial Exercises; his Judgment was profound and deep, and yet his familiar Discourse facetious; his Conversation obliging, his humour affable, and yet severe and majestick; he spake much, and yet well; his disposition was li∣beral and generous, especially to his Soldiers, whom he never restrained or defrauded of their Booty and Prey, but contented every one with a just and exact Division. In short, he was one of those zealous Champions of the Chri∣stian Cause, who in the Chronicles of past Ages ought to be placed and numbred amongst the worthiest Heroes.


The Winter now approaching, and a conclu∣sion in all appearance made of the War, the Vi∣zier returned to 
Belgrade,
 designing to remain there until the 
German
 Ambassadour had entered the 
Turkish
 borders, and in the mean time sent for his Mother thither, pretending that in an

uncertain and changeable estate the Maternal Blessing is of highest Consolation, it being esteem∣ed pious amongst the Turks for a man to dye at the Feet of his Mother. This Mother of his was esteemed a cunning or wise Woman, by whose Charms and Incantations his Father and he were supposed long to have conserved the Office of Vi∣zier; and as my own Ears can witness, the com∣mon Souldiers Discourse, That his Mothers Art consisted much in Philtrums and Charms, recon∣ciling affection and friendship, and had a power over the Grand Signiors Inclinations and Under∣standing, rendring all things and actions the Vi∣zier had performed in this War full of merit and admiration. This I say was the Discourse of some common Soldiers.


In the Month of 
December,
 that Blazing-star which appeared formidably to most parts of the known World, was also seen within the Turkish Empire, not without a general terrour of all, as prognosticating disasters of Sword, Pestilence, and Famine; and set the Turkish Astrologers at work to find out the mystery it portended: from whose Art most commonly was divined the death of some great Person in the Empire, which some would have to be the Grand Signior, othes the Visier; others both, as they desired alteration and change of Government.


The Grand Signior continued all this time at 
Adrianople,
 taken up with an extraordinary de∣light and pleasure in his Court there, with which his aversion to 
Constantinople
 so much increased, that he could not endure so much as the name of the place: and if accidentally in his Hunting (as it reported) he chanced to fall into the road which led thither, and remembring himself there∣of, would immediately turn thence, as one that corrects himself of some desperate errour, or a∣voids a path which tends to an evitable destructi∣on. The Kadelescher and the other grave Judges of the Law observing this unreasonable hatred of their Prince to his Imperial Seat, considered how prejudicial it was to him and his People to have a City of that renown, antiquity, and commo∣diousness of living, despised and abandoned: and that perhaps the Souldiery now upon their March from the War, might be impatient of returning home, as all the Dependants on the 
Divan,
 and Personages of great Quality, desired to in∣joy their Habitations and Gardens at 
Constanti∣nople;
 from which discontents on all sides it was concluded, That there might result dangerous Seditions and Mutinies, and therefore resolved (and as some say also at the instigation of the Vi∣zier) to prostrate themselves before the Grand Signior, and tender him their opinions and sence in that particular, which they accordingly per∣forming and assigning the Kadelescher, or the Chief Justice with all humility to be their Mouth in this Petition, their counsel was received with that indignation, that they were chased from the Grand Signiors presence with fury and high dis∣pleasure, and the Kadelescher at that moment deprived of his Office.


To these other extravagances the Grand Sig∣nior would have added another of a higher na∣ture and cruelty, by causelesly putting to death his Brother 
Solyman,
 whom all the time of his Reign, together with another Brother, he had kept Prisoner in the Seraglio: for now having a Son of his own, he conceived it more secure to remove all competition that might be for the Go∣vernment, according to the example and custom of the Ottoman Princes; but suffering some re∣morse of conscience in the thoughts of imbruing his hands in the blood of his guiltless Brother, con∣ceived it more justifiable to perform the Fact by process of Law, and to that end sent to the Muf∣ti for his Fetfa or Sentence, 
viz.
 That in such a case, where there is a sufficient provision for con∣tinuance of the true Lineage of the Ottoman Fa∣mily, whether it may be lawful, according to their Law and ancient Presidents, to take off some as superfluous Suckers, that draw not only nourishment from the root, but endanger also the life of the Tree. But the Mufti was not so cruel or unjust as to pass this Sentence, but rather sup∣plicated the Grand Signior to deser this resolu∣tion; for having but one Son, and that a Child, which was subject to the common chances of mor∣tality, the 
Ottoman
 Family was not so sufficient∣ly provided of Heirs, that he could pass his Sen∣tence for taking away one, who was so neces∣sary a reserve and member of it; with which re∣ply the Grand Signior suffered himself to be overcome, having some touches of Conscience, and perhaps, not being naturally cruel, some sence of compassion towards his innocent Bro∣ther.


But returning now to the Great Vizier, we find him in his Winter quarters at 
Belgrade,
 where having taken an affection to the elder Son of the Tartar 
Chan,
 or else having conceived some ha∣tred or displeasure against the Father,
 frankly proffered to depose the Father, and confer the Government upon him who was the Son. But it seems this young 
Tartar,
 though barbarous, had yet so much of filial obedience and reverence instamped on him by nature, that he modestly refused the proffer, and immediatly dispatched a Messenger with secret Advices to his Father. The Tartar 
Chan
 received this Intelligence with great indignation, and purposing to play that game in reallity with the Vizier, which he had passed on him only by way of overture, wrote a Letter to the Pasha of 
Buda,
 a man of great abilities and cou∣rage, advertising him, that hearing a true and worthy character of his prowess and wisdom, he could not but desire to be his friend; and that he might make demonstrations of his being such, he proffered all the interest he had at the Ottoman Court to promote him to the supreme Office of first Vizier. What Fate soever accompanied this mat∣ter, either from the Confidents of the Tartars, or of the Pasha, the substance of the Message came to the knowledge of the Vizier, who ob∣taining a private Commission immediately from the Grand Signior therein, sent for the Pasha, and without farther process, or evidence of proof, or accusation, struck off his Head.






Anno Christi 
1665.
 Hegeira 
1076.


THE Peace thus happily concluded with 
Germany,
 was a subject of singular con∣tentment to the People, and not less readily em∣braced by the Grandees, who hastened so much the consummation thereof, that in the beginning of 
January
 one 
Mahomet Beigh,
 of the Order of the Mutafaracaes (who are those that attend the Services of the 
Divan,
 and are of a Degree somewhat above the Chaouses) a man of consi∣derable Richess, was designed Ambassadour for 
Vienna,
 and qualified with the Title of the Pasha of 
Romelia.
 In the Month following, being 
Feb∣ruary,
 this Ambassadour having received his Pre∣sents and Instructions, departed, with Orders to remain on the Frontiers, until the Emperours Ambassadour met him at the place of Ex∣change, where according to custom at the same

time that one enters into the Dominions of the Emperor, the other passes into those of the Grand Signior. The Presents that one Emperor sends to the other are according to the ancient Canon, and are to be of equal value, and are commonly estimated to be an Hundred thousand Dollars. Those sent by the Grand Signior to the Emperor, were:



Three Horses with their Furniture adorned with precious Stones.


Twelve other led Horses of great price.


A Royal Tent with all the Apartments, valued at Eighty thousand Dollars.


A Royal Feather set with Jewels.


Ambergreese of a considerable value.


Bezor-stones.


Twenty Cods of Musk.


Seventy Coftans or Vests of Three sorts.


Six 
Persian
 Carpets.




Forty very fine Turbants, with other 
Persian
 Commodities of divers sorts of Linnen.


The Spring being now well forward, the time of action, and the Summer at hand, the 
Turks
 remained with great expectation of the 
German
 Ambassadour; and with greater impatience, in regard that their Ambassadour had for some time continued upon the Frontiers. It was now 
May,
 and yet no news from 
Germany;
 so that many be∣gan to doubt the reality of the Peace, others re∣flected on the dishonour of the Grand Signior, in having his Ambassadour so long on the Frontiers, as if the Peace had been precarious, and desired by the 
Turks:
 Some considered the present ill consequences, in case the War should break out again; for that license was given to the greatest part of the Army to return home, and all such as came as far as from 
Babylon, Damascus,
 and 
Egypt,
 to the Frontiers in 
Hungary
 were departed;
 and to recal these again, and other Zaims and Ti∣mariots from remote parts, required a considera∣ble time, of which their distress would not ad∣mit, should the Christians prove deceitful in their Treaty. Besides which, reports were spread abroad, that the 
French
 had intercepted the Am∣bassadour in his passage about 
Komorra,
 and had given an interruption to the Peace. Others re∣ported, that the Ambassadour was dead in his Jour∣ney, and that the 
Hungarians
 were again in Arms, as wholly dissatisfied with the Peace. These ru∣mours flying about, all People blamed the facili∣ty of the Great Vizier in being too credulous and confident of the Faith and Morality of the Chri∣stians; and the Enemies of the Vizier more boldly adventured to accuse his ill management of Affairs, which did not a little tickle the ambition of 
Mu∣stapha
 Pasha, then Captain Pasha, and Chimacam of 
Adrianople,
 supposing that all the disgraces and ill successes of the Vizier prepared a way for his ascent unto that Office. And to become more popu∣lar, being a man naturally of an affable and plau∣sible carriage, insinuated himself into the favour and good opinion of the Great men and principal Favourites of the Seraglio, over-acting his part in some measure by condescensions unbeseeming the degree and dignity of a Chimacam,
 being ob∣served one day to kiss the Vest of the Kuzlir-Aga, too apparent a piece of adulation and meanness in so great a Subject, who in those parts repre∣sents the Person of his Master. These passages were not altogether unknown to the Vizier; and though at a distance he could not perfectly view, and discover particularly the comportment of this Chimacam, yet being by conversation well ac∣quainted with his subtle disposition, guessed at his thoughts, and the rest of his actions, and to deal with him in the same terms, wrote a Letter to the Grand Signior, bewailing the ill success of the War against 
Venice,
 and the ill estate and condition of the Fleet; to repair which, and to give courage to their men, and restore the Discipline in Marine Affairs, the presence of the Captain-pasha was necessary in the Fleet, who had now for Two years enjoyed the benefit and the title without personal attendance on that im∣portant Charge. The Grand Signior having re∣ceived this Letter, concurred in the same opi∣nion with his Vizier, and gave Orders to the Chi∣macam to prepare himself to serve that Summer at Sea; for that now it was necessary he should be in Person there, and less requisite his presence in the City, where his Office would speedily be made void by return of the Vizier. The Chima∣cam immediately in obedience to his great Ma∣sters command, put himself in a posture for his Voyage, and in the first place sent away his Wo∣men to 
Constantinople,
 and appointed the Fleet not to depart until his farther order: Yet in the mean time so secretly and under-hand made use of the friendship of the Court-Favourites, representing as from themselves, how useful the service and at∣tendance of the Chimacam was as yet in the City, by reason that the delays of the 
German
 Ambas∣sadour made the Viziers return uncertain, and that this Office would ill be supplied by any another; they obtained license for his continuance in Office, and disappointed the intentions and designs of the Vizier.


About the end of 
May,
 after long expectation arrived the 
German
 Ambassadour at 
Buda,
 to the great joy of the 
Turkish
 Camp. I then was there my self, and observed the general satisfaction at this news: so that now the Ambassadour being entred the Frontiers, and his arrival secured, on the Twenty ninth of 
May,
 the Vizier began his March from 
Belgrade
 with the whole Army, and I kept company with them for thirteen days. On the last of 
June
 the Vizier arrived within six hours Journey of 
Adrianople,
 intending in Two or Three days to prepare for his solemn Entrance. But it is reported, That the Viziers Mother had by her Art so affected the heart of the Grand Signior towards her Son, that he could not longer want his presence, and therefore in the way dispatch∣ed frequent Messages to him to hasten him as fast as his convenience would permit. And bet∣ter to assure him of his grace and favour, sent his young Favourite, a handsom Youth of about Twenty years of age, to meet him with a Pre∣sent of five Horses richly adorned and furnished, and to feast him plentifully on the way: And be∣ing come within a few hours Journey, the Grand Signior could not contain his desire of see∣ing him, until the day of his Entry; but ordered him immediately to come to him, being im∣patient of a private Conference. The Vizier ac∣cordingly obeying, and being come to the Royal Presence, the Grand Signior kissed him on the shoulder, and honoured him with a
 Topoose of Gold studded with precious Stones, with a Sword, a Dagger, and a Horse richly furnished, with which Regal Munificence he returned tri∣umphing to his Tents, being now fully assured of the real grace and constant favour of his Master. The second of 
July
 the Vizier made his Entrance with solemn Pomp and Glory through part of the City, passing again into the Field to remain under Tents with the whole Camp, being so or∣dered by the Grand Signior, in regard the City was neither capable to contain so great a num∣ber without dispossessing the greatest part of the Inhabitants of their Houses, nor in this hot season of the Year was it so wholesom and cool as the

open air of the Country. Besides, matters would be in a far greater readiness for a depar∣ture towards 
Constantinople,
 to which place the Vizier had perswaded the Grand Signior to make a Visit after Audience given to the 
German
 Am∣bassadour, whom the People now expected with wonderful impatience.


Not many days after arrived Count 
Lesly
 the Ambassadour Extraordinary from his 
Caesarean
 Majesty to the Grand Signior, who made a solemn Entrance into the City, passing first through the 
Turkish
 Camp, where the Grand Signior remained, and thence to the House fur∣nished and appointed for him at the expence of the Sultan. The Cavalcade was as followeth: In the Front of all were the Ten Chaouses which had attended the Ambassadour through the whole Journey,
 these were followed by an Hundred fifty five other Chaouses with Muzevege, with some Captains over the Janisaries▪ The Am∣bassadour had of his own Retinue about a Hun∣dred and fifty Persons on Horse-back, well mounted, and cloathed after the 
Hungarian
 fashi∣on; his proper Guard consisted of Four and twenty Persons armed with Partisans; before him went his Trumpets, and Kettle Drums, but not sound∣ing, with Two Banners of spread Eagles fly∣ing, one of them richly embroidered, carried by a Count of the Empire. The Ambassadour him∣self was cloathed with a Cloth of Silver Vest, lined with Sables, on his Cap he wore a Feather after the 
Turkish
 fashion, adorned with Jewels, which they call 
(Sargouch)
 and is only used by the Grand Signior, and his principal Vizier; before him went Eight led Horses richly furnish∣ed; immediately after him followed the Pages and Servants of the Spaheelar Agasee, and of the Aga which conducted him from the Frontiers. Next came his Litter covered with Violet colour∣ed Velvet, and carried by Mules; then his three Coaches with six Horses a piece, one of which being richly gilded, and made chearful with Glass Windows after the new mode, the Grand Signior became much pleased with it, and at his request it was presented to him: after these fol∣lowed four or five other Coaches of Four Horses, in which were Churchmen and unfirm persons; and last of all came the 
German
 Wagons, and other Carts with those of the Countrey with Baggage.


This Ambassadour was not long arrived be∣fore he was admitted to Audience with the Prime Vizier,
 who bestowed on him a Vest of Sables, with a Horse and Furniture of considerable va∣lue, and a Hundred of his Retinue were vested with Coftans, which amongst the 
Turks
 are testi∣monies of favour and acceptance. About Four days after, the Ambassadour had Audience with the Grand Signior himself, at which were only Forty Coftans given out, which coming from so Grand a Personage, were in value multiplied much above the number given by the Vizier.




The Presents brought hy the Amdassadour were as followeth:


A Looking Glass of about a man's height, in a silver Frame, standing on a pedestal of Silver, turning round on every side.


Two great Basons of Silver, supported with three Pillars at three Corners, a man's Body and a half high, adorned with several Figures; at one Pillar was fastened a gilded Bason, over which was a Fountain Cock for the Water to run through.


Two great gilded Basons full of holes at the Bottom to make a Passage for the Water.


Twelve Silver Candlesticks, every one about Two Ells high.


Six Silver Flower-Pots.


Twelve gilded Ewers for sweet Waters.


Twelve Silver Dishes with Covers made after the form of 
Turkish
 Turbants, al
 gilded within side.


Twelve gilded Dishes for Confects, set upon Pedestals of Silver.


One round Table of Silver upon a Pedestal of about half an Ell, after the manner of the 
Turkish
 Tables, with many Devices.


Four Guns with Silver Stocks, and one Cutlash of Silver.


Two great Writing Desks of Jaspar-Stone, with Prospectives within.


Two other of Ebony Wood, and Tortoise shell, in laid with Gold and Silver.


One great Ice Vessel, and one great Drinking Pot of Silver.


Four Pieces of 
Spanish
 Tapestry wrought with Silver.


Fourteen Clocks with 
Turkish
 and 
Christian
 Fi∣gures.


A Grota with a Clock in it, and a Case of Vir∣ginals which sound with the motion of Water that runs through it.


A Cupboard an Ell high adorned with Bosses of Silver, in which was a Salt-box, Candlesticks, and other appurtenances thereunto.


A large Chest with Figures of Silver gilded.


A high Writing Desk of Silver gilded, with ma∣ny Boxes and Drawers, which for the Art and Invention is not to be described.


Presents to the Valede or Queen Mother.


An embroidered Cushinet to sow upon, in which was a Looking-Glass, and a Virginal sounding of it self.


A large Looking-Glass in a Silver Frame.


Two Silver Candlesticks of an Ell and half high.


A Basket of Silver rarely worked and engraven.


Four great Cups.






To the Great Vizier.


Twelve Silver Platters with Covers.


Two Silver Candlesticks ¾ of an Ell high.


Twelve Silver Plates handsomly worked for Confects.


One Basket of Silver engraven.


Fourteen very large Silver Cups.






For other Ministers to be bestowed as occasion was.


Thirty two Clocks of several sorts, some with 
Turkish,
 and others with Christian Figures.


Twenty one Watches gilded.


Seven gilded Basons and Ewers.




The Weight of the Silver all together amount∣ed unto Three thousand five hundred pound weight. These were the Parriculars of the Pre∣sents sent from the Emperor to the Grand Sig∣nior, from whom he received the live value by the 
Ottoman
 Ambassadour. And though this Relation may seem impertinent to the Weight of History, yet in regard on such minute things ma∣ny times greater matters depend, and thereby the curiosity of the Reader satisfied, I thought it not from our purpose to insert a List thereof.


This year gave the first Beginning to trade be∣tween the 
Ottoman
 Dominions, and that of 
Ge∣noua.
 For in Company of the 
German
 Ambas∣sadour, in condition of a private Person, came the Marquess 
Durazzo
 a Nobleman of 
Genoua,
 with Letters from that Republick to the Grand Signior, and Great Vizier, importing their desire of friendship and commerce with the 
Ottoman
 Port. This design of opening a door to a new Trade was commenced and carried on wholly by the contrivance and power of the Family

of the 
Durrazzo
's, falsly founded on the course allay of Money, then currant in the 
Turkish
 Territories, which proved not long durable, as will appear by the Sequel. This Marquess being arrived at 
Constantinople,
 declared his Mes∣sage, which if favourably accepted, an Ambas∣sadour or Resident with Merchants should be sent to hold a Trade in the 
Turkish
 Dominions. In answer whereunto the Vizier replied according to the usual complement, That the Arms of the Port are always open to those who desire to enter∣tain a friendship and correspondence with it. But because in former days Ambassadours from 
Spain
 and 
Genoua
 having like promises of admission, were notwithstanding through the union of the 
English,
 and 
French
 and 
Venetians,
 obstructed in their passage, and forced to return home, though one of them as far as 
Scio
 in his way, and the other as 
Ragusa;
 therefore this Marquess in re∣membrance hereof pressed the Vizier farther in his promise, desiring him to give him the assu∣rance, that what opposition might be made to the contrary by other Ministers, he would yet keep firm to that word he had given to his Re∣publick: The Vizier constantly promised that he would; and if any other Ambassadours were not pleased with the friendship and Treaty of that day, they might seek their remedy as they pleased, and if they pleased might have liberty to depart. The Marquess being satisfied with this assurance, took Letters to his Repub∣lick in assurance thereof, and Articles were given, and Priviledges for Trade signed according to the Tenour of other Capitulations: And be∣ing herewith dispatched,
 he returned home by Land, and the next year appeared again himself in the Person of Ambassadour Extraordinary to the 
Ottoman
 Court; where after high and con∣siderable Presents and great Expences made, chiefly supported by the House of 
Durazzo,
 a Resident was seated at 
Constantinople,
 and a Con∣sul at 
Smyrna,
 where we will leave them for a while, and some years after (God willing) take an account of the profit and loss this progging Na∣tion had made by this Embassy and Trade. But before we leave this point, it will be worth our noting, how hainously the 
French
 Ambassadour Monsieur 
La Haye
 took this entertainment of the 
Genoese,
 in regard he was so concerned against his admission, that he declared to the chief Mi∣nisters of State, how he had received Orders to oppose the entrance of the 
Genoese
 Nation, as highly prejudicial and obstructive to their Trade; and in sine, to acquaint the Grand Signior, that in case he resolved to entertain them, his Master would withdraw his Ambassadour and Nation; and therefore they ought to consider, whether a new Friend and an inconsiderable Republick ought to be perferred before the Known and ap∣proved acquaintance of the powerful Empire of 
France.
 But whatsoever the 
French
 Ministers were able to act to the contrary, the 
Genoe∣ses
 kept their stations, in which they were the better secured by those frequent occasions of dis∣gust his most Christian Majesty in defence of the Christian Cause, had given to these Enemies of the Christian Faith


The Great Vizier and the 
German
 Ambassadour being now both at the 
Ottoman
 Port, the Wars were concluded, and every one began to dispose his affairs to a quiet and a reposed life. But this Empire being still by God's Providence in a condition of growth and augmentation, could not remain long in Peace, nor long in health without exercise and action. Wherefore no sooner was 
Germany
 at ease, than the Visier be∣gan to move the prosecution of the War in 
Can∣dia,
 desiring to obtain the glory of subjecting totally that Island,
 which for the space of Twenty five years had been the principal subject of the 
Ottoman
 design and exercise, and acquire to him∣self the Fame in History of being Conquerour of 
Candia,
 and Concluder of the 
Venetian
 War. Wherefore the Vizier with several other princi∣pal Persons, assembled in a Garden near the City of 
Adrianople,
 sent for the Signior 
Ballarino
 Representative for the Republik of 
Venice;
 where being come, at the first word demanded of him the Surrender of the whole Island of 
Can∣dia.
 To which he modestly replied, That so great a gift was not in his power to give, and that his office was only to be assistant to that happy hour, wherein all matters might concur towards Peace, and that his Mediation might contribute towards a conclusion of this long and tedious War. In the mean time he should acquaint his Prince with the demand the Vizier was pleased to make. To which the 
Turks
 added menaces, with high and insolent words, designing to bend their whole force and power against 
Candia,
 the effect of which will hereaf∣ter be a material subject of our History. And thus much, to my best remembrance, I received from the mouth of that 
Venetian
 Minister.


In the mean time the Grand Signior, though he continued his Sports and Hunting, without re∣gard to the violent heats of the Summer; yet he began to entertain something more of warm af∣fection towards his Women, and to be recon∣ciled to that Sex, in contemplation of his little Son, who beginning now to play and prattle, afforded him matter of entertainment in the Apartments of his Women; so that he affectionately doting on his Queen, gave order for increase of her Re∣venue and Attendance,
 and appointed the best Artisans of 
Adrianople
 to make her a Crown studded with very precious Stones to adorn her Head, of which he was so impatient, that he or∣dered the Goldsmiths to work in the Seraglio, permitting them scarce time to eat or sleep until it was finished. In recompence of which affecti∣on of her Sultan, this Lady so corresponded, that she appeared passionately in love, practising certain pretty tricks of swooning and of an un∣easie condition in his absence, which so endear∣ed him in all respects to her, that it was said the Sultan kept himself constant to this Queen only, and contrary to the custom of other Emperors, and permission of the 
Turkish
 Laws, made use of the multitude of his other Women only for Slaves, or Attendants to the greater state and adoration of his beloved Queen.


And now the Grand Signior, at the perswasion of the Vizier and others of his Council, resolving to winter at 
Constantinople,
 certain Women of the lower rank were dispatched before, as fore∣runners of the removal of the Court: And being in the Seraglio at large without observance and awe of their usual Spies, two of the boldest Wenches finding a Cradle, wherein the Royal Infants were usually laid, adventured to pick out the best Jewels, of which some were very good Stones, and afterwards laid it up again in a pri∣vate place, where it was not easily found. Not many days after the Queen-Mother wanting the Cradle of so much value and antiquity, where many of the young Sultans had lain, sent to the Seraglio at 
Constantinople
 to fetch it thence. But it not being found, inquisition was made into all secret corners, the Wardrobes were searched, but nothing appear'd, to the great fear of those to whose care it was committed, one accusing the other to

acquit himself. In fine, the matter was so tra∣ced, that some whispers there were concerning those in whose hands the Cradle not long be∣fore was seen to remain. The Women having guilty consciences were amazed in being so close∣ly followed, and fearing the matter should be per e
tly discovered, entred into consultation what course they should take to save their lives and their honour. In fine, they both concluded, that in such an extremity desperate remedies ought to be used, than which none was better than to set fire to the Seraglio,
 by which means, either the thing sought for, would be esteemed for burnt and consumed by the fire, or in so great a loss it might be hoped that matters of smaller moment would not be remembred. Wherefore the bold Wenches without other consideration gave fire with their Candle to the roof of Cedar, of which wood most of the Womens rooms in the Se∣raglio are made, which in a moment made such a flame, as with the help of a little wind, was carried through all the quarters of the Womens Apartments, and thence took its way to the 
Di∣van
 Chamber, and other considerable parts of the Court, where many Records and Registers of Law were consumed to ashes, together with one of the lesser Treasuries, where much richess, which endured not the test of fire, perished: And the whole Seraglio had run an evident hazard, had not the Bostangees and other Servants of the Court ventured far into the flames, in which many of them miserably perished. The fire be∣ing quenched, and the Women afterwards (I know not how) detected to have been the Au∣thors thereof, were sent to 
Adrianople,
 and being there accused, were strangled by the immediate order of the Grand Signior.


But the destruction of that considerable part of the Seraglio was no impediment to the Grand Signiors return to 
Constantinople,
 being rebuilt with that speed and industry, equal or excelling the magnificence of the former, that the day pre∣fixed for the Journey thither was not prolonged by reason thereof. Howsoever the Grand Sig∣niors aversion to the place made the wheels of his Chariots move slow, and the quickness of his Attendants grew slack and cold, observing so much displeasure in their Emperor to the place de∣signed. For though he was pressed by the Vizier to begin his Journey, and could not handsomly refuse to comply with the time appointed; yet to defer this resolution as long as was possible; he contriv'd a long way of Meander towards 
Constantinople,
 for∣ming his Journey in Company with the Great Vi∣zier by way of the 
Dardanelli
 upon the 
Hellespont,
 on pretence of viewing the Fortifications of the new Forts raised at the entrance of that Streight, and sending some Provisions from thence for Relief of 
Candia;
 wherefore the Captain-Pasha was commanded to Sea with three gallies, and at 
Gallipoli
 to attend the Grand Signiors arrival, be∣ing to transport him thence to the Castles, and back again. And the design being now resolved, and hot to prosecute the VVar in 
Candia;
 for tran∣sporting thither a numerous Army, it was conclu∣ded, That the Captain-Pasha should propose to the 
English
 Ambassadour the Grand Signiors desire of Fifteen Sail of Ships, with consent of our King, for this Service, the 
Turks
 paying what reasonable Rates should be demanded. But the Earl of 
Win∣chelsea
 then Lord Ambassadour, modestly replied, That though His Majesty of 
England
 did always entertain a good affection and a zealous disposition towards the Affairs of the Grand Signior; yet at present the VVar with 
Holland,
 and ill un∣derstanding with 
France,
 made his occasions for his own Shipping more urgent than usual, and the time most unseasonable to press his Majesty in this particular: by which reply and several o∣ther excuses of the Ambassadour, the Captain-Pasha perceiving an aversness to the Proposition, and that Christians unwillingly arm 
Turks
 against the Cross, gave an account of this discourse to the Grand Signior and Vizier, who immediate∣ly gave order for the building of sixty Gallies against the next Spring, which with what they had before would make up above an Hun∣dred Sail. The Rendezvous of this Fleet, to∣gether with Saykes and other 
Turkish
 Vessels,
 from thence to transport the Vizier and his Army for 
Candia,
 was appointed to be made at 
Malvoi∣sia
 of the success of which we shall have occasion (God willing) to discourse in the following Year, which gave a beginning (as we may say) to the total loss of that Country, and to that fa∣mous Siege, which in History will bear the Fame of one of the most memorable in the World. And as a preparation thereunto, and as a supply of the present urgent necessities, three Ships, 
viz.
 one 
English,
 another 
French,
 and a third 
Dutch
 were laden with Corn, and thirty Sail of Beys Gallies, with all sorts of Arms and Ammunition, with a Recruit of a thousand Janisaries, were di∣speeded from 
Constantinople
 for Reinforcement and Succour of that Island.


And now at length the Grand Signior after his long circuit arrived at 
Constantinople,
 where he made his solemn Entry the Third of 
October,
 but not with that Joy and Pomp, which usually at∣tended other Sultans in their return from the Wars and labours to their Imperial City; but all things seemed like the Sultans humour, sullen and displeased; for he seldom lodged in his Seraglio, or slept there, but at a small Palace called 
Daout-Pasha,
 where he for the most part made his abode; only sometimes in the day he passed a few hours at his Seraglio, but rested not there in the Night: The reasons hereof some attributed to the remembrance of those dangers and troubles which he had seen in that Court, and which made so deep an impression on his fancy, that he could never enter within those Gates with∣out some sense of terrour for the late disor∣ders.


The 
German
 War being thus concluded, the Sultan returned to 
Constantinople,
 and Affairs dis∣posing themselves to spend their fury against 
Candia,
 all things growing black and tempestu∣ous towards that Coast, the 
Venetians
 prudently provided to oppose the storm. And as an able General,
 and wise and experienced Captains are the supports of an Army; and that the success of War depends much on Martial Discipline, and on the vigilance and wisdom of the Comman∣ders, the Senate gave order to their Ambassadour at 
Turen,
 called 
Catarin Belegno,
 to offer unto Mar∣quess 
Ghiron Francesco Villa,
 a Native of that Country, the honourable charge of General of the Foot, with a stipend of 12000 Crowns of yearly Pay; the said Marquess obliging himself to bring with him Four Captains, and two Lieu∣tenant-Generals, for entertainment of whom the Republick allowed Five thousand Ducats, be∣sides Seventy Ducats a Month pay to an Engi∣neer. To this Marquess 
Villa
 a power was given to command in chief over all, without subjection to any other than to the Captain-General, and to the Proveditor General in 
Dalmatia,
 when he waged War in that Province: And in short, his actions were not to be questioned or examin∣ed by any other than the Senate it self, to whom he was immediately subjected, and a Gally was

to be allotted purposely to transport him and his Family to 
Candia.
 Upon these conditions agreed at 
Turen,
 Marquess 
Villa
 took his Journey to 
Venice
 about the beginning of 
April,
 being ac∣companied with his Kinsman 
Francesco Villa,
 his Nephew 
Benedetto
 Count of 
Lagnasco,
 Count 
Lodovico Saluzza,
 and Count 
Bernardino Barret∣ta,
 which Four served in quality of Captains, together with 
Gio. Francesco Pusserla,
 and 
A∣lessandro Negri,
 who were Lieutenant-Gene∣rals, and 
Gio. Girolamo Quadruplano
 Engineer. With these Companions and several other Vo∣luntiers, Gentlemen of Quality, the Mar∣quess 
Villa
 was received with much honour by the Nobility and People of 
Venice;
 and being introduced into the Colledge, with a singular grace and fluency of Language he began to speak in this manner.




IF thanks, most Serene Prince, and most Excellent Sirs,
 ought to be equivalent to the benefits we receive, I must of necessity (not to appear ungrateful) refuse those fa∣vours, which this most Serene Republick is pleased to confer upon me; or resolve to ap∣pear ungrateful, because I am unable to make a compensation. But I satisfie my self in this, That as the mind which re∣ceives favours, and returns thanks is the same; so that mind which makes acknow∣ledgments with a due sense of them, doth in some measure equal the benefit, though it prove defective in expressions to declare it. I do therefore confess and acknowledge, that the Election you have been pleased to make of me amongst so many conspicuous Persons, unto a Charge graced by most re∣nowned Predecessours, and in it self most honourable, is a most singular favour, and an effect of your immense Bounty to me; which though it be limited with some subordination, yet it may serve for the ul∣timate Goal to a glorious Course of Mili∣tary labours. I must also farther acknow∣ledge, That as it is the property of this most Serene Republick to receive momentary Services, and to render them Eternal by Records in History; so they have been pleased to adjoyn unto my mean deserts a remembrance of the humble devotion which my Ancestors professed towards them: I mean 
Alfonso Villa
 my great Grand-father, who in that most glorious Fleet at 
Lepanto,
 whose Sails were the wings of Victory, evi∣denced his Christian Zeal against that Peo∣ple, which issuing from the bowels of Sea-monsters, continue to vent their ancient rage against your most Serene Highness. Nor with less promptness of mind, had my Grandfather 
Francesco Villa,
 and my Fa∣ther 
Guido Villa,
 consecrated their Powers to your Command: but that the unparal∣lel'd Equity of this most Serene Republick gave permission, that one of them should take the charge of General of the Artillery of the Holy Church under the Pope his Su∣pream Lord, preferring a natural duty be∣fore a voluntary service; and that the other being entertained in service of the most In∣vincible 
Charles Emanuel
 in 
Piedmont,
 you were pleased to judge, That the service done to a Prince your Confederate, and Son of this Republick, was a service and duty rendred to your selves: so that this Election made of me by this most Serene Republick, and approved by the singular goodness of that 
Charles Emanuel,
 who now reigns, eviden∣ces the Destiny of my Family, and obliges me to satissie that hereditary debt by per∣formances, which my Ancestors entertained only in their wishes. Hence it is, that to this my Election some celestial influence hath concurred, by which I am clearly as∣sured, that your more than humane Power is desirous to imitate the Divine, which oftentimes makes use of weak means to ope∣rate miraculous effects, that to you only the success may be acknowledged, and to you only the thanks be returned: That if the Providence of your Serenity, and of this most Serene Republick will be pleased (as I am assured you will) to imitate the Divine Pro∣vidence, which co-operates with means, the number and quality of your Troops and plen∣ty of your Provisions, which are the Nerves of War, are those means which correspond with the ends you design: And therefore I dare presage, that I shall not only see the threat∣ning horns of the changeable 
Ottoman
 Planet precipitated into the Sea by the 
Venetian
 horn of strength; but those glorious Conquests re∣newed, which rendered your Name more bright and resplendent than the Sun it self in his Oriental parts. With these auspicious Presages, I seel already in my breast an impatient heat to sacrifice my life in so worthy a Cause, fancying that I serve the Ʋniverse, whilst I am engaged in the service of the greatest of Republicks, which communicates delicious Fruit to all People, gathered from those triumphant Palms, which were planted and watered with her own sweat and labours; and resembles her own generous Lion, which continually stands on the Guard in opposition to the common Ene∣my, that all other People may rest quiet, and repose secure. And thus much, Most Serene Prince, and Most Excellent Sirs, shall suffice to have been spoken by a Soldier, not acquainted with Eloquence, to whom Courage is more requisite than Words, and to fight well with the hand, is more laudable than to utter florid Speeches with the Tongue.




According to the preceding counsel and de∣sire of Marquiss 
Villa,
 the Senate sent by divers Convoys great plenty of Provision and Ammuni∣tion to 
Candia,
 and fitted their Fleet with all things necessary; and strengthened their Forts both with Horse and Foot drawn out of their Garisons on the 
Terra Firma,
 being assisted with Men and Money from other Princes and States. The Pope gave them liberty to levy Four thou∣sand

men out of his Countries, the Emperour also furnished them with a considerable Force, to which were made Additions from other parts of 
Germany.


In this manner the prudent Care of the Veneti∣ans provided for their own safety: But at 
Constantinople
 things were more quiet, for it being Winter, the Turks made Entertainments for the German Ambassadour, who was first seasted by the Chimacham, and twice afterwards, with much Magnificence, by the Great Vizier at his own Garden, seated on the 
Bosphorus,
 all difficulties being before overcome, and agreed, unless the deliverance of the poor Captives from the Prison and the Oar, who continued in the torment of expectation between hope and fear, either of liberty or perpetual slavery. Which Treaty though it properly belonged to the Vizier, to whom the absolute power is derived, yet in formality it was reserved for matter of the last Au∣dience with the Grand Signior, who being desirous to attend his Hunting and Pastime abroad, was in pain, until he had complyed with his Of∣fice towards this Ambassadour, whose departure though not some time after designed, yet be∣ing often called upon to receive his Dispatch from the Grand Signior, was admitted on the 31th of 
October
 to his Audience with the same formali∣ty and feasting as is common to all other Ambassadours in the Divan, or place of Judi∣cature, and received three and forty Coftans be∣stowed on himself and his retinue, and thence be∣ing conducted to the Chamber of Audience, with some of the principal Noblemen of his Company, they presented themselves on their Knees, with their Faces on the Ground, accor∣ding to the Custom of the Eastern Courts; with which occasion the Heer 
Reningen,
 who had for sixteen or seventeen years been Resident for the Emperor,
 a person grown infirm with Age and the Gout, and his Knees not so active and pliable as the younger sort, coming also to take his turn in this prostrate manner of Worship, was so rudely handled by the kapugibashees, who assisted on each Arm at the Ceremony, that he not being able to bow his head so easily as others, was thrust down by them with so little consideration or respect, that his Brows and Forehead were broken on the Flour; which mischance so disordered him, as put him besides that Speech which he had premediated in Turk∣ish to address to the Grand Signior; and though he curbed what was possible his passion, whilst he remained in the Royal Presence, yet in vain after∣wards he vented his Choler with words against those unmannerly Officers without other re∣medy or satisfaction. The Demands of the Ambassadour were in writing read before the Grand Signior, according to the custom of the Court, and principally concerned the freedom of the Slaves, some of which were then in the Gallies, and Banniard, and others of the most principal in the seven Towers. Other Demands there were in relation to the State of 
Transylvania,
 that for the future it might be free from Incursions, in which particular the Turks had already vi∣olated the Peace; and that a more orderly Government of Affairs might be observed on the Frontiers, than usually had passed, as agreed by the last Capitulations. To which the Grand Signior gave no Answer, referring all to the Vizi∣er, only told the Ambassadour in short, That he should counsel his Master to beware of inva∣ding the Ottoman Dominions, or acting any thing in prejudice of the Peace.


The Articles of Peace made between the Two Emperors were for the most part a confirmation of the ancient Agreement, only it was provided as a new Addition. That the Armies should de∣part from the Confines of 
Transilvania.
 Second∣ly, That the Castles and Forts garisoned with 
German
 Soldiers in that Countrey should be resigned into the hands of the Prince. And Thirdly, There were other particulars added in reference to 
Newhausel,
 and the Countries ad∣jacent lately conquered, and the Limits of both Emperors, as before declared.


But whilst these things were in agitation, and Ambassadours interchangeably at either Court, the 
Turks
 of 
Varadin
 and 
Janoua
 made fre∣quent incursions into 
Transilvania,
 destroying the Villages, and carrying away great numbers of Captives; and so lately, as about the begin∣ning of 
August
 last, those of 
Varadin
 conveyed themselves privately under the Castle 
Cseh,
 and robbed the Horses belonging to that Garison, killed some, and carried others into slavery; at which time also Two thousand 
Turks
 besieged the Castle 
Valko,
 which they took, and razed to the ground; which Complaints of their Coun∣tries Aggrievances the 
Transilvanians
 intimated to the 
German
 Ambassadour, as matters al∣ready acted contrary to the late Articles of Peace, requesting farther to interpose for a modera∣tion and abatement of their Tribute, which 
Kuperlee
 had, contrary to Oath and reason, un∣justly augmented. But the Ambassadour seemed so coldly to interpose in this behalf, as taught the 
Turks
 to deny his Requests, acquiescing with this Answer, That it was no breach of Peace then to make incursions on the Frontiers, as also without Cannon to rob, and spoil, and skir∣mish, not exceeding Five thousand men in num∣ber. For it appeared that the Ambssadour was most desirous to secure the main points of the Peace,
 which concerned most the Interest of the Empire, and not hazard it for such like Concernments of 
Transilvania;
 for though it seemed strange to the World to see a Peace hastily clapt up with disadvantageous Terms on the Emperors side, whilst he was victorious and fortunate in several Enterprizes; yet they that penetrated farther into the State and Condi∣tion of the Empire, report, That there was a necessity of making a moderate use of these suc∣cesses by a fair accommodation, rather than to tempt Providence by a too eager and continued prosecution of the War. For it was observed that the Designs of making the Duke of 
Anguien,
 Son to the Prince of 
Conde,
 King of 
Poland,
 pro∣ceeded forward; and that there was a Combi∣nation of a dangerous League amongst the Princes of the 
Rhine.
 The Divisions between the 
Ger∣mans
 and the 
Hungarians
 encreased; the latter of which are known to be an obstinate sort of People. The Army also of the 
French
 was fear∣ed in the Bowels of the Empire, under the Com∣mand of Monsieur 
la Feuvillade,
 who under pretence of applying themselves to the assistance of Christendom, were suspected to come with in∣tentions to advance the interest of their King, and force the next Diet to elect him King of the 
Romans;
 in order whereunto, and in considera∣tion of farther assistance, they demanded se∣veral Towns in 
Hungary
 to be delivered into their hands, and made extravagant Propositi∣ons for Winter Quarters; all which considered, made the 
German
 Ambassadour more ten∣der how he entred into Disputes with the 
Turk,
 which might prejudice the essential points of the Peace, or occasion a new War more destructive to 
Germany
 through the

dangers before intimated, than by the Arms and Hostility of the common Enemy.
 These Considerations made the Ambassador less zealous in the matter of 
Transilvania,
 and in all others which were not really conducing to his Masters immediate service; so that having no other dif∣ficulty remaining, than the liberty of the Cap∣tives, on the day of his last Audience with the Vizier, being the 
8th
 of 
November,
 he urged with more earnestness their Release, which was in part granted; those of the Gallies were delivered from their Chains and Oars; but such as were of greater Quality in the seven Towers were de∣tained, until the Emperor had on his part re∣leased the 
Turks
 of Quality in like manner; and though it was agreed in the Article, That Cap∣tives should on both sides be released, yet the Vi∣zier interpreted it to be in respect to Number and Quality, of which I remember to have heard often Complaints, and especially of those poor Gentlemen, then under Irons and restraint, who though afterwards received their freedom, yet for the present endured more torment in their minds, than if they had never been put in ex¦pectation to enjoy their hopes. At the end of the Audience the Ambassadour proposed something in behalf of the Religious of 
Jerusalem,
 That cer∣tain places of Devotion might be restored them, which were injuriously taken from them by the 
Greeks;
 and also that License might be grant∣ed for re-edification of some Churches, and Mo∣nasteries destroyed in 
Galata
 by the late Fire: To the first of which, the Vizier answered, That the 
Franks
 with the 
Greeks
 of 
Jerusalem
 should have a fair and equal Tryal at Law about the possession of those places in difference, and Ju∣stice and Right should be done unto the in∣jured; but the latter Proposition he positively denied, for being a matter contrary to their Law and Religion, was not dispensable by his Power, nor ought he to expect a Complement from him, or Gratuity of that nature, which was Inconsistent with the honour and conscience of the Donor; but that in any thing else he was ready to yield to his Desires, whereby he might understand the value he put upon his Person; using this Expression, That he was more satisfied that the Emperor had designed so illustrious and worthy a person to this Em∣bassy, than if he had sent him a Hundred thou∣sand Dollars more of Present, and at the Conclu∣sion of the Audience, vested both the Ambassa∣dour and Resident with Sables, which ended with all imaginable satisfaction, and mutual con∣tentment.


On the 
21th
 of the Month of 
November
 arrived ar 
Constantinople
 Monsieur 
De Ventelay,
 Ambassa∣dour from the 
French
 King to the Grand Signior,
 who was Son to the Sieur 
De la Haye,
 the for∣mer Ambassadour, a Person much talked of be∣fore he arrived; a generous and an accomplish∣ed Gentleman, and one well practised in the Af∣fairs of that Countrey. To understand which story the better we must look back to the former Year, at the beginning of which during the 
Ger∣man
 War, and that the Vizier remained in his Winter-quarters at 
Belgrade,
 a Courier with Let∣ters from his most Christian Majesty to the First Vizier arrived, who concealed not the occasion of his coming, nor the contents of his Letters with that secrecy, but that those who were im∣ployed in the Translation of the Papers into 
Turkish,
 made it publickly known to be no other than a recital of the many provocations his most Christian Majesty had received from the Pirates of 
Barbary,
 containing a List of the Ships, Men, and Goods they had from time to time seized and made Prize: in vindication of which indignities to his Honour, and in protection of his People, he could not do less than make a War upon those Pirates (for as yet the advice was not come, that the 
French
 had deserted 
Gi∣geri
) in which for the foregoing reasons the Grand Signior ought not to judge himself con∣cerned. And for the Succour given the Empe∣ror, it was not afforded as King of 
France,
 but as one of the Princes of the Empire, in which capacity, by virtue of his Tenure, he was obli∣ged to contribute such Forces on the like emer∣gencies and distresses of the Empire. And if the foregoing reasons were available with the Sultan to induce him (as in reason he ought) to believe he continued in perfect friendship with him, with∣out breach of Articles, he was then ready to send his Ambassadour to reside at the Port, pro∣vided it might be Monsieur 
De Ventelay,
 Son to Monsieur 
De la Haye
 late Ambassadour there, who was the Person that had some time since re∣ceived indignities from the Vizier 
Kuperlee,
 that so his Majesty might receive satisfaction, by ha∣ving the very Person of Monsieur 
De Ventelay,
 ho∣noured by extraordinary demonstrations of re∣spect, in reparation of the former affronts. This Messenger having translated his Papers, ob∣tained license to ride Post to the Vizier, and in the frosts and extremities of the weather in 
January
 set forward on his Journey; but in his passage through 
Adrianople,
 visiting the Chimacam, and desiring his license in like manner to ride Post to the Vizier on publick affairs, received such a lesson of scorn and disdain, vented with the ex∣tremity of choler against the 
French
 Nation in publick Divan, with terms undecent to be re∣peated: And that in farther resentment, if he were First Vizier, he would refuse to accept any friendship or alliance with them; but since he was inferiour to the Great Vizier, he would dispeed him to the Camp, and grant him a Command for his Post. But it seems this Courier being ar∣rived at 
Belgrade,
 was received with better terms, and more courtesie by the Vizier, who had learned by experience of the late Christian Wars, and proof of the Valour of the 
French
 Nation, that the Propositions of that King were not lightly to be contemned. And therefore con∣sented that Monsieur 
De Ventelay
 might freely come (using their common expression) that the Arms of the Port are always open to re∣ceive the addresses of Friends, Allies, and Con∣federates. With this Message and Letters the Courier was dispatched by way of 
Rag
si
 with safe conduct, and what else was requisite for his securer passage. No doubt but his most Christian Majesty was the more urgent, that the Person of Monsieur 
De Ventelay
 (who was the subject on whom formerly the 
Turks
 had exercised such injurious violence) should be accepted for Am∣bassadour, and resolved,
 unless they received him, he would send no other, that so his Honour which suffered before in this Person, might be repaired again by the respect and reverence they were to shew to him as Ambassadour, as 
 in repentance of their former unkindness, they should now strive to make amends by extraordinary de∣monstrations of honour to this Representative. For it was judged in 
France,
 and there concluded, That there was no other means to repair the Kings Ho∣nour than by the Embassy of Monsieur 
De Ventelay;
 to which that a greater reputation might be ad∣ded, he was transported in one of the Kings Ships called the 
Caesar,
 accompanied with a Fire-ship, and a small Patach for a Victualler, and for

his better Equipage was attended by four or five Marquesses and 
ersons of Quality. Being ar∣rived at the farther part of the City called the Se∣ven Towers, the Ships came to an Anchor, from whence the Ambassadour sent to advise the Vi∣zier of his arrival, desiring as one mark of the extraordinary honour promised him, that a re∣turn might be made to the Salute of his Ship from the Seraglio, by the Cannon which lay under the Wall, a Ceremony before never demanded, or practised with respect to any Christian or Turk∣ish Vessel; and that his landing might be ho∣noured with a more than usual reception by the attendance of Officers, or at least equalled to the Formalities of the late English Ambassadour. But the Vizier it seems judged, that the recepti∣on of the English, strained on a particular occa∣sion, was not to be brought into example, and that a Salute from the Seraglio was so besides the ordinary custom, that he esteemed the demand to be extravagant, and that such a Presi∣dent would be dishonourable to his Master. And therefore resolving not to exceed the perticulars of former customs, offered at his landing to have him accompanied to his House with ten Chaouses, only the Ambassadour not accepting hereof, in a discontented manner entred with his Ship the day following, and giving the usual Salutes to the Seraglio, landed at 
Topenau,
 a place near to his own Dwelling, from whence with no other attendance than his own Company, privately walked up, and with no farther ceremony took possession of the place of Residence of former Am∣bassadours from 
France.


Notwithstanding this slight treatment, the Am∣bassadour was not so much mortified, but he con∣ceived hopes, that the Turks would at length in contemplation of his Masters greatness, gratifie him with some signal demonstrations of extraor∣dinary honour, by concessions of unusual Pri∣viledges, and greater facility in his Negotiations: and therefore was induced, though as yet he had not had a personal Audience of the Vizier, to desire a revocation of the Agreement made with the Genoese, (the Marquess 
Durazzo,
 of whom we have spoken before, being just upon his departure) protesting against it with all ear∣nestness, as a matter so prejudicial to the French Traffick and Commerce in those Dominions, that if admission were given to the Genoese, they must expect to lose friendship and commerce with 
France.
 But notwithstanding this heat and other protestations against it, the Vizier who in∣herited his Fathers spirit, little regarded the discontent of the French, but calmly answered, That the Grand Signior was Master of himself and Country, and might make Peace or War at his own pleasure without licence or permission of the French king; and that such as were envious, or discontented at the Peace, had free liberty to depart and take their remedy as they esteemed most beneficial.


In this manner matters passed between the time of this Ambassadours Arrival and his Au∣dience.
 In which interim the curiosity of Mon∣sieur 
Abermont,
 Captain of the French Man of War, had like to have proved fatal to him; for whilst he viewed from the Gallery of his Ship the pleasant situation of the Seraglio, and the Prospect of the 
Bosphorus,
 behold at a distance appeared certain Gallies gently gliding down the stream, dressed up with Flags and Streamers, which all Ships and Saykes saluted with their Guns as they passed. This Captain being informed that the Grand Signior was there in person, and returned from his Hunting, which he had made in certain Woods not far from the City, saluted him also as he passed with twenty five Guns; but being not able to discover his person, presently fitted his Boat and followed him, hoping to receive that satisfaction at his landing; fot conceiving, that access to the Ottoman and Eastern Princes is as facile and grateful, as it is to those of Christendom, with all confidence endeavoured to accost the Person of the Grand Signior as near as was possible. The Grand Signi∣or turning his eyes, and seeing a man habited (as he conceived) in a barbarous and extravagant dress, apprehended the Majesty of his Person vio∣lated by so near and bold an approach of the cu∣rious Stranger; and thereupon, without farther inquiry, being moved with scorn and indignati∣on, called for the Executioner, who is ever rea∣dy at his hand; but some persons then present, especially the Bostangibashee, being of more mo∣deration, beseeched the Grand Signior to have a little patience, and to enquire of the Ghaur or Infidel (as they call'd him) the cause of this his boldness: with which the Grand Signior suppres∣sing a little his passion, and having patience until one was sent to expostulate with the Captain, who all this while, though he perceived some disturbance, was yet ignorant that the matter so dangerously concerned himself; and not being able to understand the Messenger, nor to be un∣derstood by him, rendred the business more confu∣sed, and less understood: which the Messenger observing, and knowing the danger of this wor∣thy and innocent Gentleman, being perhaps of a compassionate nature, and prudent, framed this excuse to the Grand Signior, That he did not well understand the Infidels language, but what he conjectured was, That he being Captain of that Vessel, which had newly saluted his Majesty as he passed with twenty five Guns, was now come in confidence of his Royal bounty and cle∣mency to receive a Coftan, as a sign of his Ma∣jesties favour, and reward of his own respect. The Grand Signior having by this time his choler somewhat abated, was better pacified with these gentle words; the Bostangibashee also interce∣ding at the same time in his behalf, that he was a stranger, and ignorant of the customs of their Court, and that if he deserved punishment, he might be remitted to the examination of the Vizi∣er, who might chastise him, as he found it reaso∣nable. The Grand Signior contented herewith, the rude Bostangees seized the Captain and hur∣ried him to the Visier, who all this time was igno∣rant of his errour or his danger, more than that he perceived by accent of their words, and by their gestures, that something was amiss, and debated in reference unto him. The Drugger-men, or Interpreters of the French Nation being sent for, and the Visier and the Cap∣tain both understanding the matter, the crime appeared only to be an absurdity committed through ignorance: yet to please the Grand Sig∣nior, and to make an appearance, as if something were done in chastisement of this bold curiosity, the Visier ordered, that the Captain should be conducted by two Chaouses to the Ambassadour, there to be put in Chains and in Prison, until sa∣tisfaction was made for his fault. The Captain being thus brought before the Ambassadour, this honest Gentleman was punished in the same man∣ner as we do those in Christendom, who crowd to see their Prince.


The Ambassadour had his first Audience with the Vizier on the 7th of 
December,
 which being insignificant to any other business more than to the delivery of his Masters Letters, and other mat∣ters

of Form and Ceremony, we shall need to insist the less upon it.


His second Audience before that of the Grand Signior,
 was in the beginning of 
January,
 at which time the Ambassadour began to declare what he had in Commission from his King, which principally related towards a satisfaction for those Affronts formerly offered him in the per∣son of his Father, and himself inculcating into the Visier a true apprehension of the greatness of his Master, his force by Land, his powerful Fleet which should that following year be set sorth in the Mediterranean Seas, with other arguments which might challenge due respect and honour to so great a Prince. These Proposals and Dis∣courses, though the Vizer seemed not to entertain with that benign and flexible ear as was expect∣ed or thought satisfactory, and thereupon several disgusts did afterwards succeed; howsoever in the end all matters cleared up again, and his Excellency was permitted to return to his own House with all imaginatble satisfaction, as he was pleased to intimate to the Ambassadour for his Majesty of great 
Britain.
 Soon after followed his Audience with the Grand Signior according to the usual Ceremonies, so that all things run smoothly with the French for several years after. And here by the way it is observable, That an En∣glish Ambassadour once arguing hotly with the Vizier on some points of the Capitulations, in which judging himself wronged, threw the Ca∣pitulations to the Vizier, telling him, that he might keep the Writing and Paper, since he resolved not to obey the Letter. The Vizier hereupon calmly took the Capitulations, and laid them behind his Cushion, which the Ambassa∣dour in a more considerate temper could not a∣gain recover under an expence of fifteen hundred Pieces of Eight.


During the time of these Negotiations the Grand Signior wholly imployed his time and thoughts in Hunting, ranging all the Woods for se∣veral days journies round 
Constantinople,
 in which Exercise twenty or thirty thousand men were imployed, collected from the Cities and Villa∣ges round about, all which were paid at the pub∣lick expence and charge of House-keepers both Turks and Chrstians;
 which in one hunt might amount to thirty or forty thousand Dollars. With this burden the people being often opppres∣sed, and many perishing in the Woods with cold and hunger, began to murmur at the excess of Tyranny, cursing their Princes madness and folly, maintained with the life and ruine of his Sub∣jects. But notwithstanding all these whispered curses and secret menaces the Grand Signior fol∣lowed his delights with such frequency, and with that heat and eagerness, that the people percei∣ving no end of their misery, began to speak loud∣ly and plainly, and by some principal Persons gave the Visier to understand, That the people would not longer endure the extravagant Vagaries of their Prince at so dear a rate, of which he thar was his chief Councellour ought to inform and advise him. The Vizier, who was be∣fore sensible of the excess of his Masters humour in this particular, and that immoderation, even in lawful and innocent exercises, may become a Vice, and when acted with oppression of the Sub∣ject as dangerous as other terms which sound more of Tyranny and Violence, resolved with courage and humility to represent to his Master the dan∣ger of such expensive Huntings, especially when over frequent; and therefore assured those who made their Complaints, That for the future all matters should be redressed, and the Grand Signi∣or should not be so prodigal in his Huntings on the Purse of his Subjects. And so sensible was the Vizi∣er of the disorders which might arise from hence, if some remedy were not speedily applied, that he immediately departed 
Constantinople
 to find out the Grand Signior, who was lodged in some retired cool place, environed with Woods and Mountains; leaving 
Solyman
 Pasha for Chimacham, or Deputy, in his place, in whose former Government many terrible Fires had happened in 
Constantinaple.


About this time Advice came to 
Constantinople
 of certain Addresses the 
Nogay
 Tartar had made to the Pasha of 
Silistria
 to obtain a Country to live in between the Rivers of 
Boristhenese
 and the 
Da∣nube;
 for that their own Country being full,
 they were forced to abandon and empty it of for∣ty of fifty thousand Families, who lived in Wag∣gons, and had about a hundred thousand head of Cattel, all which with their substance, they prof∣fered for Subjects to the Grand Signior, if he plea∣sed to afford them protection, and Land for Pa∣sture and habitation. The Pasha approving here∣of, gave them assurance of security under the sha∣dow of his Masters favours, sending information thereof to the Port, who willingly embraced these new-come Guests, and entered into consultation what Country and limits should be assigned them. In the mean time the 
Krim
 Tartar jealous of this people, and not knowing what inconvenience such Neighbourhood might produce, fell upon them, and cut off a great number of them, forcing the rest to reurn into their own Country, which though ill taken at first by the Turks, was yet af∣terwards excused by the Tartar, and dissembled by the Port.


Though all things appeared quiet at 
Constanti∣nople
 after the Peace concluded with the Empe∣rour, and that the German Ambassadour was returned back to his Master; yet the Turks prosecuted their designs against 
Venice,
 aad made great preparations in the Provinces of 
Albania, Bossena,
 and 
Licca,
 which confine on the Veneti∣an Territories; and though in reality those For∣ces were not intended against those parts, but in order to a more warm prosecution of the War in 
Candia,
 whether the Vizier intended to trans∣port himself in Person; yet the Venetian State not fully penetrating the Design, took the Alarm chiefly in 
Dalmatia,
 and reinforced their Garrisons of 
Cataro
 and other Fortresses. And that matters there might be well provided, and all things acted with due circumspection; Marquiss 
Villa
 was or∣dered to visit those Garrisons in his Voyage to 
Candia;
 so that departing from 
Venice
 attended with two Gallies, he arrived in a few days at 
Zara,
 and thence proceeding to 
Spalato,
 where the Pro∣veditor General, 
Catarin Cornaro,
 made at that time his residence; they both joined together to survey the most important places of that Province. They began with the City of 
Spalato,
 which rather seems a place intended by Nature for a Palace of delights, than a Garrison of Arms; being the Seat which 
Dioclesian
 (who was born at 
Salona,
 six miles distance from thence) chose for his Garden of retirement, after he had renounced the Empire, and is now turned into a ruder shape of War, since the invasion of the Turk made it neces∣sary to be fortified for security of it self, and the parts circumjacent. 
Spalato
 is now very strong, be∣ing secured by divers Redoubts; the chief of which is scituated on a little rising, called 
Grippe,
 distant about a Musket-shot from the Town, is strengthe∣ned with four Royal Bastions, and with good Artil∣lery, there is also a new Line of Fortification drawn round the Town, which renders it the strong∣est, and most considerable of all 
Dalmatia:


But to make this place the more impregnable, these Generals laid the foundation for another Bulwark; and as an evidence of their Union, they cast a Medal with a stamp on one side of 
Cornaro,
 and on the other of Marquis 
Villa,
 and so rendring thanks to God, the Service ended with firing all the Guns of the Town.


Afterwards both the Generals Embarking, passed that Night to 
Curzola,
 anciently called 
Corsina Negra,
 which is one of the greatest and best of the Isles of this Gulf; Thence passing by 
Ragusi,
 where the Deputies of that Government, in recognition of that Soveraignty which the 
Ve∣netians
 have over the 
Adriatick
 Seas, presented the usual refreshments to the General of the Pro∣vince; and in a particular manner treated Mar∣quis 
Villa
 with a Present in name of their Repub∣lick. That Night they arrived at the Entrance of the Channel of 
Cataro,
 and taking 
Perasto
 in their way (which is a strong Fortification about six miles distant from 
Cataro
) they were received there with firing all the Guns of the Town, which were doubly multiplied by an Eccho returned from the sound of the neighbouring Mountains. Thence they proceeded to visit 
Budua,
 a place well fortified, as also Fort St. 
George
 in the Island 
Liesina,
 which is the usual Rendezvous of 
Bri∣gantines,
 and armed Barques; at length they went to 
Almissa,
 where they made a general Muster of all the Forces of the Province; in all which places having viewed and amended the de∣fects in Fortification, and given order for supply∣ing them with Ammunition and Provisions neces∣sary; they returned back to see the famous For∣tress of 
Clissa,
 the Situation of which seems to have been planted when Nature desired to sport, and be wanton; for it issues, as it were, out of the Bosom of two Mountains, which are at an equal distance from the Town, and then draw∣ing themselves at each end into the fashion of a Bow, seem to form a Triumphal Arch. The pas∣sage through these Mountains is so narrow and crooked, that it appears like a Labyrinth; and being supplied with plenty of Fountains and Ci∣sterns both within and without the Fortress, the Suburbs demol shed, and no incumbrances to cloy and weaken its strength, is certainly more obliged to Nature for its defence than to Art. From hence they proceeded to view 
Sebenico,
 which is another strong Fortress, situated on a rising Hill, and overviews a spacious Port, the entrance to which is secured by the Fort St. 
Nicho∣las;
 and the City it self, besides its own Walls, is guarded by a Cittadel, and by the new works of St. 
John,
 situated on two Hills: From hence the Generals returning to 
Zara,
 the Capital City of the Province which being encompassed by the Sea, annexed to the Land only by a Bridg, which is also defended by a Fort, is rendered the strong∣est and most impregnable of all the Fortresses. And here having made a general Muster of all the Forces, and visited the Country of 
Novigrade,
 and 
Possidaria,
 the habitations of the 
Morlach
 Mi∣litia, the Marquis returned again to 
Venice,
 being called thither by the Senate; for the Year being now well spent, and the Winter approaching too near to admit of any considerable action; the time grew seasonable for Counsels, in which man∣ner the Affairs of Wars might best and most ad∣vantageously be directed for the succeeding year. Yet in regard Advices were come from 
Candia,
 That the 
Turks
 were much afflicted with the Pe∣stilence, and scarcity of all Provisions; it was judged requisite to prosecute the War the more eagerly against them, before the Great Vizier arrived there with such an Army as commonly at∣tends his Person; it being advised from Count 
Leslie,
 the Emperors Ambassador at 
Constantinople,
 that the whole force of the 
Ottoman
 Armes was to refund it self speedily on that Island. This In∣telligence hastned the departure of Marquis 
Villa
 from 
Venice,
 with such Force as was then in a rea∣diness, being directed with necessary Instructi∣ons of what he ought to act in 
Candia.
 In his Voyage thither he touched at 
Corfu, Cefalonia,
 and 
Zant,
 and afterwards happily arrived on the sixth of 
December
 at the Isle of 
Paros
 or 
Paresi
 in the 
Archipelago,
 where he met with the Captain-General, and other Chief Commanders of the Fleet, together with 
Vuertmiller
 the Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance; and here the Marquis reforming several Companies, which were much diminished in their numbers, a general Muster was made of all the Forces, which being ranged in form of Battel, they were accounted to amount unto eighteen hundred Horse, and eight thou∣sand two hundred ninety five Foot. This Army had some want of Fire-Arms, and other Neces∣saries, of which the Senate being advised, they promised to supply all by a Convoy, then pre∣paring; and congratulating in their Letters to Marquis 
Villa
 the good News of his happy Arri∣val at 
Paros,
 raised and prompted him to At∣chievements worthy his Courage and Grandeur; for being a Person now elevated on the Bulwarks of 
Candia,
 he seemed to stand on that Theater, where he had all 
Europe
 for his Spectators.




The Troubles which the 
English
 Trade found this Year in 
Turky.


THE Currant of our Negotiations ran smoothly this year without any considera∣ble interruption in all parts of 
Turky,
 unless at 
Aleppo,
 where the Emim, or Customer, accor∣ding to his usual practice, began a new pretence, not only against former Presidents, but also a∣gainst the very Letter of Capitulations, deman∣ding 2 ½ 
per Cent.
 Custom at 
Scanderoon,
 and 3 at 
Aleppo;
 a matter against which our Articles of Peace and Commerce have made many and sundry Provisions: Notwithstanding the Custo∣mer (like others of his Predecessors, who have ever at 
Aleppo
 made Disputes about their Cu∣stoms, without being restrained by the most strict Imperial Commands, and plainest Decisions of the Law) resolved to make good his pretence by a sequestration on the whole Cargo of two gene∣ral Ships then under his Custody in the Custom-house. The Consul hereupon had recourse to the Justice of the Kadi, and there produced the Ca∣pitulations, the Hattesheriff, or Royal Signature, under the hand of Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 wherein the particulars of Custom were regulated, a Com∣mand from the present Vizier, and his Father, and other Commands from 
Adrianople
 and 
Con∣stantinople,
 all of the same tenour. The Emim on the other side, had no other Argument than his Baratz or Patent from the Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer, which was so prevalent, and of that force with the Kadi, joined with the fear and fa∣vour he bore towards the Emim; that it was judged by him to stand in ballance with all the other Imperial Signatures; and therefore left the business (which was as much as the Customer desired) undecided, making a Declaration, that the reasons on both sides were so forcible, and the arguments so equal, that he concluded it more proper, that a matter of so great importance should be reserved for the determination of more

powerful and eminent Officers. The matter stan∣ding thus doubtfully, the Emim conceiving it too great a pawn to detain so great a quantity of Cloth for a difference only in the Custom, deliver∣ed to every man his consignation, reserving only fifty Bales to make himself good on the judgment and commands he expected shortly in his favour. The difference being now referred up to the Court, the Lord Ambassador received the just complaints of the Consul and Merchants; for redress of which abuses, his Excellency dispatch∣ed my self, then his Secretary and Druggerman, to the Vizier at 
Belgrade,
 attending the advice of the 
German
 Ambassadors entrance into the Frontiers. The Vizier having heard the difference, was ready to have passed sentence in our favour, had not the Tefterdar, the only Advocate for the Customer, from whom the Original of our Evils was derived, put an unhappy obstacle in the course of our Negotiations, pretending that there were ancient Tefters or accompts amongst his Books, which mentioned two and a half 
per Cent.
 at 
Scanderoon,
 and three at 
Aleppo;
 and though it was urged to the contrary, that we never had to do with the Registers of the Treasurers, nor had managed any Apalto, or Farm of the Grand Signior; but our Capitulations are our Law and Rule, and our Commands Registred in the Reis Efendi's, or Secretaries Office, than which we never had, nor could ever acknowledg any other Canon: yet the Vizier over-ruled our reasons, and we were forced to submit, until the Tefter∣dar took his leisure to examine and consult his Books.


The Vizier and his Army being then upon their return, we found no opportunity to renew our sollicitations, until we came to 
Nissa,
 where the Army had two days of repose, and there again as in other places before, we urged the Tefterdar so importunately, that at length we compelled him to acknowledg to the Vizier, that our affairs were not Registred in his Office. So that now we took liberty to declare our Reasons to the Vizier; which we drew from our Capitulations, the ancient Hattesheriff of 
Aleppo,
 the Vizier and his Father's own Commands, and Copies of o∣thers of the like tenour, not omitting other Ar∣guments and Evidences, which rendered the busi∣ness not a little clear and apparent to the capaci∣ty of the Vizier: who thereupon reprehended the Tefterdar, for seeking by his Command to intro∣duce an innovation contrary to our Capitulati∣ons, and promised us Commands in our favour; but we replied, that we had already Commands, and the Grand Signiors own Royal Signature on our side, and that our Ambassador had not sent us so many days Journey to seek another, which perhaps would as ill be observed as the former; But it was the punishment of the Customer which the Ambassador expected, who against so many clear Evidences, durst proceed to the violation of them all Many other words were added perti∣nent and forcible to the present purpose. To which the Vizier answered, that he was now up∣on his Journey, where business of this nature was ill dispatched. And therefore ordered us to pro∣ceed to 
Adrianople,
 where he should have more leisure to consider what was fit to be done in or∣der to justice and satisfaction of the Ambassador. Hereupon I left the Army, wherein I was much incommoded, and proceeded with all haste to 
Adrianople,
 where the Great Vizier in some days after me arrived, and there we renewed our wonted endeavours, and sollicitations, that we might come to an end of this business, and that justice might be done us: But the Vizier willing to gratifie the Tefterdar, was not forward to pass his Sentence, but put us again off to 
Con∣stantinople,
 where the Books should be peru∣sed, that were laid up amongst the Registers of the 
Divan:
 For that this matter was a concernment of the Grand Signiors, in deter∣mination of which, he ought to be tender and considerate. That for sending for 
Ibrahim
 Aga, the Customer (which was one of the princi∣pal of our demands) to answer for the inju∣ries he had done our Nation, he was already ordered to appear at Court, where he should be ready to stand to judgment for what the Ambassador should object against him: and this had been the answer which was contrived to be given to the Ambassador himself, in case he had (as once he designed) appeared at 
Adrianople
 in person on this occasion.


The Vizier arriving at 
Constantinople
 some few Months after; the Lord Ambassador ob∣tained Audience of him on the 
15th.
 of 
Octo∣ber,
 pressing still for justice against the Custo∣mer of 
Aleppo:
 but nothing thereof could be procured, besides a Command for restitution of the fifty Bales of Cloth, detained in the hands of the Emim, upon the pretence before related, and that the payment of Customs should be regulated after the rate of three 
per Cent.
 according to the ancient usance. For putting this Command in execution, an Aga was ordered to be dispatched, for whose ser∣vice herein the Vizier allotted a thousand Dol∣lars should be paid him, which though an ex∣travagant reward, yet to put an honour and authority on the business, and not to displease the Vizier, it was granted to him, and so he was dispatched the 
25th.
 for 
Aleppo.
 But the troubles of our Merchants at 
Aleppo
 ended not here: For the Tefterdar greatly enraged to see his designs against us to have no better issue, thought to trouble us by a new inven∣tion of prohibiting the Scale of 
Scanderoon
 to all 
English,
 and other Christian Vessels, and that the Factories should be transferred again over to 
Tripoli
 in 
Soria;
 a place formerly fre∣quented by our Merchants, but by reason of the danger and inconvenience of that Port, the Trade was transported to the Scale of 
Scanderoon.
 This alteration the Tefterdar pre∣tended to have been granted to the Merchants at their earnest Petition, and promise to the Grand Signior, of payment of 13000 Dollars Yearly, for discharge and maintenance of those Guards which were requisite in that place for safety of the Coast, and defence of the Caravans which pass with Merchants goods to 
Aleppo;
 but time and corruption of the Ministers had depri∣ved the Grand Signior of the benefit of that duty. And this he urged with the greater instance and eagerness, knowing that the Scale of 
Scanderoon
 being prohibited, the Hattesheriff whereon con∣sisted the priviledg of the Merchants, and their sole security must consequently fall, and they forced to a new agreement. On this occasi∣on our Lord Ambassador had Audience with the Vizier, and insisted on that point of our Capitulations, which gives us liberty to Trade in any part of the Grand Signiors Dominions; and therefore to consent to be restrained, or confined to any particular place, was to assent to a breach of the Capitulations, which was out of his power, and only to be dispensed with by his Master the King of 
England,
 and the Grand Signior, by whom they were established; and to connive or assent to the breach of one particular clause, was to hazard the loss and

breach of the whole: for that our Capitulations (to use the 
Turks
 saying) are like a string of Berds, of which, when one link is broken, the others drop off. To which the Vizier replied, that the Scale of 
Scandroon
 was open, and clear as before for the 
English
 Trade; but be∣cause the Testerdar, and Customer, pretended that the Grand Signior was put to great ex∣pences for maintenance of a Watch and Guard at that Port, which was only in respect to the security of the Merchants Goods; Orders should be given for taking away those Officers, as unnecessary and insignificant to the publick Service; no Guards having ever been in that place, the Embassador judged his business to be granted, and so thanked the Vizier and depar∣ted. But not many days after the Testerdar procured a Command for shutting the Scale of 
Scanderoon,
 and transporting the Factory to 
Tri∣p
li:
 which Command was rather intended to affright our Nation into some composition, than really to be put in execution, as appeared by the sequel; for the Testerdar better consider∣ed than to bring so great an 
Odium
 upon him∣self from the whole Country and City of 
Aleppo,
 and to enforce the Embassador to have recourse to the Grand Signiors own person, for redress of an abuse of so high a nature, in derogation of his Imperial Capitulations. Howsoever it is observa∣ble in the transaction of all this business, that it is diccicult to bring a corrupt 
Turkish
 Minister to Justice or punishment, meerly for breach of our Capitulations, or in respect to any difference or abuse offered to Christians, unless the complaint be accompanied with Presents or Money, which are most prevalent Arguments in the 
Turkish
 Court; and in this case I really believe, that had three or four thousand Dollars been offered as a reward for bringing the Customer to capital pu∣nishment, the complaint had found acceptance, and honourable success: for default of which, the Cause was starved, and naked, and carried no fire or heat in those aggravations with which it was represented. It is likewise observable, that business in the 
Turkish
 Court doth not always find that dispatch, or expedition, as is generally be∣lieved in 
Christendom,
 unless it come accompani∣ed with the interest of the Ministers themselves, and then it is transacted in a moment, which o∣therwise languished with delays, and will never want excuses to deser it.








Anno 
1666.
 Hegeira 
1077.


WE shall begin this Year with the strange rumour and disturbance of the 
Jews,
 con∣cerning 
Sabatai Sevi,
 their pretended Messiah, which for being most principally acted in 
Turkey,
 may properly belong to the History of this time and place; which therefore for delight of the Readers, I shall here insert: for though it may have been elsewhere published, yet being an issue of my Pen, I may lawfully now own it, and an∣nex it to this History, in respect of that near co∣herence it may have therewith; and that many other particulars have been added thereunto, which succeeded until the Death of this 
Sabatai.


According to the Predictions of several Christi∣an Writers, especially of such who comment upon the 
Apocalypie
 or 
Revelations,
 this year of 1666. was to prove a year of Wonders, of strange Revolutions in the World, and particularly, of blessing to the 
Jews,
 either in respect of their Conversion to the Christian Faith. or of their Re∣storation to their Temporal Kingdom. This opinion was so dilated and fixt in the Countries of the Reformed Religion, and in the heads of Fanatical Enthusiasts, who dreamed of Fifth Mo∣narchies, the down fall of the hope and Anti∣christ, and the greatness of the 
Jews,
 insomuch, that this subtil people judged this Year the time to stir, and to fit their Motion according to the season of the Modern Prophecies. Whereupon strange reports flew from place to place, of the March of multitudes of People from unknown parts into the remote deserts of 
Arabia,
 supposed to be the Ten Tribes and a half, lost for so many Ages. That a Ship was arrived in the Northern parts of 
Scotland,
 with her Sails and Cordage of Silk, navigated by Marriners who spoke nothing but 
Hebrew,
 and with this Motto on their Sails, 
The Twelve Tribes of Israel.
 These reports agree∣ing thus near to former Predictions, put the wild sort of the World into an expectation of strange accidents this Year should produce in reference to the 
Jewish
 Monarchy.


In this manner Millions of people were posses∣sed when 
Sabatai Sevi
 first appeared at 
Smyrna,
 and published himself to the 
Jews
 for their Mes∣siah, relating the greatness of their approaching Kingdom, the strong hand whereby God was about to deliver them from Bondage, and ga∣ther them from all the parts of the World. It was strange to see how this fancy took, and how fast the report of 
Sabatai,
 and his Doctrine flew through all parts where 
Jews
 inhabited, and so deeply possessed them with a belief of their new Kingdom and Riches; and many of them with promotion to Offices of Government, renown and greatness; that in all places from 
Constantinople
 to 
Buda
 (which it was my fortune that Year to travel) I perceived a strange transport in the 
Jews,
 none of them attending to any business, unless to wind up former Negotiations, and to prepare themselves and Families for a Journey to 
Jerusalem;
 all their Discourses, their Dreams, and disposal of their affairs, tended to no other design but a re-establishment in the Land of Promise, to Greatness and Glory, Wisdom and Doctrine of the Messiah, whose Original, Birth and Education is first to be recounted.


Sabatai Sevi
 was Son of 
Mordecai Sevi,
 an In∣habitant and Natural of 
Smyrna,
 who gained his Livelihood by being Broker to an 
English
 Mer∣chant in that place; a person who before his Death was very decrepit in his Body, and full of the Gout and other infirmities: But his Son 
Sabatai Sevi
 addicting himself to study and learning, be∣came a notable Proficient in the 
Hebrew
 and 
A∣rabick
 Languages; and especially in Divinity and Metaphysicks, he was so cunning a Sophister, that he vented a new Doctrine in their Law, and drew to the profession of it so many Disciples, as raised one day a tumult in the Synagogue; for which afterwards he was by censure of the Kock∣hams (who are the Expounders of the Law) ba∣nished out of the City.


During the time of his Exile he travelled to 
Thessalonica,
 now called 
Salonica,
 where he mar∣ried a very handsom Woman; but either not having that part of Oeconomy as to govern a Wife, or being impotent as to Women, as was pretended, or that she sound not favour in his eyes, she was divorced from him. Again, he took a second Wife more beautiful than the former; but the same causes of discontent raising a differ∣ence between them, he obtained another Divorce from this Wife also. And being now free from the incumbrances of a Family, his wandring head

moved him to travel through the 
Morea,
 thence to 
Tripoli
 in 
Syria, Gaza
 and 
Jerusalem,
 and by the way picked up a 
Ligornese
 Lady, whom he made his third Wife, the Daughter of some 
Polo∣nian
 or 
German,
 her Original and Country not being very well known. And being now at 
Jeru∣salem,
 he began to reform their Law, and to a∣bolish the Fast of 
Tamuz,
 (which they keep in the month of 
June
) and meeting there with a certain 
Jew
 called 
Nathan,
 a proper Instrument to promote his design, he communicated to him his condition, his course of life, and intentions to declare himself the Messiah of the World, so long expected and desired by the 
Jews.
 This de∣sign took wonderfully with 
Nathan;
 and because it was thought necessary, according to Scripture and ancient Prophecies, that 
Elias
 was to pre∣cede the Messiah, as St. 
John Baptist
 was the Fore-runner of Christ, 
Nathan
 thought no man so proper to act the part of the Prophet as him∣self; and so no sooner had 
Sabatai
 declared him∣self the Messiah, but 
Nathan
 discovers himself to be his Prophet, forbidding all the Fasts of the 
Jews
 in 
Jerusalem,
 and declaring that the Bride∣groom being come, nothing but joy and triumph ought to dwell in their habitations; writing to all the Assemblies of the 
Jews
 to perswade them to the same belief. And now the Schism being be∣gun, and many 
Jews
 really believing what they so much desired, 
Nathan
 took the courage and boldness to prophesie, That one year from the 
27th
 of
 
Kislau,
 which is the Month of 
July,
 the Messiah was to appear before the Grand Signior, and to take from 
 his Crown, and lead him in chains like a Captive: 
Sabatai
 also at 
Gaza
 preached Repentance to the 
Jews,
 and Obedi∣ence to himself and Doctrine, for that the Co∣ming of the Messiah was at hand. Which novel∣ties so affected the 
Jews,
 Inhabitants of those parts, that they gave up themselves wholly to their Prayers, Alms, and Devotions; and to confirm this belief the more, it happened that at the same time that news hereof with all particulars were dispatched from 
Gaza,
 to acquaint the Brethren in foreign parts; the rumour of the Messiah had flown so swift, and gained such reception, that Intelligence came from all Countries, where the 
Jews
 sojourn, by Letters to 
Gaza
 and 
Jerusalem,
 congratulating the happiness of their deliverance, and expiration of their time of servitude by the appearance of the Messiah. To which they ad∣joyned other Prophecies relating to that Domini∣on the Messiah was to have over all the World, that for nine Months after he was to disappear; during which time the 
Jews
 were to suffer, and several of them to undergo Martyrdom; but then returning again mounted on a Coelestial Li∣on, with his Bridle made of Serpents with seven heads, accompanied with his Brethren the 
Jews,
 who inhabited on the other side of the River 
Sa∣bation,
 he should be acknowledged for the sole Monarch of the Universe, and then the Holy Tem∣ple should descend from Heaven already built, framed, and beautified, wherein they should of∣fer Sacrifices for ever. And here I leave the Rea∣der to consider, how strangely this deceived Peo∣ple was amused, when these confident and vain reports and dreams of Power and Kingdoms had wholly transported them from the ordinary course of their trade and interest.


This noise and rumour of the Messiah having begun to fill all places, 
Sabatai Sevi
 resolved to travel towards 
Smyrna,
 the Country of his Nati∣vity, and thence to 
Constantinople,
 the capital City, where the principal work of preaching was to be performed: 
Nathan
 thought it not fit to be long after him, and therefore travels by way of 
Da∣mascus,
 where resolving to continue some time for better propagation of this new Doctrine, in the mean while writes this Letter to 
Sabatai Sevi,
 as followeth.




22.
 Kesvan of this Year.


TO the King our King, Lord of our Lords, who gathers the dispersed of 
Israel,
 who redeems our Captivity, the Man elevated to the height of all sublimity, the Messiah of the God of 
Jacob,
 the true Messiah, the Coelestial Lion, 
Sabatai Sevi,
 whose Honour be exalt∣ed, and his Dominion raised in a short time, and for ever, 
Amen.
 After having kissed your hands, and swept the dust from your feet, as my duty is to the King of Kings, whose Majesty be exalted, and his Empire en∣larged; These are to make known to the Su∣preme Excellency of that place, which is a∣dorned with the beauty of your anctity, that the Word of the King and of his Law hath in∣lightned our faces, that day hath been a solemn day unto 
Israel,
 and a day of light unto our Rulers, for immediately we applied our selves to perform your Command, as our duty is. And though we have heard of many strange things, yet we are couragious, and our heart is as the heart of a Lion, nor ought we to inquire a rea∣son of your doings, for your works are marvel∣lous and past finding out, and we are confirm∣ed in our fidelity without all exception, resign∣ing up our very Souls for the Holiness of your Name. And now we are come as far as 
Da∣mascus,
 intending shortly to proceed in our Journey to 
Scanderoon,
 according as you have commanded us, that so we may ascend and see the face of God in light, as the light of the face of the King of life: and we servants of your servants shall cleanse the dust from your feet, beseeching the Majesty of your Excellen∣cy and Glory, to vouchsafe from your habita∣tion to have a care of us, and help us with the force of your right hand of strength, and shorten our way which is before us. And we have our eyes towards Jah, Jah, who will make haste to help us and save us, that the children of iniquity shall not hurt us, and to∣wards whom our hearts pant, and are consumed within us, who shall give us talons of Iron to be worthy to stand under the shadow of your Ass. These are the words of the servant of your servants, who prostrates himself to be trod on by the soals of your feet.


Nathan Benjamin.




And that he might publish this Doctrine of the Messiah and himself more plainly, he wrote from 
Damascus
 this following Letter to the Jews at 
Aleppo,
 and parts thereabouts.




TO the Residue or remnant of the Israelites, Peace without end. These my words are to give you notice, how that I am arrived in peace at 
Damascus,
 and behold I go to meet the face of our Lord, whose Majesty be ex∣alted;

for he is the Soveraign of the King of Kings, whose Empire be enlar∣ged.
 According as he hath commanded us and the Twelve Tribes to elect unto him twelve men, so have we done: and we now go to 
Scanderone
 by his Command to shew our faces together with part of the principal of those particular friends to whom he hath given li∣cense to assemble in that said place.


And now I come to make known unto you, That tho you have heard strange things of our Lord, yet let not your hearts faint or fear, but rather fortifie your selves in your faith, because all his actions are miraculous and secret, which humane understanding cannot comprehend; and who can penetrate into the depth of them? In a short time all things shall be manifested clearly unto you in their pu∣rity, and you shall know and consider, and be instructed by the Inventor himself, and blessed is he who can expect and arrive to the Salva∣tion of the true Messiah; who will speedily publish his Authority and Empire over us now and for ever.


Nathan.




And now all the Cities of 
Turkie,
 where the Jews inhabited, were full of the expectation of the Messiah, no Trade or course of gain was followed; every one imagined, that daily Pro∣visions, Riches, Honours, and Government were to descend upon him by some unknown and mi∣raculous manner. An Example of which is most observable in the Jews at 
Thessalonica,
 who now full of assurance, that the restauration of their Kingdom, and the accomplishment of the times for the Coming of the Messiah was at hand, judged themselves obliged to double their Devo∣tions, and purifie their Consciences from all sins and enormities; which might be observed by the scrutiny of him who was now come to pene∣trate into the very thoughts and imaginations of Mankind. For which work, certain Kochams were appointed to direct the people in the regu∣lation of their Prayers, Devotions, and Fastings: but so forward was every one now in his acts of Penance, that they stayed not for the sen∣tence of the Kocham, or Prescriptions or Rules, but applied themselves immediately to Fastings, and some in that manner beyond the abilities of Nature, that having for the space of seven days taken no sustenance, were famished: others buried themselves in their Gardens, covering their naked bodies with earth, their heads only excepted, remained in those beds of dirt, until their bodies were stiffned with the cold and moisture: others would endure to have melted wax dropt upon their shoulders: others to roul themselvs in snow, and throw their bodies in the coldest season of the winter into the Sea, or frozen waters. But the most common man∣ner of Mortification was first to prick their backs and sides with thorns, and then to give themselves thirty nine lashes. All business was laid aside, none worked or opened shop, unless to clear his Ware-hose of Merchandise at any price: who had superfluity in Houshold-stuff sold it for what he could, but yet not to Jews, who were interdicted from all bargains or sales un∣der pain of Excommunication, pecuniary mulcts, or corporal punishment; for their comportment as to business and imployment was esteemed the test or touch-store of their saith. It being the general Tenent, That in the days that the Mes∣siah appeared, the Jews should become Masters of the Estates and Inheritance of Infidels; until when, they ought to content themselves with matters only necessary to maintain and sup∣port life. But because that every one was not Master of that Provision and Fortune as to live without daily labour; therefore to quiet the cla∣mours of the poor, and prevent the enormous lives of some, who upon these occasions would be∣come vagabonds, and desert their Cities, due order was taken to make collections, which were so liberally bestowed, that in 
Thessalonica
 only four hundred poor were supported by the meer charity of the richer. And as they endeavoured to purge their consciences of sin, and to apply themselves to good works, that the Messiah might find the City prepared for his reception; so lest he should accuse them of any omssion in their Law, and particularly in their neglect of that ancient Prcept of Increase and multiply, they married children together of ten years of age, and some under, without respect to richess or poverty, condition or quality; but being pro∣miscuously joyned to the number of six or seven hundred couple, upon better and cooler thoughts, after the deceit of the false Messiah was dis∣covered, or the expectation of his Coming grew cold, were divorced, or by consent separated from each other.


In the heat of all this talk and rumour came 
Sabatai Sevi
 to 
Smyrna,
 the City of his Nativiry, infinitely desired there by the common Jews, but by the Kochams or Doctors of their Law, who gave little or no credence to what he pre∣tended, was ill received, not knowing what mis∣chief or ruine this Doctrine and Prophecy of a new Kingdom might produce. Yet 
Sabatai
 bringing with him Testimonials of his Sanctity, ho∣ly Life, Wisdom, and gift of Prophecy so deep∣ly fixed himself in the heart of the generality, both as being holy and wise, that thereupon he took courage and boldness to enter into dispute with the Grand Kocham (who is the head or chief Expositor of their Law, and Superintendent of their civil Government) between whom the ar∣guments grew so high, and language so hot, that the Jews who favoured the Doctrine of 
Saba∣tai,
 and feared the Authority of the Kocham, doubtful what might be the issue of the contest, appeared in great numbers before the Kaddee of 
Smyrna,
 in justification of their new Prophet, be∣fore so much as any accusation came against him; the Kaddee according to the custom of the Turks swallowed money on both sides, and afterwards remitted them to the determination of their own Justice: In this manner 
Sabatai
 gain∣ed ground daily; and the Grand Kocham with his Party, losing both the affection and obe∣dience of his People, was displaced from his Office, and another constituted more affectionate and a∣greeable to the new Prophet, whose Power daily increased by those confident reports of his Ene∣mies being struck with phrensie and madness, until being restored to their former temper and wits by him, became his Friends, Admirers, and Disciples. No invitation was now made in 
Smyr∣na
 by the Jews, nor Marriage, or Circumcision held, where 
Sabatai
 was not present, accompanied to the solemnities with multitudes of his Follow∣ers, and the streets covered with Carpets or fine Cloth for him to tread on; but the humility of this Pharisee appeared such, that he would stoop and turn them aside, and so pass. And ha∣ving thus fixed himself in the opinion and admira∣tion

of the people, he began to take on himself the Title of Messiah, and the Son of God, and to make this following Declaration to all the Nati∣ons of the 
Jews,
 which being wrote Originally in 
Hebrew,
 was translated for me faithfully into 
Italian
 in this manner.




L'Ʋnico Figliolo e Primogenito di Dio Sa∣batai Sevi, il Messiah e Salvatore d'Is∣rael,


a tutti li Figlioli d'Israel eletti di Dio, Pace.


Essendo cho sette fatti degni di veder quel gran giorno della deliberatione e salvati∣one di Israel, e consummatione delle Parole di Dio promesse per li suoi Profeti, e Padri no∣stri, per il suo diletto Figlio di Israel. Ogni vostra amaritudine si converta in allegrezza, e li vostri digiugni si faccino feste, per che non piangerete, O miei Figlioli di Israel, haven∣dosi dato iddio la consolatione innarabile feste∣giateri con Timpani, Organi, e Musiche, rin∣gratiando quello chi ha adempito il promessa dalli secoli, facendo ogni giorno quelle cose che solete sare nelle Calende, e quel giorn
 dedi∣cato all afflittione e mestitia, convertite lo in giorno giocondo pro la mia comparsa. E non spaventateri niente, per che haverete Domi∣nio sopra le Genti, non solamente di quelle, che si vedono in Terra ma quella che sono in fondi del Mare. Il tutto pro vostra consolatione e allegrezza.




Which translated into 
English
 runs thus.




THE only and first-born Son of God 
Sabatai Sevi,
 the Messiah and Sa∣viour of 
Israel,


to all the Sons of 
Israel,
 Peace.


Since that you are made worthy to see that great day of Deliverance and Salvation unto 
Israel,
 and accomplishment of the Word of God promised by his Pro∣phets and our Forefathers, and by his be∣loved Son of 
Israel,
 let your bitter sor∣rows be turned into Joy, and your fast into Festivals, for you shall weep no more, O my Sons of 
Israel;
 for God having gi∣ven you this unspeakable comfort, re∣joyce with Drums, Organs, and Musick, giving thanks to him for performing his promises from all Ages doing that eve∣ry day which is usual for you to do up∣on the Calends, and that day dedicated to affliction and sorrow, convert you un∣to a day of mirth for my appearance. And fear you nothing, for you shall have Do∣minion over the nations, and not only over those who are on Earth, but over those creatures also which are in the depth of the Sea. All which is for your consolation and rejoycing.


Sabatai Sevi.




Notwithstanding the Disciples of 
Sabatai Sevi,
 were not so numerous, but many opposed his Doctrine, publickly avouching, that he was an Impostor, and deceiver of the People, amongst which was one 
Samuel Pennia,
 a man of good Estate and reputation in 
Smyrna;
 who arguing in the Synagogue, that the present signs of the Coming of the Messiah were not apparent, e∣ther according to Scripture, or the Doctrine of Rabbins, raised such a Sedition and Tamult a∣mongst the 
Jews,
 as not only prevailed against his arguments, but had also against his life, had he not timely conveyed himself out of the Syna∣gogue, and so escaped the hands of the Multi∣tude, who now could more easily endure Blas∣phemy against the Law of 
Moses,
 and Prophana∣tion of the Sanctuary, than contradiction or mis∣belief of the Doctrine of 
Sabatai.
 But howsoever it fell out, 
Pennia
 in a short time became a Con∣vert, and Preacher up of 
Sabatai
 for the Son of God, and Deliverer of the 
Jews;
 and not only he, but his whole Family, his Daughters Pro∣phesie, and fall into strange ecstasies: and not only this house, but above four hundred men and women Prophesie of the growing Kingdom of 
Sabatai,
 and young Infants who could scarce yet stammer out a syllable to their Mothers, re∣peat and pronounce clearly the Name of 
Saba∣tai
 the Messiah and Son of God. For thus far had God permitted the 
evil to delud
 this people, that their very children were for a time posessed, and voices heard to found from their stomacks and entrails: those of riper years fell first into a Trance, foamed at the mouth, and recounted the future prosperity and deliverance of the 
Is∣raelites,
 their Visions of the Lion of 
Judah,
 and the Triumphs of 
Sabatai
 All which were cer∣tainly true, being effects of Drabolical delusions, as the 
Jews
 themselves since have confessed to me.


With these concomitant accidents and successes 
Sabatai Sevi
 growing more presumptuous, that he might correspond with the Prophecies of Greatness and Dominion of the Messiah, procee∣ded to Election of those Princes which were to govern the Israelites in their March towards the Holy Land, and to dispense Judgment and Ju∣stice after their Restauration.


In this manner things ran to a strange height of madness amongst the 
Jews
 at 
Smyrna,
 when ap∣peared such Pageantry of Greatness, that no Co∣medy could equal the mock-shows they represen∣ted. And though none durst openly confess any scruple or doubt of this common received Belief, yet for confirmation of the 
Jews
 in their Faith, and astonishment of the Gentiles, 
 was judged no less than necessary, that 
Sabatai
 should shew some Miracles, whereby to evince all the World that he was the Messiah. And as the present oc∣casion seemed to require an evidence and convi∣ction infallible of this truth, so it was daily exe
e∣cted by the Vulgar with an impatience 
table to humors disposed to Novelty, who out of eve∣ry action and motion of their Prophet, began to fancy something extraordinary and supernatural. 
Sabatai
 was now horribly puzzled for a Miracle, though the imagination of the people was so vi∣tiated, that any legerdemain or flight of hand would have passed more easily with them for a Wonder, than 
Moses
 striking the Rock for water, or dividing the Red-Sea. And an occasion happen∣ing, that 
Sabatai
 was in behalf of his Subjects to ap∣pear before the Kaddee or Judg of the City, to de∣mand ease and relief of some oppressions which aggrieved them; it was thought necessary a Mi∣racle should be worked now or never, when 
Sa∣batai
 appearing with a formal and Pharisaical gravity which he had starched on, some on a sudden avouched to see a Pillar of Fire be∣tween him and the Kaddee, which report pre∣sently was heard through the whole room, filled with 
Jews
 that accompanied 
Sabatai.
 Some of w
om, who strongly fancied it, vowed

and swore they saw it; others in the outwrad Yard, or that could not come near to hear or see for the crowd, as speedily took the Alarm, and the rumor ran, and belief received by the Women and Children at home in a moment. So that 
Sabatai Sevi
 returned to his house trium∣phant, fixed in the hearts of his People, who now needed no farther Miracles to confirm them in their Faith. And thus was 
Sabatai
 exalted, when no man was thought worthy of communi∣cation, who did not believe him for the Mes∣siah: others were called Kophrim, Infidels, or Hereticks, subjected to the Censure of Excom∣munication, with whom it was not lawful so much as to eat. Every man produced his Trea∣sure, his Gold, and Jewels, offering them at the feet of 
Sabatai;
 so that he could have commanded all the Wealth of 
Smyrna;
 but he was too subtle to accept their money, lest he should render his design suspected by any acts of covetousness.


Sabatai Sevi
 having thus fully fixed himself in 
Smyrna,
 and filled other places with the rumours of him, declared that he was called by God to visit 
Canstantinople,
 where the greatest part of his work was to be accomplished; in order where∣unto he privately shipped himself with some few Attendants on a Turkish Saike in the month of 
January
 1665, lest the crowd of his Disciples, and such who would press to follow him, should endanger him in the eyes of the Turks, who al∣ready began to be scardalized at the Reports and Prophecies concerning his Person But though 
Sabatai
 took few into the Vessel with him, yet multitudes of Jews travelled over land to meet him again at 
Constantinople,
 on whom all their Eyes and expectations were intent. The Wind proving Northerly, as commonly it is in the 
Hellespont
 and 
Propontis, Sabatai
 was thirty nine days in his Voyage, and yet the Vessel not arrived: So little power had this Messiah over the Sea and Winds. In which time the News fore-running to 
Constantinople
 that the Jews Messiah was near, all that people prepared to receive him with the same joy and impatience as was ex∣pressed in other parts where he arrived. The Great Vizier then also at 
Constantinople,
 (being not yet departed on his expedition for 
Gandia
) ha∣ving heard some rumours of this Man, and the disorder and madness he had raised amongst the Jews, sent two Boats, whilst the Saik was detain∣ed by contrary Winds, with Commands to bring him up Prisoner to the Port, where accordingly 
Sabatai
 being come, was committed to the most loathsome and darkest Dungeon in the Town, there to remain in farther expectation of the Vi∣ziers Sentence. The Jews were not at all discou∣raged at this ill Treatment of their Prophet, but rather confirmed in their belief of him, as being an accomplishment of the Prophecy of those things which ought to precede his Glory and Dominion; which Consideration induced the Chiefest Persons amongst the Jews to make their Visits and Addresses to him with the same Cere∣mony and Respect in the Dungeon, as they would have done, had he then sate exalted on the sublime Throne of 
Judah.
 Several of them, with one 
Anacago
 by name, a Man of great esteem amongst the Jews, attended a whole day before him, with their Eyes cast down, their Bodies bending forward, and hands cross'd before them; (which are postures of humllity and service in the Eastern Parts) the undecency of the place, and present subjection, not having in the least abated their high thoughts and reverence towards his person.


For the 
Jews
 in 
Constantinople
 were become as mad and distracted, as they were in other places, all Trade and Traffick forbidden, and those who owed Money, in no manner careful how to satisfie it; amongst which wild Crew, some were indebted to our Merchants at 
Galata,
 who not knowing the way to receive their Money, partly for their interest, and partly for curiosity, thought fit to visit this 
Sabatai,
 complaining, That such particular 
Jews,
 upon his Coming, took upon them the boldness to defraud them of their right, and desired he would be pleased to sig∣nifie to those his Subjects, his pleasure to have satisfaction given.


Whereupon 
Sabatai,
 with much affectation, took Pen and Paper, and wrote to this effect.




To you of the Nation of the 
Jews,
 who ex∣pect the appearance of the Messiah, and the Salvation of 
Israel,
 Peace without end. Where∣as we are informed, That you — are indebted to several of the 
English
 Nation, It seemeth right to us to enorder you to make satisfaction to these your just Debts: which if you refuse to do, and not obey us herein; know you that then you are not to enter with us into our Joys and Dominions.




In this manner 
Sabatai Sevi
 remained a Priso∣ner at 
Constantinople
 for the space of two Months; at the end of which the Vizier having design∣ed his expedition for 
Candia,
 and considering the rumour and disturbance the Presence of 
Saba∣tai
 had made already at 
Constantinople,
 thought it not secure to suffer him to remain in the impe∣rial City, whilst both the Grand Signior and him∣self were absent; and therefore changed his Prison to the 
Dardanelli,
 otherwise called the Castle of 
Abydos,
 being on the 
Europe
 side of the 
Hellespont,
 opposite to 
Sestos,
 places famous in 
Greek
 Poetry. This removal of 
Sabatai
 from a worse Prison, to one of a better Air, confirmed the 
Jews
 with greater confidence of his be∣ing the Messiah, supposing that had it been in the power of the Vizier, or other Officers of the 
Turks,
 to have destroyed his Person, they would never have permitted him to live unto that time, in regard their Maximes enforce them to quit all jealousies and suspicions of ruine to their State by the death of the Party feared; which much rather they ought to execute on 
Sabatai,
 who had not only declared himself the King of 
Israel,
 but also by Prophecies published fa∣tal things to the Grand Signior and his King∣doms.


With this Consideration, and others prece∣ding, the 
Jews
 flocked in great numbers to the Castle, where he was imprisoned, not only from the Neighbouring parts, but also from 
Poland, Germany, Ligorn, Venice, Amsterdam,
 and other places, where the 
Jews
 reside; on all whom, as a reward of the expence and labours of their Pil∣grimage, 
Sabatai
 bestowed plenty of his Be∣nedictions, promising encrease of their Store, and enlargement of possessions in the Holy Land. So great was the confluence of the 
Jews
 to this place, that the 
Turks
 thought it requisite to make their advantage thereof, and so not only raised the price of their Provisions, Lodgings, and other necessaries, but also denied to ad∣mit any to the presence of 
Sabatai,
 unless for Mo∣ney, setting the price sometimes at Five, some∣times at ten Dollars, or more or less, according as they guessed at the abilities and zeal of the Person; by which gain and advantage to the 
Turks,
 no Complaints or Advices were carried to 
Adrianople,
 either of the Concourse or Arguments

amongst the 
Jews
 in that place, but rather all Ci∣vilities and Liberties indulged unto them, which served as a farther Argument to ensnare this poor People in the belief of their Messiah.


During this time of Confinement 
Sabatai
 had leisure to compose and institure a New Method of Worship for the 
Jews,
 and principally the manner of the Celebration of the Day of his Na∣tivity, which he prescribed in this manner.




BRethren, and my People, Men of my Re∣ligion, inhabiting the City of 
Smyrna
 the Renowned, where live Men, and Women, and Families; much Peace be unto You from the Lord of Peace, and from Me his be∣loved Son King 
Solomon.
 I command you, That the Ninth of the Month of 
Ab (which according to our account answered that Year to the Month of
 June) next to come, you make a Day of Invitation, and of great Joy, celebrating it with choice Meats, and pleasing Drinks, with many Candles and Lamps, with Musick and Songs; because it is the day of the Birth of 
Sabatai Sevi
 the High King, above all the Kings of the Earth. And as to matters of labour, and other things of like nature, do as becomes you upon a day of Festi∣val, adorned with your finest Garments. As to your Prayers, let the same Order be used as upon Festivals. To converse with Christians on that day is unlawful, though your Discourse be of matters indifferent; all labour is for∣bidden, but to sound Instrument is law∣ful.


This shall be the method of your Prayers on this day of Festival. After you have said, Blessed be thou, O Holy God; then proceed, and say: Thou hast chosen us before all Peo∣ple, and hast loved us, and hast been delighted with us, and hast humbled us more than all other Nations, and hast sanctified us with thy Precepts, and hast brought us near to thy Ser∣vice, and the Service of our King. Thy Ho∣ly, Great, and Terrible Name thou hast pub∣lished amongst us; And hast given us, O Lord God, according to thy love, times of Joy, of Festivals, and times of Mirth, and this Day of Consolation, for a solemn Convocation of Ho∣liness, for the Birth of our King the Mes∣siah 
Sabatai Sevi,
 thy Servant, and first-born Son in love, through whom we commemorate our coming out of 
Egypt.
 And then you shall read for your Lesson the first, second, and third Chapters of 
Deuteronomy
 to the Seven-teenth Verse; appointing for the reading thereof Five men, in a perfect and uncorrupt∣ed Bible; adding thereunto the Blessings of the Morning, as are prescribed for Days of Festivals. And for the Lesson out of the Pro∣phets, usually read in the Synagogue every Sabbath you shall repeat the Thirty first Chap∣ter of 
Jeremiah
 to your Prayer called the Mussaf (used in the Synagogue every Sabbath and sOlemn Festival.) Instead of the Sacrifice of Addition at the returning of the Bible to its place, you shall read with an audible Voice, and clear Sound, and with holy Harmony, the Ninty fifth Psalm. And at the first Praises in the Morning, after you have sung Psalm Ninty one, and just before you sing Psalm Ninety eight, you shall repeat Psalm One hun∣dred thirty two; but in the last Verse where it is said, 
As for his enemies I shall clothe them with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish;
 in the place of [upon himself] you shall read, Ʋpon the Most High; after which shall follow the One hun∣dred twenty sixth Psalm, and then the One hundred and thirteenth, to the One hundred and Nineteenth.


At the Consecration of the Wine upon the Vigil, or Even, you shall make mention of the Feast of Consolation, which is the Day of the Birth of our King the Messiah 
Sabatai Sevi,
 thy Servant, and first-born Son; giving the Blessing as followeth. Blessed be thou, our God, King of the World, who hast made us to live, and hast maintained us, and hast kept us alive unto this time. Ʋpon the Eve of this Day you shall also read the Eighty one Psalm, as also the One hundred thirty two, and One hundred twenty sixth Psalms, which are appointed for the Morning Praises. And this Day shall be unto you for a remembranee of a solemn Day unto eternal Ages, and a per∣petual Testimony between me, and the Sons of 
Israel.


Audite audiendo, & manducate bonum.




Besides which Order and Method of Liturgy for Solemnization of his Birth, he prescribed other Rules for Divine Service, and particularly published the same Indulgence and priviledge to every one who should pray at the Tomb of his Mother, as if he had taken on him a Pilgrimage to pray and sacrifice at 
Jerusalem.
 The Devo∣tion of the 
Jews
 towards this pretended Messiah, encreased still more and more; so that not only the chief of the City went to attend and proffer their service towards him in the time of his Im∣prisonment, but likewise decked their Syna∣gogue with 
S. S.
 in Letters of Gold, making for him on the Wall a Crown, in the Circle of which was wrote the Ninety one Psalm at length, in a fair and legible Character; attributing the same Titles to 
Sabatai,
 and expounding the Scrip∣tures in the same manner in favour of his appear∣ance, as we do of our Saviour.


Howsoever some of the 
Jews
 remained in their Wits all this time, amongst which was a certain Cocham at 
Smyrna,
 one zealous of his Law, and of the good and safety of his Nation; and observing in what a wild manner the whole Peo∣ple of the 
Jews
 was transported with the gronnd∣less belief of a Messiah, leaving not only their Trades, and course of Living, but publishing Prophecies of a speedy Kingdom, of rescue from the tyranny of the 
Turk,
 and leading the Grand Signior himself captive in Chains; matters so dangerous, and obnoxious to the State wherein they lived, as might justly convict them of Trea∣son and Rebellion, and leave them to the mer∣cy of that Justice, which on the least jealousie and suspicion of matters of this nature, uses to extirpate Families, and subvert the Mansion houses of their own People, much rather of the 
Jews,
 on whom the 
Turks
 would gladly take this occasion to despoil them of their Estates, and

condemn the whole Nation to perpetual Slavery. And indeed it would have been a greater wonder than ever 
Sabatai
 shewed, that the 
Turks
 took not advantage from all these extravagancies to drain the 
Jews
 of a considerable Sum of Mo∣ney, and set their whole Race in 
Turky
 at a Ran∣some, had not these passages yielded them matter of pastime, and been the subject of the 
Turks
 laughter and scorn, supposing it a disparagement to the greatness of the 
Ottoman
 Empire, to be concerned for the rumours and combustions of this despised People. With these Considerations this Cocham, that he might clear himself of the blood and guilt of his Countrymen, and un∣concerned in the common destruction, went be∣fore the Kaddee, and there protested against the present Doctrine, declaring, That he had no hand in setting up of 
Sabatai,
 but was an ene∣my both to him and his whole Sect. This free∣dom of the Cocham so enraged and scandalized the 
Jews,
 that they judged no Condemnation or Punishment too severe against such an Of∣fender, and Blasphemer of their Law, and Ho∣liness of the Messiah, and therefore with Money and presents to the Kaddee, accusing him as disobedient in a Capital nature to their Go∣vernment, obtained sentence against him to shave his Beard, and commit him to the Gallies.


There wanted nothing now to the appearance of the Messiah, and the Solemnity of his Com∣ing, but the presence of 
Elias,
 which the 
Jews
 began to expect hourly, and with that attention and earnestness, that a Dream or Phantasm to every weak Head was judged to be 
Elias,
 it be∣ing taught and averred, that he was seen in di∣vers Forms and Shapes, not to be certainly dis∣covered or known before the Coming of the Mes∣siah. For this Superistition is so far fixed amongst them, that generally in their Families they spread a Table for 
Elias
 the Prophet to which they make an invitation of poor People, leaving the chief place for the Lord 
Elias,
 whom they believe to be invisibly present at the Entertainment, and there to eat and drink without diminution either of the Dishes or the Cup. One Person amongst the 
Jews
 commanded his Wife, after a Sup∣per of this kind, to leave the Cup filled with Wine, and the Meat standing all Night for 
Elias
 to feast and rejoyce alone, and in the Morn∣ing arising early, affirmed, That 
Elias
 took this Banquet so kindly, that in token of gratitude and acceptance, he had replenished the Cup with Oyl instead of Wine. It is a custom amongst the 
Jews
 on the Evening of the Sabbath to re∣peat certain praises of God. 
(Haudola)
 which sig∣nifies a distinction or separation of the Sabbath from the prophane days (as they call them;) which praises or blessing they observe to perform in this manner. One takes a Cup filled with Wine, and drops it through the whole House in the name of 
Elias,
 saying, Elias 
the Prophet,
 Elias 
the Pro∣phet, come quickly to us with the Messiah the Son of
 David. And this, they affirm, is so acceptable to 
Elias,
 that he never fails to preserve that Fa∣mily so devoted to him, and augment it with the Blessings of encrease. Many other things the 
Jews
 avouch of 
Elias,
 so ridiculous, as are not necessary to be declared, amongst which this one is not from our purpose, That at the Circumci∣sion there is always a Chair set for 
Elias.
 And 
Sa∣batai Sevi
 being once invited at 
Smyrna
 to the Cir∣cumcision of the first born Son of one 
Abraham Gutiere,
 a Kinsman of 
Sabatai,
 and all things ready for the Ceremony; 
Sabatai Sevi
 exhorted the Parents of the Child to expect a while until his farther order. After a good half hour 
Saba∣tai
 ordered them to proceed, and cut the Pre∣pucee of the Child, which was instantly perform∣ed with all joy and satisfaction to the Parents: and being afterwards demanded, wherefore he retarded the performance of that Function; his answer was, That 
Elias
 had not as yet taken his Seat, whom as soon as he saw pla
d, he order∣ed them to proceed: and that now shortly 
Elias
 would discover himself openly, and proclaim the news of their general Redemption. This being the common opinion of the 
Jews,
 and that 
Saba∣tai Sevi
 was the Messiah, being become an Article of Faith, it was not hard to perswade them that 
Elias
 was come already, that they met him in their dishes, in the dark, in their Bed-chambers, or any where else invisible, in the same manner as our common People believe of Hobgoblins and Faries. For so it was, when one 
Solomon Cremona,
 an Inhabitant of 
Smyrna,
 making a great Feast, to which the principal 
Jews
 of that City were in∣vited, after they had eaten and drank freely, one started from his seat, and avouched that he saw 
Elias
 upon the VVall, and with that bows to him, and complements him with all reve∣rence and humility: some others having in like manner their fancies already prepossessed, and their eyes with the fume of VVine ill prepared to distinguish shadows, immediately agreed up∣on the object, and then there was not one in the Company who would say, he did not see him; at which surprise every one was struck with re∣verence and awe, and the most eloquent amongst them having their tongues loosed with Joy and VVine, directed Orations, Encomiums, and acts of thankfulness to him, courting and complement∣ing 
Elias,
 as distracted Lovers do the supposed presence of their Mistresses.


Another 
Jew
 at 
Constantinople
 reported, That he met 
Elias
 in the streets, habited like a 
Turk,
 with whom he had a long communication, and that he injoin'd the observation of many neglected Ceremonies, and particularly the Zezit, 
Lev
 15.38. 
Speak unto the Children of
 Israel 
and bid them, that they make fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the border a Ribband of Blue.
 Also the Peotz, 
Levit.
 19.27. 
Ye shall not round the corners of your Head, nor mar the corner of your Beard.
 This apparition of 
Elias
 being published, and as soon believed, every one began to obey the Vi∣sion, by fringing their garments; and for their heads, though always shaved according to the 
Turkish
 and Eastern fashion, and that the suffering hair to grow, to men not accustomed, was heavy and incommodions for their health and heads; yet to begin again to renew, as far as was possi∣ble, the ancient Ceremonies, every one nourish∣ed a Lock of hair on each side, which was visible beneath their Caps, which soon after began to become a sign of distinction between the Believers and the Koparims, a name of dishonour, signify∣ing as much as Unbelievers or Heretick, given to those who confessed not 
Sabatai
 to be the Mes∣siah. VVhich particulars, if not observed, it was declared as a menace of 
Elias,
 That the Peo∣ple of the 
Jews
 who came from the River 
Saba∣tion,
 as is specified in the 2. 
Esdras Cap.
 13. shall take vengeance of those who are guilty of these omissions.


But to return again to 
Sabatai Sevi
 himself, we find him still remaining a Prisoner in the Castle of 
Abydos
 upon the 
Hellespont,
 admired and adored by his Brethren with more honour than before, and visited by Pilgrims from all parts, where the Fame of the Coming of the Messiah had arri∣ved: Amongst which one from 
Poland
 named 
Ne∣hemiah

Cohen
 was of special note and renown, learned in the 
Hebrew, Syriack,
 and 
Chaldee,
 and versed in the Doctrine and Kabala of the Rab∣bins, as well as 
Sabatai
 himself One (of whom it was said) had not this 
Sevi
 anticipated the de∣sign, esteemed himself as able a Fellow for to act a Messiah as the other. Howsoever it being now too late to publish any such pretence, 
Sabatai
 having already prepossessed the office, and with that the hearts and belief of the 
Jews, Nehemi∣ah
 was contented with some small appendage or relation to a Messiah; and therefore to lay his design the better, desired a private Conference with 
Sabatai.
 These two great Rabbins be∣ing together, a hot Dispute arose between them. For 
Cohen
 alledged, That according to Scrip∣ture and Exposition of the Learned thereupon, there were to be two Messiahs, one called 
Bon Ephraim,
 and the other 
Ben David:
 The first was to be a Preacher of the Law, poor and despi∣sed, and a Servant to the second, and his Fore∣runner; the other was to be great and rich, to restore the 
Jews
 to 
Jerusalem,
 to sit upon the Throne of 
David,
 and to perform and act all those Triumphs and Conquests, which were expected from 
Sabatai. Nehemiah
 was contented to be 
Ben Ephraim,
 the afflicted and poor Messiah, and 
Sabatai
 was well enough contented he should be so; but that 
Nehemiah
 accused him for being too forward in publishing himself the latter Mes∣siah, before 
Ben Ephraim
 had first been known to the World. 
Sabatai
 took this reprehension so ill, either out of pride and thoughts of his own Infallibility, or that he suspected 
Nehemiah
 being once admitted for 
Ben Ephraim,
 would quickly, being a subtle and learned Person, perswade the World that he was 
Ben David,
 would by no means understand or admit of this Doctrine, or of 
Ben Ephraim
 for a necessary Officer: And thereupon the Dispute grew so hot, and the Con∣troversie so irreconcileable, as was taken notice of by the 
Jews,
 and controverted amongst them as every one fancied; but 
Sabatai
 being of greater Authority, his Sentence prevailed, and 
Nehe∣miah
 was rejected as Schismatical, and an Enemy to the Messiah, which afterwards proved the ruine and downfal of this Imposture. For 
Nehe∣miah
 being thus baffled, and being a Person of Authority, and a haughty Spirit, meditated no∣thing but revenge; to execute which to the full, he took a Journey to 
Adrianople,
 and there inform∣ed the chief Ministers of State and Officers of the Court, who (by reason of the gain the 
Turks
 made of their Prisoner at the Castle on the 
Helle∣spont
) heard nothing of all this concourse of Peo∣ple, and Prophecies of the Revolt of the 
Jews
 from their obedience to the Grand Signior. And taking likewise to his Counsel some certain dis∣contented and unbelieving Cochams, who being zealous for their Nation, and jealous of the ill consequences of this long continued and increa∣sing madness, took liberty to inform the Chima∣cam (who was Deputy of the Great Vizier then at 
Candia
) that the 
Jew,
 Prisoner at the Castle, cal∣led 
Sabatai Sevi
 was a lewd person, and one who endeavoured to debauch the minds of the 
Jews,
 & divert them from their honest course of livelihood, & obedience to the Grand Signior and that there∣fore it was necessary to clear the World of so fa∣ctious and dangerous a Spirit. The Chimacam be∣ing thus inform'd could do no less than acquaint the Gr. Signior with all the particulars of this mans condition, course of life, and Doctrine; which were no sooner understood, but a Chaouse or Messenger was immediately dispatched to bring up 
Sabatai Sevi
 to 
Adrianople.
 The Chaouse executed his Commission after the 
Turkish
 fa∣shion in haste, bringing 
Sabatai
 in a few days to 
Adrianople,
 without farther excuse or ceremony, not affording him an hours Space to take a solemn farewel of his Followers and Adorers, who now were come to the vertical point of all their hopes and expectations.


The Grand Signior having by this time re∣ceived divers informations of the madess of the 
Jews,
 and the pretences of 
Sabatai,
 grew big with desire and expectation to see him; so that he no sooner arrived at 
Adrianople,
 but the same hour he was brought before the Grand Signior. 
Sa∣batai
 appeared much dejected, and failing of that courage which he shewed in the Syna∣gogue. And being demanded several questions in Turkish by the Grand Signior, he would not trust so far to the vertue of his Messiahship, as to deliver himself in the 
Turkish
 Language, but desired a Doctor of Physick (who had from a 
Jew
 turned 
Turk
) to be his Interpreter, which was granted to him, but not without reffection of the standers-by, that had he been the Messiah and Son of God, as he formerly pretended, his Tongue would have been loosed into Eloquence and perfection of Languages. But the Grand Sig∣nior would not be put off without a Miracle, and it must be one or his own chusing; which was, that 
Sabatai
 should be stripped naked, and set as a mark to his dextrous Archets; if the ar∣rows passed not his body, but that his flesh and skin was proof, like Armour, then he would be∣lieve him to be the Messiah, and the Person whom God had designed to those Dominions and Greatness he pretended. But now 
Sabatai
 not having Faith enough to stand to so sharp a tryal, renounced all his Title to Kingdoms and Go∣vernments, alledging that he was an ordinary Cocham and Jew, as others were, and had no∣thing of priviledge and virtue above the rest. The Grand Signior notwithstanding, not wholly satis∣fied with this plain confession, declared, That ha∣ving given publick scandal to the Professors of the 
Mahometan
 Religion and done dishonour to his Soveraign Authority, by pretending to with∣draw from him so considerable a portion as the Land of 
Palestine,
 his Treason and Crime could not be expiated without becoming a 
Maho∣metan
 Convert: Which if he refused to do, the Stake was ready at the Gate of the Seraglio to impale him. 
Sabatai
 being now reduced to his last game and extremity, not being in the least doubtful what to do, for to dye for what he was assured was false was against Nature, and the death of a mad man: Replied with much chear∣fulness, that he was contented to turn 
Turk,
 and that it was not of force, but of choice, ha∣ving been a long time desirous of so glorious a profession, he esteemed himself much honoured, that he had an opportunity to own it first in the presence of the Grand Signior. And here was the 
Non plus ultra
 of all the bluster and noise of this vain Impostour. And now the Reader may pause a while, and contemplate the strange point of consternation, shame, and silence, to which the 
Jews
 were reduced, when they under∣stood how speedily their hopes were vanished, and how poorly and ignominiously all their fancies and promises of a new Kingdom, their Pageantry and Offices for Devotion were past like a tale, or a midnights dream. And all this was con∣cluded, and the 
Jews
 sunk on a sudden and fallen flat in their hopes, without so much as a line of comfort or excuse from 
Sabatai,
 more than in general to all the Brethren, that now they should apply themselves to their callings and services

of God, as formerly; for that matters relating to him were finished, and the sentence past.


The News of 
Sabatai
 turning Turk, and of the Messiah to a Mahometan, quickly filled all parts of 
Turky;
 the 
Jews
 were strangely surprised at it, and ashamed of their easiness of belief, of the ar∣guments with which they had perswaded o∣thers, and of the Proselytes they had made in their own Families. Abroad they became the common derision of the Towns where they in∣habited, the Boys houted after them, coining a new word at 
Smyrna (Pouftai)
 which every one seeing a Jew, with a singer pointed out, would pronounce with scorn and contempt; so that this deceived People for a long time after re∣mained with confusion, silence, and dejection of spirit. And yet most of them affirm, That 
Sa∣batai
 is not turned Turk, but his shadow only remains on Earth, and walks with a white head, and in the habit of a 
Mahometan;
 but that his Body and Soul are taken into Heaven, there to reside until the time appointed for accomplish∣ment of these Wonders: And this opinion began so commonly to take place, as if this People re∣solved never to be undeceived, using the Forms and Rules for Devotion prescribed them by their 
Mahometan
 Messiah. Insomuch that the Cochams of 
Constantenople
 fearing the danger of this Er∣rour might creep up and equal the former, con∣demned the belief of 
Sabatai
 being Messiah as damnable, and injoyned them to return to the an∣cient Method and Service of God, upon pain of Excommunication. The Stile and Tenour of their Letter was as followeth.




TO you who have the power of Priesthood, and are the knowing, learned, and magnanimous Governours and Princes residing in the City of 
Smyrna,
 may the Almighty pro∣tect you, 
Amen,
 for so is his will.


These our Letters which we send in the midst of your Habitations, are upon occasion of certain Rumours and Tumults come to our ears from that City of your Holinesses. For there is a sort of men amongst you who fortifie themselves in their Error, and say, Let such an one our King live, and bless him in their publick Synagogues every Sabbath day; and al∣so adjoyn Psalms and Hymns invented by that man for certain days, with Rules and Methods for Prayer, which ought not to be done, and yet they still remain obstinate therein. And now behold it is known unto you, how many swelling waters have passed over our Souls for his sake; for had it not been for the mercies of God which are without end, and the merit of our Forefathers which hath assisted us, the 
foot of Israel
 had been rased out by their enemies. And yet still you continue obstinate in things which do not help,
 but rather do mischief, which God avert. Turn you therefore, for this is not the true way, but restore the Crown to the ancient custom and use of your Fore∣fathers, and the Law, and from thence do not move.


We command you, That with your Au∣thority, under pain of Excommunicati∣on and other Penalties, all those Ordi∣nances and Prayers, as well those delivered by the mouth of that man, as those which he injoyned by the mouth of others, be all abo∣lished and made void, and to be found no more, and that they never enter more into your hearts; but 
 according to the ancient Commandment of your Forefathers, repeating the same Lessons and Prayers every Sab∣bath as hath been accustomary; as also the Collects for Kings, Potentates, and Anoint∣ed, &c. and bless the King 
Sultan Maho∣met;
 for in his dayes hath great Salvati∣on been wrought for 
Israel,
 and become not Rebels to his Kingdom, which God forbid. For after all this which is past, the least motion will be a cause of jealousy, and you will bring ruine upon your own persons, and upon all which is near and dear to you; where∣fore abstain from this man, and let not so much as his name proceed out of your mouths. For know, if you will not obey us herein, which will be known who, and what those men are who refuse to conform unto us, we are resolved to prosecute them, as our duty is. He that doth hear and obey us, may the blessing of God rest upon him. These are the words of those, who seek your peace and good, having in 
Con∣stantinople,
 on 
Sunday
 the 5th of the month 
Sevat,
 under-wrote their names.




Joam Tob,
 Son of 
Hanania Ben Jacar.


Isaac Alnacagua.


Joseph Kazabi.


Menasse Barudo.


Kaleb
 Son of 
Samuel.


Eliezer Casti.


Eliezer Gherson.


Joseph Accohen.


Eliezer Aluff.






During the time of all these transactions and passages at 
Constantinople, Smyrna, Abydos
 upon the 
Hellespont,
 and 
Adrianople;
 the 
Jews
 leaving their mercantile course and advices what prices Commodities bore, and matters of Traffick, stuffed their Letters for 
Italy
 and other parts with nothing but wonders and miracles wrought by their Messiah. As that, when the Grand Signior sent to take him, he caused all the messengers immediately to die; upon which, other Janiza∣ries being again sent, they all fell dead with a word only from his mouth; and being desired to revive them again, he immediately recalled them to life, but of them only such, who were true Turks, and not those who had denied that Faith in which they were born, and had professed. Af∣ter this they added, that he went voluntarily to Prison, and though the Gates were barred, and shut with strong Locks of Iron, yet that 
Sabatai
 was seen to walk through the streets with a nu∣merous attendance; and when they laid shac∣kles on his Neck and Feet, they not only fell from him, but were converted into Gold, with which he gratified his true and faithful Believers and disciples. Some Miracles also were report∣ed of 
Nathan,
 that only at the reading of the name of any particular Man or Woman, he could immediately recount the story of his or her Life, their sins or defaults, and accordingly impose just correction and penance for them. These strong reports coming thus confidently into 
Italy,
 and all parts, the 
Jews
 of 
Casal di Monferrato
 resolv'd to

send Three persons in behalf of their Society, in the nature of extraordinary Legates, to 
Smyr∣na,
 to make enquiry after the truth of all these rumours, who accordingly arriving in 
Smyrna,
 full of expectation and hopes, intending to pre∣sent themselves with great humility and submis∣sion before their Messiah, and his Prophet 
Nathan,
 were entertained with the sad news, that 
Sabatai
 was turned Turk; by which information, the Character of their Embassy in a manner ceasing, every one of them laying aside the formality of his Function, endeavoured to lodge himself best to his own convenience. But that they might return to their Brethren at home with the cer∣tain particulars of the success of these affairs, they made a visit to the Brother of 
Sabatai,
 who still continued to perswade them, that 
Sa∣batai
 was notwithstanding the true Messiah; that it was not he who had taken upon him the hahit and form of a Turk, but his Angel or Spirit, his Body being ascended into Heaven, until God shall again see the season and time to restore it; adding farther, that an effect hereof they should see by the Prophet 
Nathan
 verifyed, now every day expected, who having wrought Miracles in many places, would also for their consolation, reveal hidden secrets unto them, with which they should not only remain satisfied but astonished: with this only hope of 
Nathan,
 these Legates were a little comforted, resolving to attend his arrival, in regard they had a Letter to consign into his hands, and according to their instructi∣ons, were to demand of him the grounds he had for his Prophecies, and what assurance he had that he was divinely inspired, and how those things were revealed unto him, which he had committed to Paper, and dispersed to all parts of the World.


At length 
Nathan
 arrived near 
Smyrna,
 on 
Friday
 the 3d of 
March,
 towards the Evening, and on 
Sunday
 these Legats made their visit to him, but 
Nathan
 upon the news of what success his Messiah met with, began to grow sullen and reserved, so that the Legats could scarce pro∣cure admittance to him; all that they could do, was to inform him, that they had a Letter to him from the Brotherhood of 
Italy,
 and Commis∣sion to confer with him concerning the ground and foundation of his Prophecies: But 
Nathan
 refused to take the Letter, ordering 
Kaim Abo∣lafio,
 a Cocham of the City of 
Smyrna,
 to re∣ceive it; so that the Legats returned little con∣tented, but yet with hopes at 
Nathans
 arrival at 
Smyrna,
 to receive better satisfaction.


But whilst 
Nathan
 intended to enter into 
Smyr∣na,
 the Cochams of 
Constantinople,
 being before advised of his resolution to take a Journey into their parts, not knowing by which way he might come, sent their Letters and orders to 
Smyrna, Prussia,
 and every way round, to hinder his passage, and interrupt his Journey, fearing that things beginning now to compose, the Turks ap∣peased for the former disorders, and the minds of the 
Jews
 in some manner setled, might be mo∣ved, and combustions burst out afresh by the appearance of this new Impostor, and therefore dispatched this Letter as followeth.




TO you who are the Shepherds of 
Israel,
 and Rulers, who reside for the Great God of the whole World in the City of 
Smyr∣na,
 which is a Mother in 
Israel,
 to her Princes, her Priests, her Judges, and espe∣cially to the perfect wise men, and of greatest experience; may the Lord God cause you to live before him, and delight in the multitude of Peace, 
Amen.
 So be the will of the Lord.


These our Letters are dispatched unto you, to let you understand, that in the place of your Holiness, we have heard, that the learned man which was in 
Gaza,
 called 
Na∣than Benjamin,
 hath published vain Doctrines, and made the World tremble at his words and inventions. At this time we have received advice, that this man some days since depart∣ed from 
Gaza,
 and took his Journey by the way of 
Scanderone,
 intending there to Em∣bark for 
Smyrna.
 and thence to go to 
Con∣stantinople,
 or 
Adrianople.
 And though it seems a strange thing unto us, that any man should have a desire to throw himself into a place of flames and fire, and into the sparks of Hell: Notwithstanding, we ought to fear and suspect it,
 for the feet of man always guide him to the worst. 
Wherefore, we underwritten, do advertise you, that this Man coming within the Compass of your Ju∣risdiction, you give a stop to his Journey, and not suffer him to proceed farther, but present∣ly to return back. For we would have you know, That at his Coming he will begin again to move those tumults, which have been caused through Dreams of a new Kingdom,
 And that miracles are not wrought every day. God forbid, that by his Coming, the People of God should be destroyed in all places where they are, of which he will be the first, whose blood be upon his own head; for in this Con∣juncture every little errour or fault is made Capital; you may remember the danger of the first Combustion, and it is very probable, that he will be an occasion of greater, which the Tongue is not able to express with words. And therefore, by virtue of ours, and your own Au∣thority, you are to hinder him from proceed∣ing farther in his journey, upon pain of all those Excommunications, which our Law can impose, and to force him to return back again, both he and his Company. But if he shall in any manner oppose you, and rebel against your word, your Endeavours and Law are sufficient to hinder him, for it will be well for him, and for all 
Israel.


For the love of God, let these words enter into your ears, since they are not vain things, for the lives of all the 
Jews,
 and his also con∣sist therein. And the Lord God behold from Heaven, and have pity upon his People 
Israel. Amen.
 So be his holy will written by those who seek your Peace.




Joam Tob
 Son of 
Chanania Jacar.


Moise Benveniste,


Isaac Alnacagua,


Joseph Kizbi,


Samuel Acazsina,


Kaleb
 Son of 
Cocham,


Samuel
 deceased,


Moise Barudo,


Elihezer Aluf.


Jehousual Raphael Benveniste.








By these means 
Nathan
 being disappointed of his wandring progress, and partly ashamed of the E∣vents contrary to his Prophecies, was resolved, without entring 
Smyrna,
 to depart thence; howso∣ever he obtained leave to visit the Sepulchre of his Mother, and there to receive pardon of his sins (ac∣cording to the institution of 
Sabatai
 before menti∣oned;) but first washed himself in the Sea, in man∣ner of purification, and said his 
Tevila,
 or Prayers, at the Fountain, called by us the Fountain of 
Santa Ve∣neranda,
 which is near the Coemetery of the 
Jews,
 and then departed for 
Xio
 with two Companions, a Servant and three 
Turks
 to conduct him, without admitting the Legates to audience, or answering the Letter which was sent him from all the Com∣munities of the 
Jews
 in 
Italy.
 And thus the Embas∣sie of these Legates was concluded, and they return∣ed from the place to whence they came, and the 
Jews
 again to their Wits, following their Trade and Profession of Brokage, as formerly, with more quiet and advantage than the means of regaining their possessions in the Land of Promise And thus ended this mad phrensie amongst the 
Jews,
 which might have cost them dear, had not 
Sabatai
 renounced his Messiahship at the Feet of 
Mahomet.
 These mat∣ters were transacted in the Years 1665 and 1666; since which 
Sabatai
 hath passed his time devoutly in the 
Ottomon
 Court, educated at the Feet of the learned 
Gamaliel
 of the 
Turkish
 Law, 
(viz) Vanni
 Effendi, Preacher to the Seraglio, or as we may so term him, Chaplain to the Sultan, one so literate as to be esteemed the Grand Oracle of their Reli∣gion; so precise, and conceited of his own Sancti∣ty as a Pharisee, and so superstitious, that nothing seemed more to unhallow his Worship than the touch or approach of a Christian.
 To this Master, 
Sabatai
 was a most docil Scholar, and pro∣fited, as we may imagine, beyond measure in the 
Turkish
 Doctrine; so that in exchange of such impressions 
Vanni
 thought it no disparage∣ment, from so great a Rabbin as his new Disci∣ple, to learn something of the 
Jewish
 Rites, and rectifie those crude Notions he had conceived of the 
Mosaical
 Law. In this manner 
Sabati
 passed his days in the 
Turkish
 Court, as some time 
Moses
 did in that of the 
Egyptians;
 and perhaps in imi∣tation of him, cast his eyes often on the Afflicti∣ons of his Brethren, of whom, during his life, he continued to profess himself a Deliverer, but with that care and caution of giving scandal to the 
Turks,
 that he declared, Unless their Nation be∣came like him, that is, renounce the Shadows, and imperfect Elements of the 
Mosaical
 Law, which will be compleated by adherence to the 
Mahometan,
 and such other Additions as his inspi∣red Wisdom should suggest, he should never be able to prevail with God for them, or conduct them to the Holy Land of their Forefathers. Here∣upon many 
Jews
 flocked in, some as far as from 
Babylon, Jerusalem,
 and other remote places, and casting their Caps on the ground, in presence of the Grand Signior, voluntarily professed them∣selves 
Mahometans. Sabatai
 himself by these Prose∣lytes gaining ground in the esteem of the 
Turks,
 had priviledg granted him to visit familiarly his Brethren, which he employed in Circumcising their Children the Eighth day, according to the Precept of 
Moses,
 preaching his new Doctrines, by which he hath confirmed many in their Faith of his being the Messiah, and startled all with ex∣pectation of what these strange ways of Enthu∣siasm may produce; but none durst publickly own him, lest they should displease the 
Turks,
 and the 
Jews,
 and incur the danger of Excommuni∣cation from one, and the Gallows from the other.


Howsoever in 
January
 1671/2 appeared another bold Impostor amongst the 
Jews
 in 
Smyrna
 from the 
Morea,
 as it was said, or not known from whence, who in despight of 
Sabatai,
 and his own Gover∣nours, pretended to be Messiah; but with so incon∣siderable and petty a Deluder as this, the 
Jews
 thought to make quick work; but being ashamed at first to bring another Messiah on the Stage, by help of money they accused him of Adultery, and procured a Sentence from the Kadi, condemn∣ing him to the Gallies; in order unto which, and in proof of his good behaviour he remain'd some time in Prison, in which Interim he found means to clear himself of that Crime by open evidence to the contrary, and had for the present escaped out of the power of the Synagogue, had not their Authority & money prevailed more than the Friends or Disciples of this Impostor; whom we will leave in prison, and 
Sabatai
 in the house of 
Pharaoh;
 where he continued until the Year 1676, and then died. And so we return to more important matters of the 
Turkish
 Affairs.


Since that we have so long insisted on the phrensie of the 
Jews,
 let us return to matters of greater conse∣quence, and more general concernment; & look back to Count 
Leslie
 the Emperors Ambassador, who ha∣ving departed from 
Constantinople
 the 11
th
 of 
Decemb.
 of the last Year, we find on the 10th of 
March
 of this year on the Frontiers ready to make exchange with the 
Turkish
 Ambassador. The night before, Count 
Leslie
 was lodged at a Village called 
Elmas,
 where the Inhabitants, as in the most parts of upper 
Hun∣gary,
 are Calvinists in Religion; and though the live between two Swords,
 do yet in time of War, by paying a Tribute to both Parties, and providing Forage for both, remain more secure than in the Villages subjected to either; which are of∣ten burnt, or in some other manner miserably de∣stroyed. The next day the Emperors Ambassador, conducted by the Pasha of 
Quinque Ecclesiae,
 with a∣bout three hundred Horse, arrived at the place for many years observed for exchange of Ambassadors, which is about an hour and halfs Journey, or five miles (as we may so say) distant from this Village, where in open Fields upon the Brink of the 
Danube,
 are set three Posts; the two Ambassadors meeting at that in the middle, after some Complements, take their leaves each of other, and so exchange. The 
Ger∣man
 Ambassador that day arrived near his Post a∣bout seven a Clock in the morning, but the 
Turkish,
 not being as yet come from 
Komara,
 he could not proceed farther. After some expectation here, advice came, That the 
Turkish
 Ambassador was resolved not to depart from 
Komara
 until he was satisfied for the allowance of eighteen days, at a hundred Dol∣lars for every day, which he had spent at his entrance into 
Christendom,
 between the frontiers and the City of 
Vienna.
 But to this was replied, That it had never been the custom to allow the 
Turkish
 Am∣bassador mony for his daily provisions, until he en∣tred the Emperors Court; and in the mean time the expences and charge of his journey were to be de∣frayed by the Imperial Officers, who had performed the same in a most ample and plentiful manner: But the 
Turk
 was resolved not to be so satisfied, and therefore declared he would not depart without full payment; hoping the more easily to prevail, in regard the 
German
 Ambassador was already in the Field, exposed to the cold and sharp weather, with∣out provisions either for himself, Attendance, or Horses, whilst the 
Turk
 remained warm in his Boat, accommodated with his Stove, and wrapt in his Furs, so that he hoped there might be a necessity of granting what he reserved for the rear-guard of his pretensions. The matter seemed unreasonable to the 
German
 Ambassador, as also to the 
Turks
 that attended him, who being in the open and cold Air, judg'd it in an unseemly time to capitulate. But in fine, the 
German


gave him this Answer. That an Ambassador ought to be contented with that hospitality and entertain∣ment which was accustomary, as he himself had done; for that since his departure from 
Buda,
 which was then seven days, he had not receiv'd one Asper of allowance, resting satisfied with the Pasha's word, that from 
Buda
 homewards it was not accustomary to receive a farther treatment; so that if he insisted on the first, he was to be allowed the latter, since both Ambassadours are to be used with terms of equality; and therefore to find an expedient to give him satisfaction, he was contented resign his seven days allow∣ance from the Grand Signior; and if any thing farther was really owing he would engage his parole of honour for the payment. And farther he added. That none but a corrupt Minister would make his private Interest to stand in Competition with a publick Design, and make the pretence of a few Dollars an interruption and impediment to the progreess of the great Af∣fairs of the Two Empires, professing that he would have quitted all his right, rather than the least concernment of his Master should have received a prejudice, on confidence of whose gracious favour he depended for reparation of whatsoever he suffered for his service. He thanked God that he had happily managed his Embassy to the satisfaction of the Grand Signior, and the appro∣bation of his Master, and was now ready to per∣form the last office and ceremony, in which if he did fail, or was impeded, the fault was not his, be∣ing ready to return to 
Buda,
 so the other in like manner did to 
Vienna,
 there to remain until this difference was decided by their Masters. The Turkish Ambassadour's Kahya or Steward who was present, and heard all this discourse, see∣ming not pleased to hear of a return to 
Vienna,
 immediately replied, That he conceived his Ma∣ster would not remove from 
Komara;
 to which it was answered, That a man who so little understood the office of an Ambassadour, as it appeared his Master did, was to be treated with some other kind of stile than was agreeable to the respect due to a publick Minister, and should therefore be forced to it in case he should refuse. The Tur∣kish Ambassadour having his stomach something taken down with the threats of returning to 
Vienna,
 that afternoon loosed from 
Komara,
 and between three and four a 
 arrived at the place of Exchange; but the wind blowing hard, had put some of his Boats ashore, which were most laden; and fewest men to govern them, which afforded him occasion of farther delay, pre∣tending that his Goods might be arrested at 
Ko∣mara,
 and until he was satisfied to the contrary, he was resolved not to make the Exchange. The German Ambassadour was more moved with choler at this humor than at the former; and the Turks that attended, growing more hungry and more cold, bestowed on him a million of cur∣ses. The Sun now declining towards its setting, Count 
Leslie
 sent word to the Turk, That he was resolved not longer to abuse his own patience, but immediately to proceed forward, giving or∣der to his Coach to drive on, protesting, That if any mischief was derived from this irregular pro∣ceeding, the fault was not his, nor would he an∣swer for any of those fatal consequences which might ensue; to which also being added some per∣swasions of the Pasha of 
Quin{que} Ecclesiae,
 the Turk at length came out from his Boat and went to his Post. The Turks were drawn up on their own Quarter to the number of about three hun∣dred, and the Hungarian Hussars or Horse-men on the other to about two hundred; the two Ambassadours making a stand at their respective Poles, proceeded with equal paces to meet in the middle, where some few Complements having passed between them, and Salutes interchangeably sent to the chief Ministers of each Empire, the German Ambassadour entred his Coach, and the Turk his Boat, and so both returned to their respective Courts. Such as was the sordid and interessed humour of the Turkish Ambassadour in this transaction, so no less dishonourable was his way of living at 
Vienna,
 where he so journed with that miserable famine and penury in his house, as discontented all his family, causing some to leave him and return home; others with bet∣ter motives (as it is hoped) to the number of thirty became Christians, and imbraced the Faith; at the same rate he was generous in his Presents: for to the Master of the House where he lodged he gave two five-Senars or eighteen Pence English, and to the Commissary who conducted him to the Frontiers, he presented a Bag of Rice, which was not accepted but returned with the like comple∣ment, as that with which it was tendered.


But no sooner was this Peace concluded,
 and the Ceremonies thereof thus happily finished, but the Turks, attentive to another War, which is the life of their Empire, and their only security against intestine Discords, made all the Prepa∣rations and Provisions this Year, that were pos∣sible, for the total subjection of 
Candia,
 of which this Vizier was highly ambitious, designing there∣by to gain unto himself that renown of which his Predecessours had been in pursuit for the space of twenty five years; so that all Ammunition, Vi∣ctual, and whatsoever was necessary, was in great quantities supplied from all the circumjacent parts of the Empire.


The City of 
Candia
 was some time before go∣verned by the Proveditor 
Priuli;
 but afterwards the Venetians, apprehensive of the succeeding War, conferred the Charge on Marquess 
Villa,
 a worthy and experienced Souldier, with Title of General of the Venetian Infantry, as we have before intimated; and having left him and his Forces in the month of 
December
 last, on the Island of 
Paros;
 where having, as is said, mu∣stered his Forces, he imbarked them on sixteen Gallies, five Galleasses, and thirty five Men of War; with which sailing in company from 
Anti-Paros,
 the whole Fleet on the 
12th
 of 
February
 made their Rendezvous at 
Argentiera;
 during which time the Turks landed eighteen hundred Janisaries at 
Canea,
 being transported thither on thirty five Gallies, which having incountred with the Cavalier 
Hoquincourt
 in the channel of 
Scio,
 received some damage and loss of men in their way, though this Cavalier himself was wounded in the Engagement, and forty of his men slain. The Venetian Fleet departing from 
Argentiera
 on the 
23th
 of 
February,
 came in sight of 
Candia,
 when a very great storm arising with Thunder and Lightning, put the whole fleet in danger of shipwrack; but by Gods Providence, though tossed with contrary winds, they arrived on the 
26th
 in safety in the Port of 
Suda,
 being directed thither in a dark night, by those Lights which the Fortress had put abroad, though the Turks on the other side had put out false Fires to de∣ceive them. The Army being landed at this place, and a Muster made of the Forces, Pay was given to the Souldiery; with which being be∣come the more couragious, they marched towards 
Canea,
 with hopes to perform some memora∣ble Enterprise at that place. The Lieutenant-General 
Vuersmiller
 led the Van,
 consisting of six∣hundred Foot, and an hundred and eighty Horse,

and advancing beyond those bounds which Marquess 
Villa
 had prescribed him, was incountred by a more numerous Force from the Garrison, by which being at first put into some disorder, had been intirely defeated, had not the Mar∣quess opportunely arrived to his Succour: howsoe∣ver the Venetians lost in this Skirmish three hun∣dred Souldiers, forty Horse, and twelve Offi∣cers, amongst which the Murquess 
Ceva
 was slain upon the place, and Captain 
Scot
 a Scoth man taken Prisoner, whom the English Factory re∣deemed at 
Smyrna;
 of the Turks seven hundred were computed to have been killed, with the A∣ga of the Janisaries, a stout and a well experien∣ced Souldier. And as this beginning was not very auspicious to the Christians, so neither did the Heavens seem much to favour them; for an unusual rain with few fair days continued almost for the space of three months, which filled all Rivers, Marshes, and Ditches with so strange an inunda∣tion, that the Army beginning to want Forage for the Horses, and all other Provisions for their Men; and the Garrison of 
Canea
 being reinforced from 
Retimo, Chiramo, Armiro,
 and other places, discouraged the Commanders in that manner, that they thought it more convenient to retire and incamp in the pleasant and fruitful Vallies of 
Spina Longa,
 until better weather, and other Recruits of their Army should open a way either to make another Attempt on 
Canea,
 or new 
Candia.
 But Fortune did not favour these de∣signs; for the Captain-general 
Andrea Cornaro
 arriving with his Fleet, part at 
Candia,
 and part at 
Standia,
 (which is an Island or Rock about two Leagues distant from this City) a new resolution was taken to remain on the defensive part, and to attend wholly to the guard of the City: for as in the natural body, upon it is assaulted by a∣cute and hot humors, the spirits retire to the heart to comfort and secure that from the violence of the distemper; so the Venetians perceiving that their Enemies daily grew more numerous, re∣solved to contract their Force into one Body for defence of that City, which was the heart or the most principal instrument of life in that Island: Wherefore Recruits both of Men, Am∣munition, and Provisions were daily sent thi∣ther; and the Captain of the Gulf arriving at 
Suda
 with eleven Gallies and one Galleass, carrying fifteen hundred Soldiers, with three hundred Pioniere, joyned his Forces to the Body of the Fleet; and all imbarking in divers Squadrons, made haste to land their men in the City of 
Can∣dia
 with all possible expedition.


The Marquess 
Villa
 landed here the first of 
March,
 being conducted from the Mole by the Proveditor to the Palace, which was provided for him; where having been complemented, and having received and returned the usual Visits, he in the first place took care to quarter the HOrse, and the new Forces lately arrived with due convenience; next he visited the Garrison and every Fort in particular, where he amended what was amiss, and added what was defective. The Captain-General by this time arriving with the remainder of the Militia, a general Muster was made in the Trenches of the Fort 
Panigra;
 of which the Turks having advice, fell unex∣pectedly upon them with a strong Body; the Chri∣stians being surprised hereat; and 
Versama
 a va∣liant Collonel being slain, they began shamefully to run, nor could either the Bravery of the Mar∣quess or his Authority stop their flight; howsoe∣ver the Musket-shot and great great Guns from the Walls were so plentifully bestowed on the Turks, that few of those who were over-sorward in the purfuit, returned to their Companions.


On the 
12th
 of 
April
 a Fleet of Gallies arrived with new Recruits, with which the Christi∣ans being reinforced, Marquess 
Villa
 resolved to take the Field; so that marching out of the City by night with seven thousand Foot and six hundred and fifty Horse,
 he incamped between that and the Valley of the River 
Gi
ffiro,
 draw∣ing his Trenches just opposite to the the Enemies Camp; in the mean Time two Squadrons of Ships were sent abroad, one towards the 
Cr
ciere,
 and the other towards the Coast of 
Canea,
 to intercept and hinder such Succours as might be sent to the Enemies Camp. Nor were the Turks less vigilant or valiant on their side;
 for a Party of about two thousand men fallying from their Trenches, and marching secretly under the covert of a Mountain, unexpectedly assailed the Out-guards of about fifty Foot belonging to the Regiment of 
Frischein,
 commanded by Captain 
Rades;
 which after a stout resistance retreated into another Body of fifty Musquetiers, and twenty five Arquibusiers of the Regiment 
Arborio;
 who also being assisted by other detachments, recovered their first Post; but being afterwards overpowred by great numbers of Turks, were forced to quit the place, which Mar∣quess 
Villa
 observing, ordered fifty Horse under Lieutenant-Collonel 
Mattiazzi,
 and seventy Foot under 
Blane
 Sergeant Major of the Regiment 
Arborio
 to their assistance, by whom the Post was again recovered with great slaughter of the Enemy: but this advantage was of little other be∣nefit than to inflame the spirits of the Turks, who rallying again their Force with fresh courage and extraordinary valour came to handy-blows with the Venetians, forcing them to another Retreat with the death of Lieutenant 
Cerusa
 a Savoyard, and some common Souldiers; but the Turks in∣joyed not long this advantage; for the Musque∣tiers from the line with some small Guns, and the Gross Artillery from the Walls did much ex∣ecution on them; and at the same time being charged by a Party of Horse under Command of Collonel 
Rades,
 the Venetians with glory and incouragement recovered their Post, driving the Turks in disorder and confusion to their Trenches. This success of the Christians served to heat the spirits of the Turks, and animate them to another Engagement: 
 having by private ways of hid∣den Vallies conducted their Men, about four hours before night made another Assault upon the 
Venetians,
 I will not say surprised them;
 because remaining always in apprehension of the Enemy, they kept themselves so watchfully on their Guard that in a moment they were ready to receive them; and that so warmly, not firing until they came within the length of two Pikes, that in a moment the Field was covered with the bodies of Horse and Men; the Turks startled hereat, not knowing whether it were better to stand to it, or fly, until incouraged by their Lea∣ders, they kept their ground for a time: but be∣ing galled by the continual Vollies of shot, and charged by a Body of Horse led by Count 
Sforza Bissaro
 and Captain 
Casick;
 they were so shaken, that they turned their backs, and began to run until falling in with the gross Body of their Party they made head again; and mixing both Horse and Foot with the 
Venetians,
 they forced them to retreat to the side of their Trenches; and so closely plyed them, that the fresh Troops of the Turks on the right and left wing had cut them off, had not the Count 
Corradini,
 by order of Count 
Sforza
 with a Regiment of Curassiers, and likewise Colonel 
Scop∣pa
 with his Lieutenant-Colonel 
Tadeo Motta,
 with a

good number of Archibusiers, assisted by a Squadron of the Regiment of Count 
Bassaro,
 sallied from the Line, and being succoured on all sides, forced the 
Turks
 at length to sound a Retreat. The night coming on, disswaded any pursuit of the Enemy, lest unknown ways and darkness should betray their men into ambushes or other snares. The 
Turks
 lost a thousand men, with divers Commanders of Quality and Note: Of the 
Venetians
 were kill∣ed Lieutenant 
Cerusa, Gio. Tessari,
 Captain to 
La Motte,
 eleven Horse, and some few Foot: 
Motte, Corradini, Soupe,
 Count 
Corbelli,
 and some others were wounded.


About this time advice being come to the Captain-General, That the 
Turks
 were dispee∣ding fifty Gallies laden with Men and Am∣munition, he resolved to incounter them at Sea with four Galleasses, and twenty Gallies, reinforcing his Fleet with twelve hundred men, which he took from the Camp; which being thereby considerably diminished, as also by the late Engagements: yet Marquess 
Villa
 kept his ground, but contracted the compass of his Trenches, and raised a Fort in sight of the Enemy, who had not the courage to give him the least interruption; but rather after this example fortified their own Tren∣ches, shutting all Avenues or passages to Re∣negadoes, whom they suspected might fly, and give advice to the Christians: howsoever some of them escaped to the 
Venetian
 Camp, de∣claring that the Cannon from the Town did much incommode the 
Turks
 in their Trenches; upon which Intelligence Marquess 
Villa
 order∣ed forty eight shot to be made at that place, where they were most offended, which put the 
Turks
 into great consternation: after which no considerable Engagements happened, be∣sides some few Skirmishes and Rencounters of no memorable note, in which one 
Antiquario
 a Quarter-master, Count 
Pio Ferretti,
 and o∣thers signalized themselves by particular Acts of Valour, as also Captain 
Vimes
 who killed 
Mehmet Bey,
 a 
Turk
 of great esteem, with his own hand.


But now the 
Turks
 receiving daily Recruits, as of eight hundred Janizaries, and six hun∣dred Spahees, landed at 
Gira-petra,
 and seven∣teen hundred more disbarked at 
Chissamo;
 and advices daily coming of great numbers of Ga∣leots and Brigantines providing in the Gulf of 
Lepanto,
 and of eighteen Ships of 
Barbary,
 all ready to transport Soldiers to 
Candia,
 moved the Captain-General to perswade the removal of the Camp for better security of the most important places:
 the which Marquess 
Villa
 performed accordingly in the night preceding the first of 
June,
 with much order and care; for first he caused the Artillery to be with∣drawn, with the Mortar-pieces, Ammunition, and Provisions of War, and placed in the Fort of 
Mocenigo;
 then he caused half the Army to work in filling the Trenches, whilst the other half remained in form of Battel, and two hours before day blew up the Fort; which having done, they marched in three Bo∣dies to the City, to the great joy and satisfacti∣on of the 
Turks,
 who on that occasion made a day of Festival.


These particulars of Action having passed un∣der the Conduct of Marquess 
Villa
 without any signal Victory or advantage over the 
Turk,
 ad∣ministred subject to such who in the parts of Christendom were emulous of his glory, and envious of his eminent charge, to give liberty to their tongues to disparage the management of his Affairs, as not agreeable to that high expectation of success which the World con∣ceived thereof, when he first entred on this im∣ployment: But here it is observable at what rate men who lye soft and warm in their beds at home, unconcerned in the dangers, labours, and hazards of those who live and act abroad, can make their reflexions, and pass their censures on active and ingaged men, not considering the state of affairs, the uncertain∣ty of Succours in so long and distant a tract of Sea, as passes between 
Venice
 and 
Candia,
 subjected to Winds, and a thousand Casualties; nor yet the numerous Troops of the Enemy, nor the Puissance of that Empire, which for its Power, Richess, and the Valour of its Sol∣diery, may be esteemed the most Potent and considerable of all the Monarchies and known Kingdoms of the Universe. But what conje∣ctures soever envious men might make of the Conduct of Marquess 
Villa,
 yet the Senate of 
Venice
 applauded his labours, and owned his services, as being such, which having merited the admiration and esteem of all the World, did in a particular manner challenge their thankfulness and acknowledgments. About this time the Gallies of 
Malta
 arrived at 
Candia,
 where some dispute arising touching the place of precedence in the Fleet, which the 
Venetians
 denied to them: they departed thence with some dissatisfaction, and returned to the Westward to transport the young Empress out of 
Spain
 into 
Italy.


And now intelligence coming to 
Candia
 by divers Letters, that the Great Vizier was de∣parted from 
Adrinaople
 with a numerous Ar∣my, and was already arrived at 
Thebes,
 where a general Rendezvous was appointed of the whole Army, with resolution to be transported from 
Malvoisin
 to that Island; the 
Venetian
 Generals and Commanders in chief concluded in necessary, if possible, to hinder their passage, and rather to fight them at Sea, which was their more propitious Element, than to attend their Landing, where they would be forced to dispute with unequal numbers, and on disad∣vantageous terms. Accordingly the Captain-General reinforced his Fleet with two thou∣sand Foot, and a thousand Horse under the Command of Count 
Licinio Martinoni,
 appoin∣ting the Rendezvous to be at 
Argentiera,
 to which place also Marquess 
Villa
 repaired, touch∣ing by the way at 
Milo
 for refreshment of his Horse, it being an Island abounding with Her∣bage; the Captain General being for some days detained at 
Standia
 by contrary Winds, a Consultation was held for the more advantage∣ous management of the War; after which the whole Fleet making Sail, was on 
August
 the ninth scattered by a furious storm, and not being able to recover 
Santoxini,
 they by good fortune setched 
Stampalia,
 an Island abound∣ing with generous Wines, excellent Fruit, Par∣tridges, and other Provisions; at length after various fortunes arriving at 
Andra,
 which is a great and populous Island, another Council of War was held, where it was again concluded, That all care was to be taken to intercept the Succours which the Enemy daily sent to 
Can∣dia;
 to which end the Cavalier 
Grimani,
 Cap∣tain of the Galleons, was ordered to cruise about the Coast; and hearing that twelve 
Turkish
 Ships were lading Provisions in the Gulf

of 
Volo,
 he repaired thither, and had the good fortune to take them with all their lading;
 but the other Squadrons missed of the like success; for notwithstanding the care and vigilance which was used, all matters seemed to succeed pros∣perous for the 
Turks,
 and adverse to the Christi∣ans; the designs of the first having an issue a∣greeable to their intentions, whilst those of the latter were always disappointed either by Na∣ture or by Fortune, or rather by that secret hand of Providence, which had allotted that Island for a Prize to the 
Ottoman
 Arms.


By this time the 
Turkish
 Army being at their Rendezvous at 
Thebes,
 the Great Vizier prepa∣red to imbark; and considering the difficulty of the passage, thought it prudent first to make new Propositions to Signior 
Ballarino
 before he entred on this hazardous attempt, supposing perhaps, that the rumour of this March might have affrighted the 
Venetians
 to a Surrender of that Kingdom, that they might spare the blood and charge of that War which afterwards en∣sued: Wherefore 
Ballarino
 being called from his House at 
Constantinople,
 began his Journey towards 
Thebes
 on the twentyfifth of 
August,
 accompanied by a Capugibashee, and three Janizaries: and in twenty three days arriving at 
Thessalonica,
 now called 
Salonica,
 he fell sick of a violent Feaver, caused by that agitation of body in his Travels to which he was un∣accustomed, and for want of that sleep which he used to take after his slender dinner, passing the rest of the day and night in continual watchings: at first he felt only some little al∣terations, which he hoping might pass over, resolved to proceed on his Journey notwith∣standing the perswasions to the contrary of Signior 
Patavino
 his Secretary, with whom I was well acquainted, and ever esteemed for an honest and a worthy Person: but he con∣tinued resolute to proceed, fearing lest his de∣lays by the way should lose him the oppor∣tunity of that moment of Treaty, which was impossible afterward to be retrieved; for in his Journey he would often reason in this manner: If I should stop here, what censure would the World pass on me? I may possibly excuse my self; but in the mean time the Vizier may in∣gage too far in his design, and frustrate all those methods and foundations which I have laid towards a Peace: and then if I live, I shall be over-burdened with the reproaches of the World, for having abandoned the grand in∣cumbance in its ultimate necessity, which is charged upon me, which will be a more sensible affliction than the agony of death. My sickness will be esteemed by many to be rather dissem∣bled than real. The dead man lives in the memory of his faithfulness and constancy, and the living man dies in the indelible characters of his cowardise and misfortune. These were his own words.


And thus travelling forward his Feaver dai∣ly increased to that excess, that on the sixth day he was forced to stop at a City called 
Isdino,
 where having instructed Signior 
Pata∣vino
 in what manner he ought to manage af∣fairs, and recommending his services and chil∣dren to the favour and protection of the Senate, he passed to the other World, being honoured by a solemn Funeral at the publick Expence, and Interred in the Church of St. 
Mark,
 his Son 
Domenico Ballarino
 succeeding into the Of∣fice and Inheritance of his Father. The Senate understanding by advices from Signior 
Pada∣vino.
 That the Vizier desired another Envoy, qualified with the Character of a publick Mini∣ster to reside with him in 
Candia,
 dispatched the Secretary 
Girolamo Giavarina,
 a Person of good abilities, to that place. And at the same time the Captain-General 
Andrea Cornaro
 pressing the Senate for license to return to his own Coun∣try; his request was granted, and 
Francesco Mo∣rosini
 was appointed to succeed him in that im∣portant Charge, and was accompanied at a time of so great emergency with powerful Convoys, and with Recruits of Men, Provisions, and Am∣munition fitting to carry on so pressing a War.


On the Month of 
October
 the Great Vizier in person imbarking himself and Army at 
Malvoisia
 with many Pasha's,
 and men expert and active in the War, passed over to the Isle of 
Candia,
 re∣solving by strength and dint of Sword to force that strong City to obedience the main Bul∣wark of Christendom, situated at the Entrance of the 
Archipelago;
 of the success of which fa∣mous Siege we shall have occasion to discourse more at large and more particularly hereafter; in order unto which the Great Vizier on the last day of this Year, went in Person to take a view of this City, and having surveyed all sides of it, apprehended that the Siege would be long and tedious; and therefore returned again to 
Canea
 to take those measures which were requisite for an Enterprise of that weight and consideration.


In the mean time the Princes of Christendom being for the most part either in that discord a∣mongst themselves, of which the 
Turks
 have al∣ways made their advantage; or else living in parts remote, did not consider 
Candia
 as a Pulwaik to their Dominions, and therefore rendred little other assistance to the 
Venetians
 than good words, and vain wishes for their success and Victory. The Popes Forces only under Command of 
Muzeo Mattei
 which were in 
Dalmatia,
 were transported to 
Candia,
 and five hundred Foot belonging to the Grand Duke of 
Toscany,
 came into their places for desence of that Country. The most Christian King in return to the Embassy of 
Venice
 performed by the Cavalier 
Alvise Sagre∣do,
 remitted to that Republick an hundred thou∣sand Crowns, and Cardinal 
Barberini
 at his ex∣pence supplied four thousand Measures of Corn. But the present Conjuncture did not seem to smile on the 
Venetians,
 for all the Gallies belonging to 
Spain
 and 
Italy,
 as well as those of 
Malta,
 were employed in the Transportation of the new Em∣press 
Margerita
 of 
Austria.
 The Pope was in∣firm, and distracted with his own Domestick Af∣fairs. The Emperor was a young Bridegroom, and besides the Diversion which a Wife gave him from Cares, he apprehended that he might speedi∣ly receive some disturbance from the Princes of the 
Rhine,
 and from 
Sweden
 in the Dukedom of 
Bremen.
 The King of 
Spain
 was a Child of five years old, labouring at the same time under a War with 
Portugal,
 and threatned by the more powerful Arms of 
France,
 on the pretence of 
Flan∣ders:
 Besides all which, the 
Turks
 were as well in quietness amongst themselves, as they were at peace with all other Princes; so that we may ex∣pect that the force and power of the 
Ottoman
 Em∣pire should now be turned, like a Torrent, to overwhelm this spot of Land, which seemed to be so situated, as well to resist the Waves of the Seas, as the Inundation of this mighty and Mar∣tial People.








Anno 
1667.
 Hegeira 
1078.


AT the Beginning of this year the Winter and Cold which chilled and benumbed the Earth, encreased the heat, and gave vigour and action to the Tartars, who made such an unex∣pected incursion into 
Poland,
 that they carried with them near a hundred thousand captived Souls, as they were numbred before 
Jash,
 in their return home. The Polanders, awakened hereat, but ill advised, resolved on a Treaty where there was more just cause for an open War, and in order thereunto dispeeded an Ambassadour to the Sul∣tan, to expostulate the reason of this breach of Peace, and require justice and satisfaction on those his Subjects, who had, contrary to the Ar∣ticles of Peace., committed such actions, and outrages of open hostility; or at least, that the Turk would not take upon him to abet the cause of the Tartars, whilst the olanders took just revenge for their late injuries. The Am∣bassadour with this Mossage put himself in a rea∣diness, and with a retinue of about two hun∣dred and fifty Persons, begun his Journey to∣wards the end of 
April,
 and on the second of 
May
 crossed the River 
Niestro,
 which divides 
Poland
 from 
Moldavia,
 where he was received by two of the Boiars, or Moldavian Noblemen, and thence conducted to 
Jash,
 where the Prince of that Country resided. The Ambassadour expected the Visit of the Prince, according to Custom and Articles of Peace; but the Prince being either forbidden by the Port, or rather out of an igno∣rant stiffness and pride, omitted to pass the Civi∣lities of that Office, but yet supplied the Ambas∣sadour with Plenty of Wine and Provisions; which the Polanders enjoying freely, dispensed perhaps more easily with other neglects and omis∣sions which concerned Formalities and Ceremo∣nies.


The ninth of 
June
 the Ambassadour arrived at 
Adrianople,
 and thence was called to 
Demitochum,
 a City about a days Journey distant, where the Grand Signior, for the sake of his hunting and divertisement, remained under Tents, as the most convenient Lodging in that Season of the Year;
 the 
25th
 the Ambassadour had his first Audience with the Chimacam, at which thirty five of his Retinue were vested with Coftans, nothing passing but the usual Ceremonies and Complements. The 
28th
 he had Audience of the Grand Signior; but first made tender of his Presents as followeth.


A Crystal Cup in a Case of Gold, adorned with Rubies and Diamonds.




2 Baskets rarely woven with a very fine Rush.


A Clock.


A Cabinet of Ebony supported with four Ea∣gles made of Silver, in which also was a Clock with a perspective Looking-Glass.


2 Silver Cups of considerable bigness.


2 Silver Flaggons.


A Gun which discharged twenty times.


2 Spotted Dogs.


4 Mastiffs.


100 Ells of Holland.




These Presents preceding,
 made way for the Ambassadours Audience, at which he declared, That the Commission from his Master the King of 
Poland,
 was to make Complaints unto his Ma∣jesty of the grand Incursions the Tartars had made into 
Poland
 without any reason or cause of War; and that therefore his Master did expect from him, as from a just and vertuous Prince, a permission for revenge, and satisfaction of his injuries, to enter 
Tartary,
 without assuming it as any ground of Breach or Infringement of that Peace which he held with him; or else that he would by his authority enjoyn the Tartars to re∣store their Captives, and their spoils, and render them a reasonable satisfaction. The Grand Sig∣nior returned no reply hereunto, but referred that to be done by his Chimacam, silence being esteemed some part of his Majesty and State, which he seldom breaks but with few and haugh∣ty words.


This Ambassadour was a man of a bold and daring Spirit, a fit Orator for such an Embassy, had not his immoderate Covetousness, the Vice and Folly commonly incident to Old Age, much eclipsed many of those Vertues of which he was Master. He was also a Man of a violent temper, feavered to a madness in the height of his Cho∣ler, which strangely betrayed him to many un∣decencies in his Language and Comportment. For at his Audience with the Chimacam, when he came to receive the Grand Signior's Answer, his words were vented with that heat, and so like to menaces, that the Turks taking exception thereat, returned his course Speeches with the like Dialect, at which the Ambassadour swelled with that indignation and anger, as became not the Moderation and Gravity of his Office; ad∣ding in Conclusion, That he was an Aged Man, full of Years and Corporal Infirmities; that no∣thing could arrive more happy to him than a Death in which he should triumph to suffer for the benefit and glory of his Country. This ex∣cess and intemperance of Language moved the Turks to set a Guard upon him, and confine him to his own House in the nature of a Prisoner; which violation of his Sacred Office, so worked upon his Spirits, that he often vented some part of his fury in words and blows on the Officers of his Guard; for which rude behaviour having received some reproofs from the Chimacam,
 his passion not knowing which way to ease it self, feavered him into a desperate sickness, of which in a few days, phrensical and distracted, he de∣parted his life.


The Secretary of the Embassy, being the next in Office, took upon him the Function and Charge of the Ambassadour, and having now nothing to act, but to receive the Answer to the Message of his Master, for which a Day be∣ing appointed, he was presented with a Horse and Furniture by the Chimacam, of whom ha∣ving Audience, he received no other satisfaction to the Complaints against the Tartars than these following, which were related to me by the Se∣cretary of the Embassy, who did me the honour to make me a Visit, when I was on my recove∣ry from a dangerous Sicknes, at 
Constantinople.


First, That no compensation or pretence be ever hereafter demanded for the late incursions made by the Tartars into 
Poland.


Secondly, That the Polanders make not War upon the Cossacks, who had lately renounced their subjection, and were fled for protection to the Ottoman Power.


Thirdly, That the Poles immediately make War upon the Muscovite.


Fourthly, That the Turk Merchants have free Trade into 
Poland,
 and that the Turkish Mer∣chants receive satisfaction for what injuries and losses they lately suffered.




With these Propositions and Conditions of Peace, the Secretary was dispatched, which did not so well please the Poles as to return thanks for them, or a Messenger with Advice of their Acceptance or Ratification; and though they could not but be sensible of the scorn and yoke the Turks would impose upon them, yet having still remaining amongst them certain Reliques of their former dissentions and diversity about ele∣ction of a Successour to their King, and there be∣ing a certain Spirit of Luxury, Pride, and Sedi∣tion which was crept in amongst the Nobility, they considered not the advantage of the present time, but willingly preferred a present ease, and enjoyment of their Feasts and Banquets, be∣fore the hazards and uncertainties of benefit, which they might receive by the doubtful lot and fortune of War; and though never any Sea∣son appeared more opportune and advantageous to the Pole than this, when the flower of the Turkish Youth and Force was employed in 
Can∣dia,
 and all places, in part, dismantled of their usual strength and complement of Souldiers to defend their Frontiers; yet they seemed resolved to pass by the former Incursions, and Spoils, and Robberies made on their People, so the Turk would but stop here, and permit them, without farther provocation, to enjoy their quiet, and de∣bauched way of living: Only some of the Bor∣derers on the Turks, who had deeply suffered by the late Incursions, moved with the loss of their Estates, and the Captivity of their nearest Relations, joyned with a considerable number of the Musco∣vites, entered 
Tartary
 in the months of 
October
 and 
November,
 and burned about three hundred Villa∣ges, carrying away Captives, and other prey, from under the very Walls of 
Coffa.


At this time also the Pasha of 
Balsora
 began new rumours and an unseasonable Rebellions,
 who being reported to have an Army of Horse and Foot consisting of forty thousand men, gave no small disturbance and apprehension to the Turks; who with their difficulties of War in 
Candia,
 and the jealousies of a storm from 
Poland,
 remain∣ed with some doubts and hesitancy about the way of their proceedings. At length Orders were dispatched to the Pashaws of 
Erzirum, A∣leppo, Damascus,
 and 
Darbequier,
 to unite against the Rebel, to divest him of his Government, and to send his forfeited head to his Master. These Pashaws accordingly joining their Forces, defeated the Rebel; and as all Conspiracies of open Rebellion distant from the Court, have had but ill success in these Countries against the true Prince, so this Pasha was routed, and be∣ing forsaken by his Servants, fled with a few Horse to the Protection of the King of 
Persia.
 The principal Cause which moved the Pasha of 
Balsora
 (as I was informed from the mouth of the Pasha of 
Damascus
) to this Rebellion, was the Confidence he had in his own strength, and the fidelity of his people, to whom of ancient right, that Government was of hereditary Suc∣cession, descended to him by his Ancestors for many Generations: by which means he challeng∣ed such absolute interest in his Principality, that for many Years he refused to acknowledge the Grand Signior by any other tokens of homage, than in the bare name of his Protector, and in making Publick Prayers for his Prosperity and Victories. But at length the Grand Signior com∣ing to impose farther on him, stirred his hot de∣sires into Rebellion, and to an open defiance.


About the beginning of this Year the Captain-General 
Cornaro,
 with the Proveditor of the Armata 
Francesco Barbaro,
 returned to 
Venice,
 bringing with them one 
Ramadam
 a Sangiack of 
Egypt,
 and other Slaves taken by the Captains 
Grimani
 and 
Molini.
 The manner was this: 
Ra∣madam,
 with three and twenty Ships, laden with Men and Ammunion, endeavoured to enter into 
Canea,
 but being charged by the Venetians, and overcome, set sire to their Ship, and leaping in∣to the Schiff to save their Lives, were taken by the Boat of 
Molino;
 and though fourteen Gallies came out of 
Canea
 to their assistance, yet they could not hinder the taking of five of their Ships, besides several others which were put ashore and strand by four Maltese Corsairs, who entered in∣to the Fight, being called at a distance by the sound of the Cannon. About that time also a Turkish Gally was surrendred by the Industry and Ingenuity of the Slaves, who having secretly boared some holes in the bottom of the Gally, and plugged them up afterwards, so as that they might let in the Water, or stop it when they pleased; it happened that the Gally being near the Rock, which is called 
Polycandro,
 they se∣cretly drew out the plug, whereby so great a Flood of Water on a sudden came in, that the Gally being ready to sink, the Turks affrighted forsook the Gally to save themselves on the Rock, leaving the Slaves in the Gally to shift as well as they could. The Slaves being thus freed of their Masters the Turks, plugged up the hol
s again, and clearing the Gally of Water, rowed away, and delivered themselves into the hands of the Vene∣tians; upon which advice, the Captain General dispatched the Captain of the Gulf 
Lorenzo Cor∣naro
 with two Gallies to that Rock, where they became masters of all the Turks except two, who threw themselves into the Sea, preferring Death before Slavery.


In the mean time the Duke of 
Savoy
 recalled Marquess 
Villa,
 who was his Subject, from 
Can∣dia;
 the reasons for which was attributed to an appearance of Breach with 
Geneva,
 the Switzers and the Valtelines, who were his Subjects, or rather to the ill Offices of those who envied his preferment, being desirous to have him recalled from a place of so much honour and reputation. In obedience to this revocation Marquess 
Villa
 taking his leave of General 
Cornaro,
 returned from 
Candia
 as far as 
Zant;
 where meeting the new Captain General 
Francesco Morasidi,
 and be∣ing by him assured, That the Pope, and Se∣nate of 
Venice
 representing the difficulty of Af∣fairs in 
Candia,
 and the present urgency and ne∣cessity for his presence there, had obtained Li∣cense from the Duke of 
Savoy
 for his continu∣ance in that employment; upon which assurance, Marquess 
Villa
 took a resolution to return again to 
Candia,
 being accompanied with a strong Squadran of Vessels carrying considerable quan∣tities both of Amunition and Provisions.






The History of the famous Siege of 
Candia.


On the 
27th
 of 
April
 the Forces from 
Egypt
 under the Command of 
Messir Bey
 appeared in the field, and on the 
5th
 of 
May N S.
 the General of the Janisaries incamped on the right side of New 
Candia,
 that he might better view and survey the ground near the 
Laza∣retto.


At the beginning of the New Moon of this Year's 
May,
 being the 12/22th day of the month, publick Prayers being first made through the most principal places of the Empire for the success of the Ottoman Arms, and so solemnly continued every 
Monday
 and 
Thursday
 for the space of a year; the Great Vizier first appear∣ed before the renowned Fortress of 
Candia,
 and began the memorable Siege of that City, which for the space of twenty five years pre∣ceding had been the subject to which the special care and expence of 
Venice,
 and the Art of the most subtle Engineers of the World, as far as humanely was possible, did concur to render it the most impregnable Fortress of the Universe.


The Town was fortified with seven great Bastions, 
viz.
 the 
Sabionera, Vetturi, Jesus, Martinengo, Betlem, Panigra,
 and St. 
Andrea;
 these were all incompassed with a large and deep Ditch, of which were the Revelin of St. 
Spirito,
 the Revelin of 
Panigra
 flanked to the right with the Half-moon of 
Mocenigo:
 next hereunto was the Revelin of 
Betlem
 bordering on the Work of St. 
Maries,
 which to the left had the Revelin of St. 
Nicholas,
 and this ad∣joyned to the Fortification of 
de Palma,
 next whereunto was the Revelin of 
Priuli,
 with the Redoubt of 
Crepa-cuore;
 and over all was the Royal Fort of St. 
Demetrio,
 which command∣ed the Work of 
Molino
 and 
Sabionera
 unto the very Sea.


Marquess 
Villa
 at his last return was chiefly intent to strengthen the Fortifications, and re∣pair the Out-works, especially that of St. 
An∣drea
 which was almost ruined, and the old subterranean Traverses were so full of water, and the old Galleries so high, that the Enemy could easily pass under them, all which he re∣paired and amended in a short time. In con∣fidence of gaining this strong Fortress, the Turks demolished New 
Candia,
 situate about two miles from the Old, which the Vizier now pointed out to them as a better Seat, and in∣couraged them to win and inhabit it; so that 14/24th of 
May
 the Turks incamped over against St. 
Maries
 along the Valley of 
Gioffiro
 with the sound of their Drums and Trumpets, and firing great Guns and Vollies of Muskets. Their Forces at first consisted of about forty thousand fighting Men, and eight thousand Pioniers, but soon afterwards increased to seventy thousand, and so for the most part were maintained during the Siege.


The first Traverses began from the side of St. 
Maries,
 and were carried to the Sea, the Great Vizier took his Quarters over against 
Panigra,
 the Janisar-Aga against 
Martinengo,
 and other Pasha's between that and 
Betlem.
 On the other side the Pasha of 
Romelia
 in∣camped against the 
Lazaretto,
 and 
Catirgi-Ogle
 Pasha of 
Canea
 against 
Sabionera, Achmet
 Pa∣sha Vizier of the Camp, and 
Zagargibashee
 Major General of the Janisaries, who had the reputation of old souldiers and good Engineers, were ordered to inlarge and lengthen the Traverses on the side of the Half-Moon of 
Mocenigo.
 Quarters being thus assigned, they raised three
 Batteries, the first against the Bastion of 
Martinengo,
 and the right side of the Work St. 
Maries;
 a second against 
Pani∣gra;
 and soon after a third against the Half∣moon and Bulwark of 
Betlem,
 from whence they continualy thundered with their great Cannons, shooting Bullets of sixty, ninety to an hundred and twenty pound weight.


Nor were the Besieged within less industrious or wise in the disposition of their Affairs; for Marquess 
Villa
 took his Quarters at the en∣trance of the Bulwark 
Jesus,
 Proveditor 
Bar∣baro
 at 
Panigra,
 the Proveditor General of the Kingdom at 
Martinengo,
 the Duke of 
Candia, Francesco Battaglia,
 in the Fort of 
Sabionera,
 and other Officers between the Curtains of St. 
Andrea, Betlem,
 and 
Sabionera.


Things thus disposed on both sides, many and various were the valiant Assaults and Sallies, the Traverses extraordinary, the Ren∣counters bloody, the resistance vigorous, not known or recorded in any Siege before; which though they can never be fully expressed, or particularly denoted, yet I should do injury to the ashes of those Heroick Christians who so freely entred the List, and on this Theatre of the World sacrificed their lives in defence of Christendom, should I not signalize some of them of divers Nations for their Prowess and Valour. And here pardon me, good Reader, if I come short or fail in this relation, where many of unparalleled Valour and Vertue dyed obscurely and unknown, and the numbers of others so great, that to specifie them all, were to swell this Work to a larger Volume than the Book of Martyrs. Here was that Martial field into which remote Nations and uncon∣cerned descended, carried thither by zeal to the Christian cause, or by certain Principles of Valour and Magnanimity; so that though the War bore no other denomination than of the Venetian and the Turk, yet so great was the confluence of both parts of the World to this little Isle, as if it had been chosen by unani∣mous consent for a Stage to try the Title to the Universal Empire. The Town being thus be∣leagured on all sides, but where
 
Neptune
 the Spouse of 
Venice
 kept it open, the Christians endeavoured first to disturb the Traverses of the Turks by a Mine of Powder which they blew up; but through the neglect or little ex∣perience of the Engineer, it being the first which they had fired, reverted, and did more hurt to themselves than to the Enemy; the errour of which being observed, another For∣nello was fired, which taking its due place and measures, so affrighted the Turks, as yet not acquainted with this manner and invention of War, that they began at the first onset to be discouraged, considering that if the ground was unsecure and unstable at that distance what abysses and chasmes must there be prepared to make them graves under the Walls or entrance to the City. To second and justifie this Gun∣powder Plot the Christians made two Sallies, one by the Savoyards under Command of Co∣lonel 
Profito Torse,
 who issued forth from the Revelin of 
Betlem,
 and made great slaughter of

the Turks with Granadoes on the side of 
Pani∣gra;
 another was performed by Colonel 
Ar∣borio
 and Colonel 
Marini,
 accompanied with Count 
Brurasco
 Captain of the Guards to Marquess 
Villa
 who assaulted two Redouts of the Turks,
 and forced them to flight, and afterwards with some loss retreated victorious∣ly to their Works. In like manner Colonel 
Frigeri
 Commander of St. 
Demetrio,
 made a Sally on 
Catirgi-Oglé
 near the 
Lazaretto,
 and with some loss returned triumphant.


About this time arrived at 
Standi
 the Captain-General 
Francesco Morosini,
 who after some Consultation disarming his Fleet of about a thousand men,
 entred with that Succour into the Town, and yet fitted out a convenient Squadron of Gallies and Galleasses to rove in the 
Archipelago
 to hinder the Enemies Succours and Recruits, which were designed for 
Candia.
 In this interim the Turks repaired the old Battery against the 
Lazaretto,
 and laboured continually in their Galleries and subterranean Works; so that by that time that the Chri∣stians had sprang five Fornelli upon them to∣wards the point of the Half-moon of 
Mocenigo,
 the Turks had advanced so well towards the Borders of 
Panigra,
 that they sprang two Mines; but these being but the first proofs or essays of this kind of invention, reverted on themselves with the loss of two hundred of their men, and again fired a third with little success: which the Christians answered to better purpose, blowing up sixty or seventy Turks. Wherefore the Turks made a farther tryal of two Mines by the Half-moon, rather to their own loss, than to the damage of their Enemy.


In all the month of 
July
 passed not a day without some considerable action, sometimes to good, sometimes with bad success to both Parties; every day Mines were sprank on both sides, destroying the Lines, and overthrowing the Galleries;
 but the main force and heat of the War as it were concentring it self towards the Quarters of 
Panigra,
 in defence thereof the Engineer 
Castellan
 as freely as couragiously proffered the use of his Art, and the hazard of his Person. In which whilst he imploy∣ed himself, and endeavoured to cleanse the Galleries of their rubbish, which the Enemies Mines had thrown down, the Turks threw such quantities of Bomboes and Stink-pots into those Caverns, as made the stench thereof so suffocating and noisom, that two Officers were choaked or smothered that went to view the place, and Lieutenant-Colonel 
Cavalli
 and the Engineer 
Castellan
 himself were brought away half dead, poysoned with Sulphur and pestiferous smoke; to purifie which Grota, nothing could render the air more wholesom, in expulsion of the preceding vapour, than the smoke of Juniper and burnt Aqua vitae, which being made use of with good success, the Christians fired two Mines, which opened so dreadful an abyss, as served for the grave of great numbers of Infidels.


During this time daily rencounters arrived the Auxiliary Gallies from the Pope and 
Malta,
 commanded by Prior 
Bichi
 and 
Bali del Bene,
 as also the Gallies of 
Naples
 and 
Sicily
 commanded by 
Gianettino Doria
 and the Duke of 
Ferrandina,
 of whom the Captain-General would have borrowed some Forces to have served at Land; but their Commissions it seems or their courages were too strait to afford any such Supplies, being designed to cruise in the 
Archipelago;
 only the generous Chevalier 
d'Harcourt
 with ten other Camerades that were imbarked on the Gallies of 
Malta
 agreed to enter the Garrison,
 having come with no other design from 
France,
 than to offer themselves in defence of the Christian cause, and in a time of Peace, when their Prince had no need of their assistance and service, to give the World true evidences and proofs of the value and greatness of their souls. In all Enterprises this Person, worthily descended of the House of 
Lorrain,
 was a Companion to Marquess 
Villa,
 and one day venturing on a design to disturb the Enemies approaches, was shot in the face with a Musket-bullet; of which wound re∣covering some time after, he with his Compani∣ons returned to 
France
 having like Cavaliers Passant acted the parts of true Chivalry. But neither did the Prior 
Bichi
 Commander of the Popes Gallies, nor 
Doria
 Admiral of those of 
Naples,
 act agreeable to the bravery of those French Gentlemen; for they not only denied, as we have said, to land a small num∣ber of their men, but as if they came only to make them a visit, sent this short Letter of Advice dated the 
24th
 of 
August,
 in these words. 
The Auxiliary Gallies are obliged to de∣part this night and to return to
 Suda, 
where they are to remain until the expiration of that time which is appointed for them in these Seas.
 Prior 
Bichi
 likewise sent word to Marquess 
Villa,
 That he judged it fit to depart, by reason that no action presented for them to undertake: to which the Marquess replied, That he who seeks may find, and that such opportunities never offer to those who endeavour to avoid them. 
Doria
 also, to colour his excuses, said, That his Orders were not to land men, unless the Town were in the extremity of danger of being taken; to which 
Villa
 replyed, That he could not well be assured in what condition the Town was, since he never vouchsafed to set his foot ashore, or conceived a curiosity of seeing the greatest and the most famous Siege that ever was in the World. In short, these Holy and Catholick Squadrons departed without contri∣buting any assistance to the Christians, incur∣ring thereby the severe censure of the Com∣manders in chief, with the anger and disdain of of the Souldiery.


The Venetians have always thought it Policy to maintain an Agent in the Ottoman Quarters, perhaps with design to afford them Intelligence, or to be ready to apply Terms of Peace in times of most urgent necessities.
 According to which Rule Signior 
Giavarina
 was sent to 
Candia
 upon the Venetian Armata, now go∣verned at Sea by one 
Pasqualino,
 with Instructi∣ons to treat with the Vizier, and perhaps to grant him any thing besides 
Candia,
 though without this nothing could come either wel∣come or satisfactory to the Turks. Howsoever to introduce him into the Camp, a white Flag was displayed on the side of the 
Lazaretto;
 which when the Turks perceived, they flocked in great numbers to know the mystery of this Signal of Pacification. And though nothing appeared, besides a Letter directed to the Great Vizier, yet they hoped it might portend something of Treaty, which in the end would produce a Peace, and a conclusion of their la∣bours, before the Winter surprised them in

their colder Lodgings. The Vizier having read the Letter, had his thoughts raised as high as was possible in hopes of a Surrender; and therefore most freely ordered, That Sig∣nior 
Giavarina
 should the Sunday following come to the Valley of 
Gioffiro
 with what Atten∣dance and Followers he judged fit, proffering at the same time a cessation of Arms and all acts of Hostility: but the Christians who were not reduced to that extremity as to crave Peace, or a respite from action, kindly refused his gentle proffer, which so inraged the Vizier, that in a fury he gave fire to a Mine on the left side of 
Panigra,
 which was seconded with that furious assault, that 
Panigra
 had been put into great danger, had not the courage of the Defendants been supereminent, and repulsed the Enemy with so great a slaughter, that the earth round about was covered with dead bodies: which action was seconded by a brisk Sally performed by some Knights of 
Malta,
 as 
la Maison Neufve, de Langeron, de Clement, de Monrosier, de Charboniere,
 and 
de Blanbuisson,
 though against the advice and counsel of Marquess 
Villa,
 of which the two first were slain, and the rest returned with honour and success.


At the end of this month of 
July
 the Gar∣rison received a Supply of six hundred Foot under Command of 
Ottavio Abia,
 a noble Venetian, who likewise made his entry more acceptable by twenty thousand Ducats which he brought with him. At the time of his arrival the Christians fired a Mine with good success, but the Enemy had prepared another in re∣venge, which took such effect on the right Angle of 
Panigra,
 as broke the Counterscarp ten paces, and filled the Ditch with Earth, on advantage of which the Turks came to an Assault, but through the courage of 
Luca Grandis
 Serjeant Major, and other gallant Officers, a stop was given to the Enemies fury, and they beaten off with considerable loss.


And now for the present all Sallies ceased, whilst both sides carried on their designs under ground, thwarthing and crossing the Mines, each of other; in which subterranean Travels and Passages, the Miners often met, and had frequent and bloody Encounters, those that were strongest robbed the Powder and Utensils of the weaker, so that the Scene of War seemed to be transferred 
ad inferos,
 and to be carried on with more fury and violence in the Grave, or the other world, than it was in the open Air of the Cydonian Fields.
 The Turks becoming now as expert as the Christia
 in their secret and hidden Traverses, had pene∣trated so far, that on the 
8th
 of 
August
 they fired a most dreadful Mine on the side of the half Moon, which made so great a Breach in that work, that eight men could march a breast; which so animated the Enemy with the advantage, that immediately in great num∣bers they mounted the breach to give an Assault; but supplies being timely afforded in assistance of the Guard, the Enemy was pre∣cipitated headlong, and overwhelmed with such showers of Musket shot, that the Retreat into their works was not only disorderly, but the number of those who survived so few and diminished, as gave proof how hazardous it was to attempt other more difficult and better fortified Bastions.


Nor was the success of the Turks less on the side of 
Panigra,
 where having made a Breach, they endeavoured to make good their ground under shelter of Sacks of earth, which the Christians drew away from them with long iron hooks, which was such a piece of sport to the besieged to see their Enemies dismantled of their shelter, and lye open to their shot, that a young Page of Marquess 
Villa,
 called 
du Clos,
 venturing in this action beyond his years, was shot with a Musket Bullet in the head, and so hastned to the other World covered with glory and renown.


There was scarce now a day which passed, that was not signalized with the springing of several Mines both on one side and the other; most of those made by the Christians were seconded with Sallies, and those of the Turks with Assaults and Stormings of one Fort or other. On the 
10th
 of 
September
 Signior 
da Riva,
 a noble Venetian, arrived with a Re∣cruit of five hundred Souldiers, and a great number of Pioneers, and the same day was ce∣lebrated, after the usual manner, by springing of Mines; one of which threw a Turk on the Fort of 
Panigra,
 and ruined the Galleries of the Enemy; the next day likewise several Fornelli were fired by the Enginier 
Lubatiers
 from the parts of the half Moon, and of 
Pani∣gra,
 which filled up the Line, and spoiled the Redoubts of the Turks.


On the 
15th
 the Christians vigorously sal∣lied out with seventy Foot, under the Com∣mand of Colonel 
Vechia,
 and two other Cap∣tains from the Revelin of 
Panigra,
 who after a valiant skirmish, orderly retreated under the rampart of the Revelin; to which place the Turks eagerly pursuing them, were enter∣tained with a Mine, and tossed into the Air; which being done, the Venetians returned again, and were in the same manner encoun∣tred by the Turks, whereby a very hot fight began; during which time the Captain General, who stood on the Bastion of 
Betlem
 to observe the motions of the Enemy, saluted them with a plentiful shower of Musket shot. In short, after the Venetians had for the space of an hour resisted the Force of the Enemy with much slaughter, they retired with good order into the Ditch of the City.


On the 
18th
 Captain 
Fedeli,
 with a hun∣dred Souldiers, made another Sally, but be∣ing wounded, he retreated with some loss; which was retured again on the Enemy by a Mine which the Enginier 
Quadruplani
 sprang with happy success on the Quarter of 
Panigra;
 and on the same day the Captain of the Gal∣leasses, called 
Gioseppe Morosini,
 arriving with five hundred men, and two hundred thousand Ducats together with good quantities of Am∣munition and Victuals, gave encouragement and relief to all the City; with whom also came the Cavalier 
Gonges
 and his Brother, in quality of Adventurers for Honour and Re∣ligion. There was not one day in all this Month, but divers Fornelli and Mines were fired on one side and the other; and though, the Christians exercised as much military Art, Industry, and Valour, as men were capable to perform, yet the Turks still gained ground, and daily advanced their works upon the Christians; wherefore the Captain General ordered that a Mine and three Fornelli shou
d be fired; by which a small Fort of the Turks,

near the Counterscarp, was overthrown, with divers other works lately raised.


The Turks had such good success with their last Mines, that a Week after they fired another, which was calculated so well that it ruined the Gallery of Communication between 
Panigra
 and its Out-works, and threw the Counter∣scarp into the Ditch of the Town;
 For the neces∣sary repair of which Breach, and clearing of the Ditch, the Governors gave immediate Order, and appointed a strong Guard for de∣fence and protection of those that laboured; and to make better dispatch, a most ingenious Engine was contrived to remove and rid the Ditch of Earth, which whilst it worked with admirable success, the Turks, by help of a Mine, blew it into the Air, and shattered it into a thousand pieces. Howsoever, the Chri∣stians desisted not from their intended work, but still laboured with Baskets, Sacks, and Wheelbarrows to carry away the Earth; which that they might do quietly and undi∣sturbed, the Savoyards and Sclavonians made a furious and desperate Sally, which continued for the space of two hours; and though in that time the Enemy had opportunity to col∣lect their greater Force into a Body, yet the Christians were not put to flight, but retreated orderly, and in a fighting posture, though with the loss of several Officers,
 of which were Cap∣tain 
Rè,
 and others. To revenge these mines of the Turks, the Christians fired two others as dreadful as the others; the first near St. 
Spi∣rito,
 which being under the Enemies Traverses, performed its desired Effect; the second was on the side of the half Moon, which swallowed up two of their Redoubts; And on the third of 
October
 they fired four other mines on the sides of 
Panigra
 and 
Betlem,
 one of which consisted of six and thirty Barrels of Powder, and another of fourteen, ordering at the same time a furious Sally from divers places; as namely,
 Captain 
Gamba
 sallied from the Re∣velin of St. 
Spirito,
 Serjeant Major 
Arasi
 from under the Bulwark of 
Panigra.
 Colonel 
George Maria
 was ordered to assault the Redoubts which were opposed to the Breach; Colonel 
Vechia
 to attaque the Redoubts between 
Pani∣gra
 and the half Moon, Colonel 
Cremasco
 and 
Marini
 to assault the redoubts between the half Moon and 
Betlem.
 Count 
Brusasco
 de∣fended the work of St. 
Maria,
 Colonel 
Inberti
 defended the Revelin of St. 
Nicholas,
 and Scrjeant 
Motta
 with thirty able Souldiers ad∣vanced to the farthest Lines of the Enemy, killing and putting to flight all before them. Colonel 
Frigeri
 Captain of the Fort St. 
Di∣metry,
 and Lieutenant Colonel 
Vimes
 possessed several Redoubts; and in the conclusion all retreated in excellent order with success and triumph, to vield the Turks evident arguments of their fortitude and courage; and that the Town was still so well provided, as not only to be in a Condition of defending it self, but offending the Enemy.


Yet the Turks were still labouring to coun∣termine the 
Fornelli
 of the Enemy, and to revenge the former Plots; to which end they had penetrated to the most inward works of 
Panigra;
 but the Pioniers, employed by the Engineer 
Quadruplani,
 discovering their Gal∣lery, entred boldly in, and drove away the Turks from whom they took thirty two Bar∣rels of Powder, and by that means for the pre∣sent preserved that work, and the Lives of many Souldiers.


The 
17th
 of 
October
 the Christians sprang two Mines, one of thirty,
 and another of five and thirty Barrels of Powder, which did the desired execution upon the Turks; which some brave spirits seconded by a bold Sally, amongst which none was more eminent than a Greek Priest, who moved with zeal to his Country, entered far into the Enemies Tren∣ches, where having killed a Person of Quality hand to hand, he was returning with the Tro∣phy of his head; but being in the way inter∣cepted by three at once, he was unequally matched, and slain, and died with the high∣est honour imaginable under the Walls of his Native City.


Soon after the Cavalier 
Verneda,
 another Engineer, fired a Mine of forty Barrels of powder, which made the very City and Works tremble, like an Earthquake; for whereas this Mine should have taken its effect on the Ene∣mies Redoubts, Providence ordered that it should take its passage through an old Gallery with so much violence and Smoak that it suffoca∣ted the Miners, Carpenters, and Masons, to the number of sixty men.


Towards the end of this Summer the Turks at 
Constantinople
 and 
Adrianople
 grew big with the expectation of the happy News and Arrival of that messenger that should declare the taking of 
Candia,
 and the end of the Vene∣tian War; to entertain which joy with the more readiness, they had prepared Lights, and Lamps, and artificial Fire-works to solem∣nize their
 
Dunalma,
 and made publick prayers and procession of the youth of the City twice a week; but finding their hopes frustrated, and their joys from Month to Month deferred, their expectations became tyred and wearied, and growing almost ashamed of their disappoint∣ment, began to throw the blame of the mis∣carriage of their Affairs on the ill Conduct of the Vizier, and the sluggishness of their Soul∣diery.
 The Grand Signior also more impa∣tient than the rest, dispatched away a Messenger with Letters to the Vizier, reproaching his cowardise and sloth; that being provided with a most puissant Army, and with all other ap∣pointments of War, should suffer the Ottoman Forces to be baffled and entertained in taking a single Fort for longer time, than formerly it had been in subduing whole Provinces and Kingdoms; and moreover charged the Mes∣senger to bring him a faithful and true Relation of the state of all Affairs, and what was the rea
use and difficulty that so long obstructed the progress of his Arms; but yet sent the Vizier for his encouragement a Sword, and a Vest of Sables, as tokens of his favour. The Great Vizier moved with this message, resolved to give some certain proofs of his industry and valour, and either to take the place, or else at least to convince his Ma∣ster, by the knowledge and testimony of his Inquisitor, that the Work was of more hazard and longer time than was apprehended in the Seraglio. Whereupon preparations were made, and the time of assault was appointed chiefly on the side of 
Panigra,
 so that pressing valiantly forward, they planted six of their Colours on the ruines of that work; so that now, full of hope and courage, they adventured to descend into the Ditch, but being prevented by three

Mines, which contained seventy Barrels of powder, they were mounted in the air with so much noise and violence, that many Bodies were tossed on the Rampire of the Town, many of their greatest Redoubts overthrown, and Graves made for multitudes of the Assai∣lants. This Assault as it began with great fury, so it continued for many hours; in which action Signior 
Pisani,
 Proveditor General of the Kingdom, was killed by a Granado. Howso∣ever, the Enemy was repulsed by the valour of the Christians, insomuch that the Turks growing faint were pressed forward by the Vizier, who, to encourage his Souldiers, pro∣mised an extraordinary reward of honour and mony to him who should but first touch the Walls with his hands. The hopes of riches and honour so pricked forward all conditions of the Souldiery, that the Commonalty desperately threw themselves at all, and endangered so fat the taking of 
Panigra,
 that they had certainly possessed themselves of it, had not the Vene∣tians had recourse to their last refuge of Mines, and blown the whole Work into the Air, by which perished three Pashaws, and great num∣bers of common Souldiers. And this for the present astonished the Turks, and gave a stop to the farther proceedings of this Assault. This proof gave an evident Conviction to the Grand Signior's Inquisitor of the strength of the place, and difficulty of the Work; and having been an Eye-witness of all, returned with dis∣mal Stories of a cruel War, reporting perhaps, and it was related in the parts of Christendom, That this was a place where blood was spilt day and night, where Gallant Men had forgot to sleep, living in perpetual labours, enured to intolerable sufferings and hourly dangers, there being none secure either in the Church, in the house, or in the street; for Granadoes rained, Cannons thundred, Arrows flew, with stones like a Tempest; so that there was none in that place, but who quartered on the Brink of the Grave.


It now grew towards Winter, and yet the Vizier thought of no other Quarters than his Trenches, judging that if he should quit his station, the labours and progress of the former Summer would be lost, and the Work to be again begun in the Spring. Wherefore re∣solving to keep his Works, provided all con∣veyances to carry away the Water, and sheds to cast off the Rain, and warmer Tents for the Soldiery, which yet could not so artifi∣cially be contrived, but that the Camp was full of mire and dirt, tedious and troublesome to Man and Beast, and the Quarters of the Souldiery, so damp between their Banks of Earth, as caused Catarrhs, Fluxes, Feavers, and other Camp Diseases with much mortality.


It was now the dead of Winter,
 and yet Martial Exploits were as frequent as they had been in Summer; and though the great rains and flouds of water extinguished the fires, and made, as it were a cessation of Arms, and of all acts of hostility; yet this interval of calm∣ness and tranquillity the Christians made use of to repair the Palisade of St. 
Andrea,
 and the Lines of Communication within the Ditch. And because the main Bulwark was also shaken, and in some danger, all the Chiorma or Slaves of the Gallies were commanded a shore to labour in the reparation, and to make an inward retrenchment, which in short time, with admirable diligence, was persected, and on all sides compleated.


The Turks in the mean time carried their Traverses forward as much as they could, for they were now entered into the very Ditch of the Town; and because there was no possibility to work in the Mines, by reason that the Gal∣leries were filled with water, they attended wholly to employ their great Guns, and fire Granadoes, so that they raised a new Eattery near the Work of 
Mocenigo,
 which began to batter the lower parts of St. 
Andrea,
 and raised another Battery on the ruines of the Revelin of 
Panigra,
 which being lower ground could not much prejudice the main Bulwark.


The Sultan satisfied with the Relation given by his Messenger concerning the progress his Vizier had made upon the Town, and of the hopes there was in time to gain it, encouraged him with a Letter of Praise, accompanied with a Sword, and Vest of Sables, the magnificent Signal of the Sultans favour. And now be∣sides the Force of Fire-Arms, the Turks made use of Arrows, slot into the Town, carrying papers written in Italian and French, per∣swading the Souldiers to fly to their Camp, where they should receive civil treatment, and a secure refuge; which gave that encourage∣ment to those wearied with the labours of the Siege and hard usage, that many of them made Tryal of the Turks entertainment, and escaping out of the Works, fled to the Enemies Camp, where they were cloathed, received Conduct Mony, and were permitted Licence to embark themselves for what place they pleased.


About this time the Proveditor General 
Bar∣baro
 and the Lieutenant General of the Artillery 
Ʋvertmiller
 having obtained licence from the Senate, returned to 
Venice;
 the first was dis∣pleased,
 that Marquess 
Villa
 should take the precedence of him; and the other, because his opinion of making a general Sally of all the Garrison on the Enemy was not followed, but rejected by the Council of War, as a design pernicious and over-hazardous; for that the fighting with an Enemy more numerous than themselves, fortified in their Redoubts and Works, and hidden under ground in inextri∣cable Labyrinths, was an Enterprise so rash, that no man wishing well to the Garrison, and of sound judgment ought to advise.


The Turks having in this Campagne fixed themselves well in a formal Siege, and gained ground, and many advantages on the Chri∣stians, of which the destruction of the Work of 
Panigra
 was none of the least: the Vizier supposed it a seasonable time to enter into a Treaty by the hand of the Secretary 
Giavarina
 who was there entertained for that purpose but he falling sick of the Camp-distemper dyed in a short time,
 whose death was soon after followed by that of Signior 
Padavino,
 who finished his days at 
Canea;
 the Plate, Money, and Houshold-stuff of both were care∣fully inventored, and by the justice of the Vizier duly accounted for, and administred to the Venetians. The Instruments of Treaty be∣ing thus taken away, the Captain-Pasha was dispatched to 
Constantinople,
 carrying with him four thousand wounded and sick men, and a Letter to the Grand Signior and Divan, signi∣fying his resolutions to win the place, or dye

under the Walls of it; and to that end desired them to send him such Recruits of men and supply of Provisions as were requisite. He complained of the cowardise of those to whom they had incharged the Convoys; that he wanted both Powder and Bullet, for default of which they could neither ply their great Guns, nor go forward in their Mines; that bread was so dear, that no price could be set to it; that his Souldiers by slaughter and sick∣ness did daily diminish, so that his Army was reduced to twenty three thousand Foot, seven hundred Horse, and two thousand Pioniers; and in fine concluded with urgent instances to have Recruits of all dispeeded to him, without which it was impossible to gain the Town, or save himself. Hereupon Recruits came from all parts, both of Men, Ammunition, and Provisions, especially from the Frontiers or adjacent places, which by such vast evacuations were almost dispeopled, more particularly in 
Albania
 and 
Castelnuovo
 extraordinary Pre∣parations were making both of Men, Horse, and Camels; and a report was spread, that the Grand Signior intended to pass over in Person to 
Candia;
 but this was soon disproved by his residence at 
Larissa,
 where he remained to render assistance more easily, and receive advices more speedily than could be performed at 
Adrianople.


Great quantities of Corn were also sent from divers places, particularly from 
Smyrna,
 where English, French, and Dutch Ships were taken up for that service, to the prejudice of the Trade, and damage of the concerned: some of which Vessels were taken in their passage to 
Candia,
 whilst others arrived in safety through the negligence, as was supposed, of the Com∣manders at Sea. And indeed the Turks plyed their business with that industry and diligence, that notwithstanding the Force which the Venetians 
ad at Sea, their Recruits for the most part arrived safe, and Corn began to be so plentiful, that the Vizier gave a prohibition against having more imported; and in short, nothing wanted for prosecution of the War, which was carried on in the Winter, as far as the season or the weather would permit; so that scarce a day passed without something of action, either of storming or blowing up of Forts, overthrowing Galleries, filling Trenches, the particulars of all which are so numerous, that to recount them would fill a Volume, and are more proper to be related in a Journal than a History, in which minute matters ought to be passed by, and nothing but acts of greatest moment be recorded.


Howsoever great Actions at this season ceased for a while on one side and the other, only continual discharges of great shot and Bomboes were practised. And the Turks endeavouring with artifice to cover their de∣signs, dispatched a Letter to the Senate of 
Ve∣nice
 by way of 
Suda,
 and thence in a Galley to 
Candia,
 touching certain Motives of Peace, supposing that Propositions and Offers of Ac∣commodation would loosen the minds of the Officers, and render them less intent and dili∣gen in their Affairs; on receipt of which Letter, though Marquess 
Villa
 replied, That he had as much power from the Senate to con∣clude a Peace, as the Vizier himself had from his Master, yet the Vizier would not treat with him, but sent a Letter which was consigned by an Aga at the Bulwark of 
Palma
 under the caution of a white Flag, desiring that it should be forwarded to 
Venice.
 About this time arri∣ved to the great comfort of the Besieged the new Proveditor 
Barnardo Nani
 with five hundred Souldiers, and 
Matteo Matheus
 Sergeant General with some Recruits from the Pope, bringing with him three hundred Medals of Silver to bestow on such as deserved them, with Jubilees and Indulgences without num∣ber, and thus ended the Action of this Year.








Anne Christi 
1668.
 Hegeira 
1079.


THE Spring approaching, toward the end of 
January
 the Turks full of hopes to compleat their Conquest, vigorously in all maritime Ports of the Empire made pro∣visions of Corn and other Victuals to be sent to the Camp, when occasion should require, and opened a door for Janisaries according to the Turkish phrase, the Formality of which is in this manner: The Cheif Officer appointed for that purpose asks severally such as come to be listed, Of what Chamber they desire to be;
 to which they making reply, That they will be of the fifth, sixth, or seventh, or the like, the Officer gives them a blow under the ear with the palm of his hand, and bids them repair to their Chamber, with which they nimbly pass away. But herein the due form and order of Janisaries was corrupted; for in former days Janisaries were educated in that condition from children, and from thence named 
Yenisheri
 or 
Tyrones,
 or the young Souldiery; but now on this necessity of raising Forces, ancient men, Fathers of Families with long beards were ad∣mitted, to the disparagement of that Order, and corruption of the exactness of that Disci∣pline. Considerable Supplies also were sent of Beldargees or Pioniers; so that this year from several parts, according to the best com∣putation, the Forces of 
Candia
 were recruited with a Supply of seventy thousand men, for transportation of which and of their Provisions, all Christian Ships were imbarged at 
Smyrna
 and 
Constantinople,
 several of which in their voyage to 
Candia,
 were intercepted by the Maltese Corsaires, and particularly a French Ship called the Arms of 
France,
 on which were be∣tween four and five hundred Turks, was taken, and in bording of her about an hundred Turks were killed upon the Deck: some other small Vessels (one of which was a Ligornese under English Colours) were taken the French Barks which had in this manner lost their Corn, un∣advisedly returned to 
Smyrna,
 supposing the ex∣cuse of having done their endeavours, and of being over-powered by a stronger Force was sufficient: But the Turks who judge of no∣thing well, but by the success, having gotten them into their hands, made them not only return their Freight, but satisfie the loss of the Cargason.


In the Month of 
March
 the Vizier having intelligence of six or seven Venetian Gallies to be at 
Fodile,
 not far from 
Standia,
 under the Command of the Proveditor of the Armata 
Lorenco Cornaro,
 gave order to 
Regep
 Pasha of 
Romelia,
 who was Captain of the Souldiery, and 
Durach
 Begh, who commanded a Squa∣dron of twelve Gallies, to weigh Anchor in

the night, and there surprise them: 
Durach
 Begh, though sore against his will, doubting the truth of the report, yet readily obeyed and fitted his Gallies for the Enterprise. The Captain-General having intelligence of the design, prepared four Gallies in Port, and im∣barked that night with a French Regiment and some Italians to the number of six hun∣dred, besides two Companies of the Guards, and one of the Proveditor 
Nam,
 under the Command of Colonel 
Audré Facile
 and 
Mont∣alto,
 accompanied also with the Proveditor Extraordinary 
Daniel Justiniani,
 Commissary of the Treasury of the Militia, with several other Captains and Officers; and arriving at 
Sandia,
 found the Proveditor General 
Cornaro
 newly entred there from crusing the Seas with sixteen Gallies, to whom having communi∣cated the design, they immediately loosed from the Port, and arrived at 
Fodilé
 before midnight. The Turks having from the place of their Anchorage discovered two Sail, hoped there might be no more, and therefore came forth to fight them; but ingaging farther, met such a number as evidenced the danger, and the little hope there was in other than in their Courage and Arms. The night being dark, the Venetians not to mistake each other, carried such great Lights on their Mast-heads, as not only distinguished them from the Ene∣my, but also directed them to give battle to the Turks, which they prosecuted so home, that they took and sunk five of the Turkish Gallies, of which the Admiral commanded by 
Durach
 Bey was one; the rest, though much shattered, and for the present unserviceable, did yet by the help of their Oars, and the dark∣ness of the night, find a way to escape: nor was this Victory gained by the Venetians in a Fight of seven hours without the loss of two hundred Souldiers killed, and about five hun∣dred wounded, besides some Persons of Quality and Command, 
viz
 the Cavalier 
Arasi Justiniani,
 the Commissary 
Francesco Cornaro, Fosca∣rini,
 &c. the wounded were 
Georgio Greco, Lorenco Bembo,
 and 
Marco Balbi.
 The Turks lost many of their best Sea-men and Souldiers, besides Slaves and others, counting on every Galley one with another three hundred persons; amongst the Prisoners which amounted to four hundred and ten, the Beys of 
Cyprus
 and 
Navarine
 with 
Mustapha
 of 
Anatolia,
 and the Chiaus of the Pasha of 
Aleppo
 were taken, to∣gether with eleven hundred Christian Slaves who were all freed, on condition that they should serve the Summer following in the Ve∣netian Armata. Of the Turks were slain 
Durach
 Bey, the Bey of 
Coron,
 and 
Hastam
 formerly Bey of 
Coron.
 The Great Vizier from the Camp could all the time behold the flashes of the small and great shot, and by help of the Ve∣netian Lights perceive the success of his own Fleet, not answerable to his expectation. What loss the Turks sustained with Slaves and Souldiers is incertain, only an hundred Chri∣stian Slaves were released, and four hundred Turks captivated, and amongst the slain was 
Durach
 Bey himself, a stout Sea-man, and a known Pirate, who from a small Brigantine had raised himself to be Begh of the 
Morea,
 and to command four or five Gallies of his own. In like manner, and not long after, a Squadron of Venetian Ships were forced by storm in the night to anchor under Cape 
Spada,
 where accidentally six Turkish Gallies were riding. The Sky being very dark and close, the first Ship ran foul of a Galley, and so shat∣tered and crushed her sides, that being ready to sink, the Turks forsook her, and run aboard the Ship to save a life which was to be afterwards miserable and slavish. The others affrighted at the arrival of these unexpected guests, flipt their Cables to seek harbour in a tempestuous Sea; but the weather being too boisterous for Gallies, one of them was cast away, and about an hundred and seventy men lost: the news hereof being brought to 
Venice
 by Colonel 
Vecthia
 with the Ensigns and Spoils taken from the Enemy, the Senate bestowed the honour of Knighthood on the Captain-General, comforting the families of the slain and wounded with signal marks of Honour and Glory.


The Captain Pasha put this year to Sea more early than was usual, designing to make as many Voyages to 
Candia
 as was possible, with Succours both of Men and Am∣munition; his design and work was wholly to avoid the Venetians, and to steal ashore his Recruits; to which end he made such expedi∣tion in every Voyage,
 that scarce could the Christians have advice of his arrival in any part of the Isle of 
Candia,
 before he was well forwarded in his return: yet his haste was not so great, but one time having fifty three Gal∣lies in his Company, he adventured to look into the Port of 
Nio,
 where he met four Cor∣saires or Free-booters under Mastese Colours, commanded by two Brothers 
Themericort,
 and by the Knights 
Verva
 and 
Bremant:
 two of the Ships were on the Careen washing and tallow∣ing their Vessels, whilst the other two, 
viz.
 the 
Themericort
 Brothers were on the Guard, being at anchor in the narrowest entrance to the Harbour. The Turks supposed at first, that so formidable an appearance of their Fleet would affright the Christians to a Surrender, rather than to contend on those unequal terms. But it seems the Corsaires were more resolute than was imagined; for no sooner did the Turks approach, than the Christians discharged their Cannon and Vollies of small shot so plentifully, as caused the Gallies to dispute at a farther distance, where shooting as it were at rovers with their long Cashee Pieces (not ad∣venturing to come to a nearer Fight) for the space of eight hours made (as reported) about eight thousand shot, with little or no execution; so that the Captain-Pasha made his sign of Retreat, and forsook the Engagement, as be∣ing too dangereous and difficult an Enterprise. But better success had the Turks the next month at Sea against Captain 
Georgio,
 an old and subtle Pirate, who for many years had vex∣ed and pillaged, not only the Turks, but Chri∣stians on all Isles of the 
Archipelago:
 great for∣tune he had in taking Turkish Saiks and Vessels; and some of them considerably rich, and when that prey failed him, or was scarce, he pursued his game on the shore, from whence he often carried men, women, and children into sla∣very, and oft-times had the fortune of consi∣derable Booty. The Islands which lay open and ungarded were his common Rendezvous, where the men attended his service, and the women his lust. In this manner the Pirate passed for several years, have obtained unto himself a fame and terror with the Turks,

and riches at home: the place which he com∣monly chose to wash and tallow his Vessels, was amongst certain small Isles in the Bay of 
Edremit,
 anciently 
Adrimetum,
 opposite unto 
Mytilene,
 from whence he had as from a Thicket or Wood a view of such Vessels as passed the great Road towards 
Constantinople:
 these frequent successes rendred him so confi∣dent and secure, that he still continued his station, notwithstanding the Turkish Naval Forces, which in the Summer season made their Rendezvous at 
Scio.
 But at length the Captain-Pasha with the whole Turkish Ar∣mata being at 
Scio,
 and with him three Ships of 
Tripoli,
 advice came that Captain 
Georgio
 had not forsaken his little Isles, but was there careening his small Fleet which consisted of two Ships and a Brigantine: hereupon the Tripo∣leses were commanded out to encounter the Enemy, whom the next day they found so secure and negligent, that he discovered not his Foes before they were ready to attaque him. The Captain Pasha also fearing that the Tripo∣leses were not of sufficient Force to encounter so valiant and experienced a Commander, both to make the Enterprize the more easie and certain, and to gain the reputation of that busi∣ness to himself, went out in person with all his Gallies. The Tripoleses had began to fire on Captain 
Georgio
 before the Pasha came in to their assistance, but it falling calm, and the Ships not able to joyn in a nearer fight, gave way for the Gallies, which being above fifty in number, overpowered the Christians on all sides; howsoever, the two Ships defended them∣selves against all this Force, until the Captain himself being killed, his own Ship surrendred, but so shattered, that she was scarce able to swim above water.
 This Ship being over∣some, the Turks boarded the other, com∣manded by Captain 
de Lescases,
 who seeing no remedy to avoid being taken, he leaped into his Boat, and blew up his Ship; howsoever could not escape his destiny, for having his Arm broke, he became a prey and a slave to his Enemy.


The News of this Victory was celebrated with so much the more joy, by how much this person was feared and hated, and was not only a subject of rejoycing to the Turks, but also to the Christians, whose Parents and Rela∣tions this Corsaire had pillaged and enslaved; so that the Inhabitants of the 
Archipelago
 for the most part were pleased with the revenge, and promised more security and quietness to their open Coasts. With no less triumph was this News posted to the Grand Signior, who rewarded the Messenger with two thousand Dollars gratuity, and caused demonstrations of joy to be made through the whole Court; so dreadful was grown the Name of so inconside∣rable a person, in respect of the greatness of the Ottoman Empire.


But the success of this advantage did not heighten the courage of the Captain Pasha to that pitch, as to make him more bold with the Venetian Armata; for in the month of 
July
 having great Recruits of Men and Provi∣sions to land, and hearing that the Venetians lay before 
Canea,
 having fortified a Rock, called St. 
Todoro,
 at the mouth of that Port, he re∣solved for 
Retimo;
 but pursuits, or intelli∣gence of the Enemies being in the way, or his own fears still prevented him, until at length he was forced to 
Gira-Petra,
 a small and ob∣scure place, far distant from the City of 
Candia,
 and the way thither by land rocky, and al∣most unpassable for Beasts of Burden; howso∣ever, the Men and Ammunition were there landed with that haste and expedition, that in less than thirty hours time the Captain Pasha was again upon his return for 
Scio,
 leaving the Souldiery, and the Ammunition he had dis∣barked to find a passage through the Rocks and Mountains: At which the Vizier was so displeased, that he sent the Captain Pasha this Message, That the next time he should for∣bear to bring farther supplies, until he could find a more commodious Port wherein to land them.


In this manner the Marine Affairs passed this year at Sea, the Turkish Fleet having, besides other succours, transported 
Ibrahim
 Pasha of 
Damascus
 with eight hundred Spahees unto 
Candia,
 whom we mentioned formerly to have been Pasha of Grand 
Cairo,
 and married to the Grand Signior's Sister; and being one with whom I had a former acquaintance, and who was a great friend to the English Nation, I made him a visit as he passed through 
Smyrna.


Whilst these matters were transacting at Sea, on the 
7th
 of 
January
 arrived the new Provedi∣tor General 
Bernardo Nani,
 and Sergeant Ge∣neral 
Muteo Matei
 with five hundred Foot, sent by the Pope, who gave Licence for destruction of some Monasteries, whose Orders were judged less necessary in the Venetian State, that their Revenue might be applied to the service of this War; after Arrival of which succours, a ge∣neral Muster was made of the whole Garrison, and the number thereof reckoned to amount unto eight thousand fighting Men; though soon afterwards continual action and exploits of War decimated the number, and many of the brave Commanders being taken off, every tenth man perished, and rendred the place in a condition which required continual supplies.


For many and various were the attempts and actions performed on both sides under the Walls of 
Candia;
 and first the Turks began to make appear a Battery which they had raised on the side of the 
Lazaretto,
 which so offended tho Port, that there was no harbour or access for Vessels. On the contrary to which, by the Fort of St. 
Andrea
 another Battery was raised, which offended 
Tramata
 very much, which was another small harbour, capable only to receive Boats or Barks; the passage to which was so annoyed now by the Enemies Cannon, that no Vessel could go in or out, unless in the Night, and that too with some difficulty and danger.


The Turks gaining advantage on the side of St. 
Andrea,
 applied their whole strength and diligence to that part; and one dark Night passing undiscovered along the Seas, they silent∣ly fixed a Cord to the Palisade of St. 
Andrea,
 and with an Engine strained it so violently, that they tore away several of the main Stakes of the Work without being perceived by the Centinels, who paid for that neglect with the price of their lives; upon which success they continued to advance their lines on that side, which Marquess 
Villa
 perceiving, resolved to hinder by some valiant sallies. And first two hundred brave men selected out of several Re∣giments,

conducted by Sergeant Major 
Motta,
 issued out from 
Panigra,
 and taking their way along the Sea, bravely mixed with the Turks, and put them to flight;
 and though the Alarm thereof brought a Concourse of Turks from all parts of the Camp, yet the Christians stood so stoutly to it, that they struck a terror to their Enemies, and once forced them to a Re∣treat within their Trenches; and at length, after they had overthrown certain Redoubts and Traverses, they gave back with good or∣der, returning with Victory and Glory; which bravery the Captain General-acknowledged to all, and encouraged in the common Souldiery with a Present of fifty Zechins. This success gave the besieged opportunity to finish their Platforms which they had raised on the side of the Ditch adjoining to the Bulwark of St. 
Andrea,
 on which they planted two pieces of Cannon which carried fifty pound Bullet a piece; which much disturbed the Enemies Traverses: Howsoever, the Turks with indefatigable pains, and invincible patience battered the little Tower of 
Priuli,
 the Curtain, and Revelin of St. 
Andrea,
 and employed all their power and at∣tention to fill the Ditch with Faggots, Earth and other Rubbish.


On the 
29th
 of 
February,
 after the Christians had first made a Breach on the Enemies Re∣doubt, which confronted the Revelin of St. 
Andrea,
 and sprang five Mines one after the other, a second Sally was made by a conside∣rable Body of the besieged, consisting of two hundred French and Savoyards, three hundred Italians, two hundred Germans, and a hun∣dred and twenty horsemen,
 who issued forth with that Gallantry, that driving the Turks under Covert, advanced far within their Works, with which Demonstration of honour the Cap∣tain-General being satisfied, they made the smoke which was a Signal for their Retreat; so that returning victorious without much loss, that day was remarkable, and numbred amongst the other days which were esteemed successful and fortunate in that Siege.


Howsoever, the Turks with admirable pa∣tience and assiduity crept forward by their Traverses, and help of their great shot on the Bastion of St. 
Andrea,
 which whilst 
Augustine Rostayne,
 Adjutant of Marquess 
Villa,
 consi∣dered, he was taken off by a Cannon Bullet, and yet the Turks could not advance so fast, but that the Engineer 
Maupassan
 gave some re∣tardment to their progress by firing a Mine, which overthrew two of their Redoubts, and afforded them new work to repair them and the adjoining Traverses.


This was the present state of the miserable 
Candia,
 when the Duke of 
Savoy
 recalled his Subject Marquess 
Villa
 from his honourable employment;
 and a Ship, called 
Alexander
 the Great, by appointment of the Venetian Senate arrived at 
Standia
 to transport him and his Family to 
Venice;
 so that on the 22/12 of 
April,
 accompanied to 
Tramata
 by all the principal Officers of the Garrison, he embarked in or∣der to his Voyage, whose place was about two Months after supplied by the Marquess St. 
Andrea Monthrun,
 a Nobleman of 
France,
 with whom the Venetian Ambassadour at 
Paris,
 by order of that Republick, had prevailed to take upon him the defence and protection of that deplorable City, reduced now almost to its ulti∣
 Crisis.


I cannot adventure to assign the reasons that might induce the Duke of 
Savoy
 to recal the worthy Governour from this glorious action. Some say, that those who were emulous of his glory procured his revocation; Others, that the Marquess himself desired it;
 and that finding the Forces of the Town to decline, and the Turks to encroach and penetrate daily into the innermost parts of strength, he was desirous, after so long a Siege, to return with untainted glory; or perhaps weary of a Siege so tedious and perilous, he might desire to retire, having performed sufficient already in his own person, and enough to make all Christendom his Debtors and Admirers. So that I cannot but reproach those tongues and pens, which in report and writings attribute the cause of Mar∣quess 
Villa
's retirement to certain just occasions of discontent given him by the Captain Gene∣ral 
Francesco Morosini,
 who, envious of his Fame and actions, and unwilling to have a conshater with him in his honours, did usually thwart his Counsels and Proposals; and more particularly contemned a Redoubt which Mar∣quess 
Villa
 had built, and of which he had a singular esteem. Yet that 
Morosini
 might evi∣dence the unsufficiency thereof, 'tis reported that he wrote a Letter to the Vizier, to assault that Redoubt; for if he did, he promised to afford him opportunity to take it, by with∣drawing all Forces from thence; which Letter it is said, was betrayed to Marquess 
Villa,
 and brought to his hands, which he with great pru∣dence and moderation dissembled until the hour of his departure, and then produced it to the astonishment and shame of 
Morosini.
 To this particular I give the less belief, be∣cause I find it wrote in a Journal of this Seige by a person who was a great Favourer of the French, and willing to share the intire glory to that Nation, and the miscarriages to the Italian. Whatsoever might be the motive to Marquess 
Villa
 to perswade his return, is un∣certain; howsoever, it is reported, that being arrived at 
Zant
 in his way to 
Venice;
 and there meeting a strong Convoy bound for 
Candia,
 with recruits of Men, and plenty of provisions, he conceived new thoughts of the greatness of the Republick; and beholding also with what vigour and vigilance they attended to the con∣servation of that place, he began to testifie some remorse and dissatisfaction for having abandoned a Charge which rendred his Fame great through the World; and the continua∣tion of which labours being crowned with that success which his courage and conduct merited, might have brought a Blessing to all Christen∣dom, and perpetuated his honour and glory to all posterity. The Marquess being arrived at 
Venice
 was received with the usual Cere∣monies and Honours from the Publick, and being Introduced, after private Audiences, into the Colledge, he spake in this man∣ner.




IF the thanks which I render to your Sereni∣ty,
 and to your Excellencies could equal the greatness of those favours which I have received from you, it would have been but an ordinary glory to you not to have infinitely surpassed the bounds of my acknowledg∣ments, as you have infinitely outdone the ut∣most

of my Deserts; Nor could this August Senate have been exalted to the most elevated point of Soveragin Power, had I been able to render Services worthy of that generosity which composed it. For as the affection of the Creatures towards God, makes excuses for their wants and infirmities, so having a zealous desire to contribute to the glories of this most Serene Republick, not only my en∣deavours, my labours, and my bloud, but also my life, and my whole being; I beseech you to accept thereof as an attonement for the weakness of my abilities. This, my Lords, is that desire which I have ever demonstra∣ted in all the wearisome performances of my Charge under the generous Conduct of the Captain General of your Armes, whose Va∣lour I have endeavoured to second and imitate. This is that Desire which would have enter∣tained me in the service of this most Serene Republick to the ultimate period of my life, if the Command of my Prince, concurring with the Assent of your Serenity, had not en∣joyned my return. I confess, that I should feel in my self an inward Consolation, could I assist at the triumph of 
Candia,
 which I hope in a short time to see victorious over all her Enemies; until when, my Lords, the honour which you have been pleased to do me hitherto, cannot but be relished by me as a Comfort of my life. And what greater Glory can I imagine to my self, than to have served a Republick, which may be called the most perfect work of the hand of God, which being founded like the Firmament upon the Waters, communicates happy Tranquillity through all the World? I am able now to boast, That I have seen a City which of it self alone is able to resist the Puissance of all 
Asia,
 and that I have proved and tryed the valorous oppositi∣on which it made against a formidable Ene∣my. I can (I say) glory that I have awaken∣ed in the hearts of your Souldiery, their an∣cient Valour, and that I have sprinkled your Lawrels with my own Bloud; and it is but just that I should distil it to the last drop for the service of this most Serene Re∣publick, which after so many Ages resigns it self up a Sacrifice for all Christendom. It is by your Arms (my Lords) and by your immoveable Constancy, that the City of 
Can∣dia,
 which in former Days was esteemed the weakest of all the Fortresses of 
Greece,
 is become at present the most famous Theatre of War. I dare not only hope, that the con∣clusion thereof will be happy, so long as your Serenity watchfully attends to the conserva∣tion of that place, but that also this August Senate will extend their Conquests into the most remote parts of all the East. This would be, most Serene Prince, and most Ex∣cellent Lords, the consummation of all my de∣sires, and also that I might finish my days in the Service of this most Serene Republick, towards which I shall for ever conserve a most passionate zeal and an immortal ac∣knowledgment.




The Senate, that they might testifie the esteem they entertained of the person of Marquess 
Villa,
 presented him with a Bason of Gold valued at six thousand Ducats, together with a Patent recounting at large the many famous Exploits which he had performed in their Ser∣vice, which they expressed with a stile so ge∣nerous and obliging, as may serve for a Record to transmit the Fame of his Merits to all Posterity.


Marquess 
Villa
 being departed from 
Candia,
 the Captain-General recalled all his Forces from divers parts of the 
Archipelago,
 which he had sent thither with the Soldiers wounded in the last Battle; and being returned, they brought with them great numbers of Pioniers and Work∣men to labour in the Fortifications and Mines: at the same time also the Captain-Pasha arrived at 
Canea,
 bringing two thousand Janisaries with him.


The Marquess St. 
Andrea Monthrun,
 a Gen∣tleman of the French Nation, was transported to 
Candia
 by the General Proveditor 
Cornaro,
 where being entred into the Charge and Office of Marquess 
Villa,
 wanted nothing of the vi∣gilance and circumspection of his Predecessour. And therefore in the first place having visited all the Forts, Out-works, and Retrenchments of the Town, ordered what was necessary for repair of the breaches, and amended what was deficient in the most distressed Fortifications. And though the Turks fired a Mine the 
22th
 of 
August
 at the point of the Fort St. 
Andrea,
 which made a most dangerous breach; yet it was so valiantly defended, and so speedily repair∣ed, that the Enemy gained little or no advan∣tage, and all by the extraordinary diligence of this Marquess St. 
Andrea,
 who passed whole months without uncloathing himself; and as his nights were without sleep, so his days con∣sumed without repose, applying himself perso∣nally to all places where was most of danger, es∣pecially at the Fort of St. 
Andrea,
 where he took up his constant Quarters.


The Turksnow daily pressing the Town more nearly than before, Skirmishes and Sallies were more frequent and more bloody; so that a∣bout this time the Proveditor General 
Bernardo Nani
 applying himself with all earnestness in the performance of his Charge, was slain by a Musket-shot in his head; his death was much lamented by all, being a Gentleman who was born (as may be said) in the Fleet, having had his Education there, and passed his youth in Wars and dangers for the safety and honour of his Country. 
Girolamo Bataglia
 was elected by the Republick to succeed him in the Office, whose death was also seconded by that of 
Fran∣cesco Bataglia,
 Brother of the Duke of 
Can∣dia,
 being shot in the breast with a Musket-bul∣let; and though he was sent thither to admini∣ster Justice to the People, yet his zeal and cou∣rage carrying him to Martial Acts beyond his duty, made a grave for him amongst the other Heroes and Worthies of that place.


The Turk, approaching daily nearer with their Works, infested very much the passage of Vessels to the Town, and shot so directly into the Port, that no Ship, Galley, or Bark could remain in any security from their Cannon; to remedy which, a small Redoubt was raised at 
Tramata,
 which being well and strongly fortified

served for a small Port, under the shelter of which the lesser Vessels found some protection, and was of great relief to the distressed City. About this time the Popes Gallies with those of 
Malta
 arrived, commanded by 
Fra. Vincenzo Rospigliosi,
 the Popes Nephew, who having not brought a greater number of people than what served to man their Gallies, they were not able to spare many for defence of the Town.


The long continuance of this Siege, and the same thereof noised through the whole World, moved the heroick and gallant Spirits of our Age, to descend into this 
Campus Martius,
 this Field of War, and give proofs of their Prowess and Valour in defence of the Christan Cause; some being moved by a principle of vain-glory, proceeding from the briskness of a youthful and aery Spirit, and others from the sense of De∣votion and fervour towards Religion: amongst which none were more forward than some Gen∣tleman of the French Nation, as namely Mon∣sieur 
La Fueillade, aliàs
 Duke of 
Roanez,
 with the Count St. 
Paul,
 a young Cavalier; to for∣ward which design, taking first the Licence and Benediction of their King, they appointed their Rendezvous at 
Tolon,
 where they listed two hundred Gentleman, Cadets or younger Brothers, who went in quest of Honour, and not of Pay, with four hundred ordinary Soul∣diers who expected their maintenance from the bounty of their Leaders. The chief of whom was Monsieur 
La Fueillade,
 and his Lieutenant the Chevalier 
De Tresmes.


Their whole Body was divided into four Bridgades.




The first commanded by Count St. 
Paul.


The second by the Duke 
De Carderousse.


The third by the Count 
De Villa Maur.


And the fourth by the Duke 
De Cheateau Tiery.




When these Persons of Honour and Courage arrived at 
Candia,
 they found the City hardly beset, and reduced to a strait and difficult con∣dition; for the Turks were advanced so near to the Fort of St. 
Andrea,
 that the Souldiers with∣in and without could cross their Muskets, and reach Tobaco one to the other: howsoever this breach was so well repaired with a good Palis∣sado fortified with several Bonnets, and a double Retrenchment on the Bastion, it self, and a third Retrenchment of squared stone with∣al, that the courage of the Besieged being no∣thing abated by the many and furious assaults of the Enemy, the Town still remained in a de∣fensible posture, and still capable with good Suc∣cours and Supplies to yield matter of imploy∣ment for several years to the Ottoman Forces. These worthy Champions, as I said, being arri∣ved, moved with the sense of Religion, and desire of glory to themselves, challenged the priviledge of mounting the Guard of St. 
Andrea;
 but that being already prepossessed by the Knights of 
Malta
 and other Officers of the place, was refused to them. Howsoever the Captain-General 
Morosini
 was pleased to gratifie them with the Guard of a small Chapel over that Bastion on the right hand of the breach, a place of no less danger, and there∣fore of no less honour than the other; with which the Cavaliers being satisfied, Mon∣sieur St. 
Paul
 mounted the Guard one day at six a clock in the morning, and continued there until the same hour of the day following; during which time he lost his Major 
Dupre
 and Monsieur 
De Marenval,
 the latter of which had his brains knocked out with so violent a blow of a great shot, that some pieces of his skull dangerously wounded the Sieurs 
De Chamilly
 and 
De Lare,
 who were near to him: and more maliciously did the Turks ply the stations of these new-come Guests than any others, throw∣ing Bomboes, Granadoes, Stink-pots, and other sorts of artificial Fire without cessation into their Quarters, notwithstanding which, this young Prince and Monsieur 
La Fueillade
 exposed them∣selves like common Souldiers, animating their men more with their example than their words.


And now by this time by so many Works and removals of Earth, by so many Traverses and Mines under ground, and throwing up the caverns and bowels of the Earth into the Air, the soil became so brittle, crumbling, and as it were sandy, and like ashes, that it seemed not capable longer enduring of the Pick-ax or the Shovel, and was so porous, that the light of some Mines glimmering into the others Traver∣ses, easily discovered each others Mines, where∣by it became equally a trade and custom to steal Powder.
 Howsoever the Venetians so closely worked with those Props and Arts, that they formed a considerable Mine, which on the first of 
December
 they sprang with so much success, that they wholly overthrew a Battery of the Turks directed against St. 
Andrea,
 and buried all their Cannon.


But these French Gallants intended not from the first of their design to make this War their Trade, or the Town of 
Candia
 their place of habitation, but as Passengers or Pilgrims, whose souls are active, and hate idleness, to give the World some proofs of their Valour, and so a∣way: wherefore 
La Fueillade
 their General pressed 
Morosini
 to give leave, that he and his Fellow-Souldiers might make a Sally, and en∣ter into the Enemies Trenches, so as to yield a divertisement to those on the Walls, and per∣form that Action and Enterprise for which they had designed and undertaken this Voyage: of which some of them were so impatient, that they would not expect Orders for their Sally, as the Chevalier 
De Tresmes,
 who alone entred into the Enemies Works, and returned with his Sword all bloody; at which 
La Fueillade
 his Commander was so incensed, that he reproved him with this short reprehension, 
I would as gladly see a Butcher as you.
 Others by this ex∣ample scarce refrained from the like; amongst which Monsieur 
De Ville Franche
 drew a Turk by force from his Trench, and brought him to the foot of the Bastion; but there he was forced to quit his Prize, for being shot in the Leg with a Pistol-bullet, soon after dyed of the wound: By these examples the Commanders seeing it impossible to repress or abate the met∣tle of these vigorous Spirits, their bridle was taken off, and licence given to make their ex∣cursion; so that all things being ordered and contrived for a Sally, before break of day in the morning they silently issued forth,
 and leap∣ing into the Enemies Quarters, valiantly ming∣led with them, cutting and hewing down all before them; their Banner was a Crucifix car∣ried in the Front by Father 
Paul
 a Capuchin Fryer, who little regarding those who followed him, proceeded with his Ensign as unconcerned, as if he had been in Procession; which so ani∣mated

the Souldiery, that like men conducted by miracle, they broke through the gross Bo∣dy of the Enemies Force: and so violent they were in their combate, and so intent to their business, that they neither observed the multi∣tudes of the Enemy which came upon them, nor the signal of their Commander for a Re∣treat; until at length discovering their danger, they made speed with some disorder to return, having lost an hundred and twenty Gentlemen in this rencounter, whose heads being cut off (as the custom of the Turks is) were pitched up∣on the Pikes end, and ranked before the door of the Viziers Tent, amongst which the head of the Marquess 
Doradour
 did beyond all the others draw the eyes of the Turks, who admired the clearness of his complexion, and fairness of the hair; which being breaded in tresses for the more convenience in fighting, made death it self beautiful, and was at the same time both his Enemies glory and their compassion. The French having thus evaporated their fury with this Phlebotomy, there not remaining above two hundred and thirty after this Sally of all those six hundred brought into 
Candia,
 Mon∣sieur 
La Fueillade
 with his reliques departed: at which time the whole strength of the Town con∣sisted of about seven thousand stranger Souldi∣ers, four thousand Inhabitants, and two thou∣sand Savoyards, which was too weak a Garrison to resist so potent an Enemy, so formally and strongly incamped, unless supplied with new Re∣cruits. Wherefore the Dukes of 
Brunswick
 and 
Lunenburg
 mindful of their Christian Brethren in this distressed Siege, contributed three Regi∣ments towards their relief,
 consisting in all of three thousand three hundred men. The first under Count 
Waldeck;
 the second under 
Molle∣son,
 and the third under Count 
Radesfeld.
 They made their Muster first at 
Verona,
 and imbarking at 
Venice
 the 
28th
 of 
March,
 on the 
12th
 of 
May
 1669. they arrived at 
Candia.
 These valiant Souldiers desiring to ease the long besieged Companies, demanded the Guards of 
Sabionera
 and St. 
Andrea;
 which being by this time become hot and dangerous stations, were not disputed with that heat of honour as for∣merly, but were easily yielded to the fresh and new-come Souldiery. Many now and various were the assaults which the Enemy made up∣on the Town, hoping to carry it by dint of Sword; but the Christians unweariedly main∣tained their valour and courage, and par∣ticularly the Lunenburghers, whose gallantry deserved its due praise and reward. Their General Count 
Waldeck
 whilst he undauntedly incouraged his men,
 and openly exposed him∣self on the Works, received a mortal wound, of which soon afterwards he dyed; but be∣fore he expired, he assembled together his Fellow Souldiers, and incouraged them in the Holy cause they were come to maintain, giving them as a Farwel-Sermon, instructions, and perswasive arguments to a godly life, and having confessed his owns sins in the presence of them all, he resigned his spirit into the hands of his Creator, leaving not only his own Forces, but the whole Town disconsolate for the loss of so able a Commander.


And now the time of year approaching, where∣in the Town expected its ultimate Relief, and the Union of all the Princes of Christendom for raising the Siege, which had continued for the space now of about two years; the valiant Chri∣stians full of hopes, daily animated each other, casting their eyes to Sea-ward, promised a re∣ward to the first Descryer of the long desired Fleet. The Turks also being advised of the expected Succours, resolved if possible to per∣form the business designed before their arrival; and thereupon made one of the greatest assaults that ever was yet given to the Town, in which though the Christians behaved themselves with all valour imaginable, yet the Turks still gain∣ed farther footing and advantage. And now it fared with the Town after every storm, as it doth with a physical body after every accession of a Feaver, which though it intermits for some time, yet it leaves the Patient always more weak and debilitated than before. Wherefore the Christians increasing in care and diligence, the Captain-General disarmed several of his Gallies to supply the Town with what Force he could possibly contribute, and the Engineers imployed their brains for destruction of the Enemy, so that they fell again to their Mines, and sprang one which took good effect; soon after they sprang seven others, after which four more near the Revelin of St. 
Spirito,
 which blew up many Turks, ruined their Lodgings, and buried one of their Batteries: these also were followed by another Mine of an hundred and sixty Sacks of Powder, which took its way between St. 
Andrea
 and the Revelin of St. 
Spi∣rito
 with extraordinary execution and violence, throwing up that vast quantity of Earth and Timber, that it not only overwhelmed the Enemy in the neighbouring Trenches, but over∣threw a Battery of three Pieces of Cannon, which the Turks had raised on the Revelin of St. 
Andrea:
 yet all this served to increase the heat and fury of the Enemy rather than abate it; for they imagining this to be the ultimate force and the last blast of the expiring Fortress, plyed their assaults with the more fury and madness, pressing forward the crowds of the Souldiery collected lately in Villages, and the Janisaries newly created taken from the Plough to be matter and fuel for the Christians Powder.


Winter now approaching, and the Vizier resolving to quarter a second year under the Walls of 
Candia,
 began to provide against the weather, and resolved to lye still until the Spring should renew the time for action, but never intermitted his imployment of plying con∣stantly his Batteries, and shooting Bomboes into the Town. In the mean time the Besieg∣ed being animated by their new additional Forces, whose spirits also were high, and de∣sirous of action; the Commanders thought it not policy to suppress the heat and mettle of their courage at the beginning, but gave way to the Souldiers proposition of a Sally, which was effected in the month of 
December
 with no bad success.
 For the Christians surprising the Turks unawares, little dreaming of any such design, fell in amongst them on the side of 
Sa∣bionera,
 where they took a Battery, dismount∣ed and spiked the Cannon, with the loss of the Duke of 
Candia,
 being shot in the breast with a Musket-bullet; of the Turks near three thousand were killed, amongst whom was 
Benglee
 the 
Sampsongibashee
 or Major General of the Janisaries, and 
Katirgi Oglé
 Pasha of 
Canea,
 whom we have already mentioned, and so returned with Triumph into the Town. This 
Katirgi Oglé
 which signifies the Son of a

Mulatier, was formerly a common Thief, who robbed on certain Mountains near 
Antioch
 in 
Pisidia,
 called 
Ock-shaher,
 which now have their names from him:
 and being a couragi∣ous man and fortunate, drew a considerable number of Miscreants from all parts to follow him in his Enterprifes. His profession was not to rob Caravans or Merchants travelling in their honest imployment; but Knight-Errant-like pretended to revenge the injuries and abuses of his Country by the unjust and corrupt Mini∣sters, whom for robbing and oppressing the people, he esteemed it Justice and Vertue to deprive of their ill gotten Wealth. In which Trade he gained such Riches and Power, that at length he came to 
Scutari,
 from whence acquainting the Grand Signior of the abuses of his Officers, and his own course of living was upon promises of duty and submission re∣ceived into Grace and Favour, and not only obtained pardon, but preferment. For the Grand Signior discovering in him a spirit of much resolution and bravery sent him unto 
Candia,
 and conferred on him the Pasha, luck of 
Canea,
 in which on all occa∣sions he comported himself with much bravery, dying at last before the Walls of 
Candia.


Various were the Sallies and Conflicts the Christians made upon the Turks towards the end of this Year; one of which, after that foregoing, was made by Marquess 
Villa,
 who with a thousand two hundred men fell in upon the Turks Trenches, where he had so good success, that he brought back with him a hundred Turks heads, which he planted on the Walls.


The Turks also as they had made strong Assaults, and gained on the Fort of St. 
Andrea
 to the East, so they undauntedly pressed for∣wards on the Bastion of 
Sabionera
 to the West, with a Force of ten thousand men, having the advantage of three Batteries, each consisting of ten pieces of Ordnance.
 The next Night the Turks gave a general Assault with all their Forces to the Bastions of 
Panigra, Sabionera,
 and St. 
Andrea,
 and the great Fort St. 
Deme∣trius;
 but the Besieged were armed with all caution and vigilance against surprise, and with that Conduct and Valour, that they gave the Enemy three Gallant Repulses with much slaughter and confusion; but yet this succss was diminished by the loss of the Count 
de Mare,
 an experienced Venetian Souldier, who, after proofs of an invincible Valour, lost his life in defence of the Christian Cause. But not long after the Marquess 
Cornaro,
 and the Baron 
Spar
 arriving with a Recruit of three thousand Men, as if they intended to requite the Turks last Assaults, made so resolute and so successful a Sally, that they left above two thousand In∣fidels dead upon the place, with a considerable number of their Officers.




The State of Affairs in the Turkish Court, and other Parts of the Empire during the War in 
CANDIA.


BUT whilst we are in relation of the Wars abroad, we must not forget the proceedings of Affairs at home. The Grand Signior now weary of his repose and aboad in his Seraglio at 
Adrianople,
 and impatient of the delays in his Affairs at 
Candia,
 judged it as well agreeable to the pre∣sent convenience of his Empire, as to his own humour, to seat himself in some place of nearer distance from 
Candia,
 than his present ab
ad; from whence by his presence and au∣thority, his Army might with better expedi∣tion be supplied with all necessaries of War and provision. After various Arguments about the choice of the place, 
Larissa
 was fixed upon, a City anciently renowned for Antiquity and Plenty,
 And that the Court might not abound with unnecessary Attendants; the Queen Mo∣ther, and 
Hasaki
 Sultana, with all the Ladies of their Retinue, were sent to 
Constantinople,
 a policy perhaps to amuse the minds of the people, and afford them an occasion of dis∣course, and hopes that the Grand Signior him∣self might shortly follow: But before the de∣parture of this Female Court,
 the disposal of the Grand Signior's Brothers was moved and questioned by the Janisaries, who having long since been jealous and doubtful of their safety, did demand, that the protection and custody of them should be committed to the Queen Mother; who willingly received the Charge, and gave security by Hoget to defend and pre∣serve them from all private Treachery, or publick Attempts with the same tenderness and care as she should her own life, or the life of her Son. In this manner these Princes and Princesses departing, made a solemn and mag∣nificent entrance into 
Constantinople.
 The chief of the Cavalcade was 
Kul-ogli,
 the Grand Signiors Mosayp, or Favourite, attended with a hundred and fifty Pages in Coats of Male, and Satten Vests; in one Coach was the 
Valedè
 Sultana, or the Queen Mother, in the next was the 
Hasaki
 Sultana, or the Grand Signior's Queen, in the third were the Bro∣thers, in the fourth was the young Prince, or the Grand Signior's Son, after came the Coaches of more ordinary Ladies attended with about a hundred and fifty black Eunuchs, in Vests of white Satten.


The Grand Signior also preparing for his journey to 
Larissa,
 pitched his Tents without the City; from whence one day viewing round the Camp from a Jardac, or Tent, elevated above the rest, he espied with a Prospective Glass a certain person taking Tobacco in his Tent, whilst a Slave rubbed his Legs: His At∣tendants not able or willing upon his Demands to inform him who he was,
 he sent an Officer to make Enquiry, who returned with Answer, that it was 
Ibrihim
 Aga, the Kahya or Steward to the Chimacam, and in effect Chimacam

himself, having a great share in the mannage∣ment of Affairs; but the smoke had like to have smothered him and all his Fortunes; for this Grand Signior, who is as great an Enemy to it as King 
James
 was, or Sultan 
Morat,
 would have made him the Sacrifice to that In∣cense, had not those present interceded for him; who with the Chimacam's own media∣tion, and the cost of fifty Purses, or five and twenty thousand Dollars, ransomed his Life.


The Sultan being arrived at 
Larissa,
 News came of the near approach of the Excellentissi∣mo 
Alvise de Molino,
 Ambassador from the Venetian Republick, with propositions of peace. But the Turks before they would admit the Embassy, or the person which brought it, to a nearer approach than a Days Journey from the Court, would be resolved first whether he brought with him the Keys of 
Candia;
 To which it was replied by the Interpreter, That he was not able to give them satisfaction in that particular, being but a mean and ordinary servant, to whom the Secrets of State, 
nd resolutions of great men were not committed; his Office being only to render faithfully the words and sence of his Masters, and not to enter into the private thoughts and Cabinet of their Counsels. To which the Chimacam proudly and barbarously made answer, Go tell thy Master, that unless he brings the Keys of 
Candia,
 thy head shall pay for it. And that he presume not in person to approach nearer unto this Court. So the Ambassadour re∣mained at a distance for some weeks, and at length was transferred over to the Vizier at 
Candia;
 who being more ready to hearken to propositions, in hopes by some overture or other to hook in 
Candia,
 gave an easie Audi∣ence to the Ambassador, and controverted several Articles and Propositions with all free∣dom and patience. So that on the Venetians part, the Surrender of 
Suda
 was offered, and a Sum of mony, in compensation of the War. The Vizier on the other side would be conten∣ted with nothing less than the Surrender of 
Candia;
 and in lieu thereof to grant a Licence to rebuild 
Paleo-Castro,
 an ancient Fortress. But the Fortress it self of 
Candia
 being the prize and aim of both, nothing could be con∣cluded without that; so that, the Ambassador in fine, declared plainly, That the City of 
Candia
 was maintained and defended by the Arms of Foreign Princes, without whose con∣sent it could not be resigned; all the rest of the Island should be the reward of their bloud and labour, only 
Candia
 was capable of no Conditions, but what were imposed on it by force of Arms.


The Vizier, whose honour could be salved, and the glory of the Ottoman Empire main∣tained, at no other rate than the subjection of 
Candia,
 would hearken to no other terms or proposals; so that the Treaty broke off, and the Ambassadour returned to 
Canea,
 there to remain until farther Overtures of an Accomo∣dation should present.


It was now towards the depth of Winter when three men of War and a Fire-Ship,
 sent by the most Christian King, steered up the Hellespont with words and boastings as full of Wind as their Sails; and being arrived at 
Con∣stantinople,
 vaunting of their Force, as if suffi∣cient to subdue the Turkish Dominions, they uttered certain rumors, that they were come to revenge the late affront offered to their Mer∣chants, to cause that mony to be repaid, which in late and frequent Avanias had been extorted from their Nation; and to renew their Capi∣tulations with more advantageous terms. As namely, That their Customs from 5 b
 re∣duced to 3 
per Cent.
 as the English, Dutch, and Genoeses pay. That their King be treated by the Sultan with the equal Presents and Gifts, according to the Custom used with the Empe∣ror; and that at all times interchangeably Am∣bassadors be sent to reside in each others Do∣minions; with other propositions which seem∣ed as extravagant to the Turks, as they ap∣peared to others vain, and to have no founda∣tion but in the report of the Vulgar.


But that which was reported by the most ju∣dicious concerning these Ships, was, That his most Christian Majesty being made to understand perfectly the affronts put on his Nation by the Turks; and not fully satisfied (as is supposed) with the respect they had shown to his Ambassa∣dor at 
Constantinople,
 made it the chief Design of his Ships to withdraw him from thence, sup∣posing it a less diminution to his honour, to have the person of his Agent subjected to af∣fronts, than of his Ambassador, to which (it was imagined) he might be obnoxious, in con∣sideration of those great supplies, which were in the following year designed for 
Candia.
 In what manner soever the Turks deemed of this appearance of Men of War to hector and brave them at their Imperial City, they did yet for the present cunningly dissemble the matter, giving the 
French
 fair Words, and what plenty of Provisions their oc∣casions did require. In what manner this Affair was transacted, I shall not adventure to relate, nor is it well or certainly known; Yet not long after came Orders for the Ambassa∣dor to repair to the Court at 
Larissa;
 and that until the Grand Signior's pleasure was far∣ther known, the Ships of War were to be detained. The Commander in chief, called Monsieur 
d' Almeras,
 was not a little troubled to have his Ships thus embargued, and labour∣ing in his thoughts between the time limited in his Instructions by his Master and the restraint by the Turks, he once bravely resolved to hazard his passage through the Castles, but protracting the execution thereof from day to day, even until the end of 
April;
 at length Licence came for their departure, and Orders to repair unto 
Vola,
 near 
Larissa,
 there to take an Ambassador, or Agent, or Envoyé from the Sultan to their King. For it seems, the Vizier had intimated to the Grand Signior, That it was not time to disgust the French King, and to bring him under the notion of a declared and publick Enemy, or at least to irri∣tate him so far as might provoke him to send greater Forces, than perhaps he designed the next year, for 
Candia:
 and that he ought to comply with the present conjuncture, and salve that up for a time, which he might afterwards open at his pleasure.
 This counsel seeming reasonable to the Grand Signior, and agreeable to the present necessity, he ordered (as I was credibly informed) a thousand Dollars only to adorn his Ambassador; so pitifully do the Turks esteem of Christian Princes, and so highly do they value themselves, as if a Mes∣sage from them would be reverenced in Christendom as a favour, though brought by a Porter or a Slave. But the French Ambassa∣dor

considering this allowance too mean a pro∣vision for a person qualified to appear before his Master, did (as it is said) out of his own Purse and generous Soul contribute a far greater Sum, with two Vests of Sables towards his better Equipage. In this manner the Sultan dissembling an appearance of good correspondence with his Christian Majesty, dispatched away his Envoyé on the Ships of War, being a Person in quality of a 
Mutafaraca,
 one of the same degree with a Chaous, to expostulate with the King concerning several Particulars, and espe∣cially his Reasons for sending for his Ambassa∣dor, without sending another according to ancient custom to supply his Office, wondering much at this sudden alteration of friendship, without any cause given on the Ottoman side: and with these smooth and fair words the Turks imagined they might charm the Spirit of the King for a while, and suspend his Succours from 
Candia,
 until at last it were beyond his power and wisdom to relieve. In the mean time the Ambassador from the most Christian King was detained as an Hostage for the other, of whose return we shall speak in its due place.


Towards the end of this year Sir 
Daniel Harvey
 Lord Ambassador from His Majesty of Great 
Britain
 arrived at 
Constantinople,
 
 suc∣ceeding in the place of the Earl of 
Winchelsea,
 who could not obtain Audience with the G. Signior until the end of the following year, by reason of the Sultans unsetled abode and far distance; who at length coming to 
Salonica,
 summoned the Ambassador thither, and there conferred on him the usual Ceremonies and Honours due to the Ambassador at first Re∣ception.


Candia
 was now hardly assailed in four places,
 
viz.
 on the side of 
Betlem, Panigra,
 St. 
Andrea,
 and 
Sabionera.
 These places be∣ing twice stormed, in which the Turks lost thirty thousand men, so many Mines and For∣nelli were fired, that the ground lay open like a vast abyss, with strange heaps of confused and undigested Earth, and hindred the Enemy from approaching to the Wall; but 
Sabionera
 and St. 
Andrea
 being esteemed the most weak, because they were not fortified by any consi∣derable Out-works, or compassed with any depth of Ditch, were pressed and forced upon by the Turk with more violence than any parts of the City. The Enemy having by their great number of Pioniers elevated the confused Earth, they formed some Batteries, fortifying them and sheltering their people with Sacks of Wool, and a Labyrinth (as we may say) of Redoubts, they advanced foot by foot upon the Revelin of St. 
Andrea,
 being destitute of all Mines to stop their proceedings; and having at length blown up the Revelin, and with fire, and earth having taken the Out-work, they penetrated into the Ditch (which was not deep) with four Traverses, and came now to the very foot of the wall of the Bul∣wark, fortified with eighteen pieces of Cannon, six of which carrying fifty pound Bullet shot into the Ditch, eight flanked that side which was opposite to 
Panigra,
 and four on that part towards the Revelin of St. 
Spirito,
 notwith∣standing which they stormed the Walls in nine places. And beginning to make a breach by firing certain Mines, which opened a wideness of forty two paces at the point of that Bul∣wark; and continuing their breaches towards the Sea, breaking in their way the Front of the Fort 
Priulo,
 they proceeded almost to the Gate of St. 
Andrea,
 and opened forty eight paces more, in all ninety paces. Afterwards they ruined the remainder of the Wall, and that which was called the Scotch Fort to the ve∣ry Sea; so that the Christians were forced to re∣tire from their Out-works, and contract their Precincts to the Walls of the City.


To add unto the misery of this place, an unfortunate shot from the Turks Camp entred that Magazine which was near St. 
Peter;
 Church, where the artificial Fires were made; and meeting several shells of Granadoes already charged, with thirty Barrels of Powder; all took fire and blew into the air, and burned all the houses which were near thereunto. At this unlucky accident the Besieged fearing a general assault, and seeing the Turkish Horse draw into a Body near 
Sabionera,
 the whole Garrison ran to the Walls; but no farther Attempt being made, towards evening they blew up a Lodge of the Enemy, with all the people that were therein.








Anno Christi 
1669.
 Hegeira 
1080.


TOwards the end of the last Year, and at the beginning of this the Turks began to open their eyes, and find themselves de∣frauded with the grossest cheat that ever was imposed on a people who had either reason or humanity. For now three or four years had ran on, that the French, Dutch, Italians, and other Nations had introduced into all parts of the Turkish Dominions (unless in those East∣ward, as 
Aleppo,
 and farther) a sort of small Mony called by some 
Luigini,
 by others 
Ot∣tavi,
 and by the Turks 
Temins,
 worth about five pence English; which appearing pleasant and bright to the eye, and commodious for change, and common expences, so bewitched the Commonalty, that Pieces of Eight, Zai∣chins, and other merchantable Money were laid aside, as neither currant or valuable. At first about nine years past they were of good and warrantable Silver, but afterwards with time by little and little grew worse and of baser alloy: at length the people doting more and more upon them, they came coarser every day than other; and being still currantly passable, every person that was failed, and of bad reputation entred into the Trade, who knowing no bounds of honesty or of gain, composed their Mony wholly of Copper or coarser Metals, with a fair gloss and resemblance of Silver, buying therewith the Commodities of the Country; and at length amassed up all the Gold, Silver, and whatsoever came to hand was the price of their false and bastard Coin, with which they filled and abused all 
Asia:
 nor was this Money only of one Mint, but of di∣vers Stamps and Mottoes reproachful to the Turks, and it is pity they had not wit e∣nough to understand them, as namely, 
Voluit hanc Asia mercem. De procul pretiam ejus,
 and such like; which were so various, that many who had the curiosity to make a col∣lection of them, found no less than an hundred and twenty several Stamps. The Commonalty still enamoured with the brightness of their colour, and commodiousness of their change, little reflected on the ill consequence to the generality, having seldom more than to supply

their daily wants. And the Officers of the the Customs finding a benefit extraordinary to themselves upon the vast Sums of Money im∣ported, little cared how it fared with the pub∣lick. In the mean time the whole currant of Merchandise in the Levant was dispossessed of its ordinary and true chanel; for vast quantities or a glut of Turkish Goods filled all Christen∣dom, the prices low and cheap, and no profit to any Merchant dealing upon the square, or upon the old and legal way of Traffick. At 
Ligorne
 and other parts of 
Italy
 complaints were made, That the Silver and Bullion of the Country were melted down to make a composition with baser Metals for 
Turkie,
 and exchanged for decaying and perishable Commo∣dities. In short, no man seemed satisfied with the Trade, and yet the World, like their sins, which they disapprove, pursued it with all heat and violence imaginable. This Trade being thus over-laid, and vast heaps of adulterate Mony imported daily worse and worse, caused the Jews and other Merchants at first to except against some forts, and admit of others. This scruple, together with the prohibition of them two years before by the English Factory at 
Smyrna,
 obliging themselves unto the Levant Company under a considerable penalty not to receive this mony for Cloth or other Commo∣dities of the growth of 
England,
 together with the circumspection and contrivance of the English Consul, awakened first the blind minds of the Turks, who having long been infatuated with this beloved mony, began now to reject and abhor it like the false and farded countenance of a Courtisan: so that from eleven they fell to twelve, and so to thirteen and fourteen to the Lion-Dollars. In which conjuncture a Dutch Convoy arrived at 
Smyrna,
 importing vast Sums thereof; which for a Bribe to the Officers of the City, or what the Customer would ask, were permitted Licence to be landed; which overflowing in great abundance, and ra∣ther of a worse than better alloy, went decli∣ning to eighteen, and so to twenty, at which Rate for a short time they passed currant. And now at this price the Officers did what was possible to keep them up, conceiving it im∣possible, in a time of so much scarcity of all sorts of other Coins, that the Countries could subsist, or that Trade in buying or selling could proceed, if this mony should wholly lose its esteem and value: nor were the people so much the care of the Governours, though for many years they had known no other price or reward of their labours, as were the vast damages of the Sultan, in whose Coffers were considerable Sums, which were never known to have been pla∣ced unto the loss of the Exchequer; for it is a Proverb amongst the Turks, 
That the Grand Signiors Lead cannot sink.
 But that which raised most of tumult was the rigour of the Tax-gatherers, who refused to take that mony from the people for their Duties to the Grand Signior, but demanded of them Lion-Dollars, 
Sevil
 and 
Mexico
 Pieces of Eight, or the like; which they not being able to find, beat and im∣prisoned them in all places, where this question came into dispute: the people hereupon, though patient, and accustomed to violence and burden, could not yet support longer an oppression so unreasonable, but that Insurrection was made in all places where this came into dispute: and as injured patience turns to fury, at 
Prusa
 and 
Angora
 the torrent of the peoples rage was not appeased without the blood and lives of some of their Officers, alledging with good reason, That their Ministers and Governors having in∣troduced or permitted this mony amongst them, and allowed it as currant in that man∣ner, as that they had for some years known no other, nor received other for all the fruits of their labour or possessions, they ought not now to refuse to receive that which they them∣selves had made passable: which argument and reason was pressed in sundry places with that violence, that the Officers were forced to submit to the necessity of the times, and the fury of the multitude. And now this mony had wholly lost its reputation, and began to be refused generally at any rate whatsoever; so that though the Government thought fit to license them at thirty to the Dollar; yet the people prosecuting the abasement of it with a hate and disaffection equal to their former desires, refused generally and absolutely to accept them in payment. Wherefore the Sultan perceiving that the power of his Officers was not sufficient to render this mony longer passable at any rate, at length he commanded, that every one should bring in his mony of these sorts into the Mint where it should be melted down, and the Silver it produced should be delivered to the Proprietor. At which Summons several Great men voluntari∣ly brought in their mony, others had it seized and condemned to the Furnace, amongst which was a French Merchant ingaged to the import of sixty thousand Dollars. As yet the News of this alteration not having reached Christen∣dom, divers-Ships arrived at 
Constantinople
 with vast Sums of this mony, which were all seized and forced to the Mint. In like manner other Ships arrived at 
Smyrna
 with the same Commodity, which my self would not suffer to be landed, and some of them having no other foundation of Stock or Freight, returned empty, to the great loss of the Employers. It was strange to see, how on a sudden all Trade ceased, no mony being left in the Country, few Bargains were made but by Bar∣ters; and though all this ruine might wholly be attributed to the ill Government, yet the people were contented, and sate down with the loss. And thus concluded this extravagant Trade of false Mony, being supposed to have wrought more of destruction and loss at the end, than it brought of benefit at the begin∣ning; memorable for nothing more than for expiring so quietly, though it had the chief part of the Turkish Empire to support and defend it.


During these Troubles the Grand Signior passed his time in hunting near 
Larissa,
 where he ruined the Country round about, and tired the people with beating and driving the Woods for Game and wild Beasts to divertise him, in which, as formerly, he continued so excessively immoderate, that without conside∣ration of the heats, or colds, or moisture of the season, he compelled the people, but espe∣cially the Jews (of which great numbers in∣habit that Country) to continual labours in the Woods and Fields; by which many died through the rigid Frosts of the Winter and Calentures of the Summer. But yet notwith∣standing these Divertisements, the Grand Signior could not easily cast off the melan∣choly

apprehensions and fears he had for the state of his Affairs, imagining that the long delays and ill success at 
Candia,
 and defaults in Govern∣ment had begotten in his Subjects a hate to∣wards his Person, and a desire of alteration. Wherefore the Spring approaching, he retired into a solitary but pleasant shade amongst the Mountains, where sprang cool and crystalline waters, about sixteen hours Journey from 
La∣rissa.
 In this solitude his melancholy thoughts again disquieted him with a jealousie and suspici∣on,
 lest his Brothers now at 
Constantinople
 should take their advantage, and one of them be by the Peoples consent and assistance placed in his Imperial Seat: which imagination made that impression in him, that he immediately dispatched away a trusty and valiant Officer with all secrecy, without making any noise, to bring him their Heads, directing his Commands to his Mother, in whose custody they were; not doubting of her help and assent, as being most nearly concerned in his interest, expected every hour the return of his Messenger with that grateful Present, which could only cure the torture of his jealousie, and alleviate his cares. But no sooner was this fatal Command arrived at the hands of the Queen, but she trembled so much, that she could scarce hold the Paper. At length considering, that (as hath been said before) she had given in caution to the Janisaries for the lives of these Princes, and that to her care they were committed she immediately dis∣closed and published the design of the Grand Signior to the Janisar-Aga, craving his help and protection, protesting that she was resolved to maintain the faith she had given to those Princes, whose life she tendered equal with her own. This advice and resolution of the Queen-Mother being brought to the Janisaries, was heartily approved, and protestations, given that they would never abandon her, nor the lives she preserved. The rumour hereof in an instant flew through the streets; but with such variety of reports, that nothing of cer∣tainty was known, only in general some great ruine was apprehended to threaten the City; whereupon a strange outcry was made to shut up the shops, and every one to consult the safety of the Publick. But some few hours after, it being more distinctly known, that the Grand Signior had sent for the Heads of his Brothers; the People of 
Constantinople,
 whose sole hopes of seeing the Royal City restored to its ancient Honour, was by the conservation of these Princes, were in a greater combusti∣on than before; for every one then betook himself to his Arms: so that in a short time were assembled forty thousand men at 
Okmedon
 well appointed, where confiding in the strength of a general Cause, in which they were ingaged, they vented many opprobrious speeches against the Government, calling the Chief Ministers 
Orsysler,
 which is unfortunate Fellows, a term amongst the Turks, of the greatest ignominy, especially to a Governor, and loudly exclaimed and wished for a reformation. In the mean time the Queen-Mother desired aid from the Janisaries, and Guards about the Apartments of the Princes, lest the Bostangees, who are the Creatures of the Grand Signior, should assault their Quarters. The Consultations also amongst the Janisaries were long and secret, and the Queen-Mother dispatched several Messages to the Grand Signior, advising him to forsake the Mountains, and repair to one of his Imperial Cities, as became the Majesty of so great a Sultan, being the only means to secure to him the establishment of his Crown. And now the Reader will with impatience at∣tend the conclusion and issue of so great ru∣mours and disturbances; but it is now, as it hath been experienced in other Common∣wealths,
 
acribus, ut fermè talia, initiis, incurioso fine,
 matters violent in their original, spend themselves at first, and produce nothing re∣markable in their end. And so was the effect of these recesses, and mutiny of the people at 
Constantinople,
 whose humour of novelty and change venting it self, and in four or five days tired with expectation; at length every one be∣gan to return to his dwelling and employment. The face likewise of things at 
Constantinople
 seemed quiet and appeased, carrying with it, as it were, a still modesty and shame for the late disorders; and nothing was heard or mur∣mured for the space of twenty or thirty days after, until the Grand Signior trembling with the fears of this confused Rebellion, kept more strict Guards than ordinary within his moun∣tains, and after being better recollected, entered into Consultation, and being advised of the Heads and Leaders of the late Insurrection, proscribed such as were the prime Actors, and having dispatched away two or three Messen∣gers on this Errant, they entered secretly in the Night to their Lodgings, where they quiet∣ly, and without noise, took off the heads of four or five of them, and banished as many without the least noise, or notice taken thereof by the Vulgar. And because this disorder happened at 
Constantinople,
 for which the chief Commander ought to answer, the Chimacam passed not without a jealousie either of negli∣gence or consent; wherefore the Vizier sent for him and the Janisar-Aga to 
Candia,
 as if he had occasion of their service, though not without their own fears and suspicion of others, to answer and make satisfaction for the late mutiny. And thus for a while this Flame is extinguished, and the fire raked up in the Embers. We must expect a while and observe when and where it will again burst forth.


The Spring now approaching, which sup∣plies new Spirits, and warm and fresh bloud into the Veins of Man, as well as sap in Trees, and life in other Vegetables; let us return again to the Wars, and survey the Camp, and po∣sture of Affairs before the walls in 
Candia.
 The Turkish Army, which, like worms be∣nummed with the Cold of Winter, had lain immured between their Banks of Earth, did not ply their Assaults so frequently as they had done in Summer, only for a Winters exercise, battered the inward Works of St. 
Andrea
's Fort, which as we said before, they had hardly beset. And now the time for action being again come about,
 they renewed their storm on that side so violently, pressing forward the least esteem∣ed of their Souldiery, that with the help of Spade and Mattock, and blowing up of some Mines, they penetrated forty paces within the Walls of the City: But the Christians having long since forseen 
e weakness of that side, made it part of their 
inters labours to draw another Wall from the Fort 
Panigra
 (whose Revelin or Out-work was before blown up) crossing over almost to the 
Tram
ta,
 which they for∣tified as well as could be expected, and

made constant and bold resistance against the Enemy. Notwithstanding which the Turks pressed so constantly and boldly forward, that though the Christians were strong within, and provided with all sorts of provisions both of war and sustenance, yet nothing supported their Courages and Spirits more than the expectati∣on of promised Succours from 
France
 and 
Italy;
 it being reported, and generally believed, that they would be so numerous as might be able to give Battel in the Field unto the Turk, and force them out of their Trenches; for by no other means was it possible for this City to be relieved: for it might fare with this place, as it did formerly with 
Rhodes
 and 
Ostend,
 which, though wanting neither men nor provisions, were yet taken by palms and inches of ground, till not so much was left, as would hold men to defend them. A pregnant example (as Sr. 
Wil∣liam Temple
 well observes) how impossible it is to defend any Town that cannot be relieved by an Army strong enough to raise the Siege. Whilst the Christians were entertained with these hopes, the Turks fortified themselves without as strongly as the besieged had within, heaving like Moles with their numerous Army of Pio∣neers, whose lives being not valued, they were wholly intent unto Mines, blowing up all be∣fore them, in that manner that every day they gained a pace of ground within the City. So that in effect (as will be seen by the Sequel) this most impregnable Fort of the World was forced and taken by the Spade and Shovel, and by a Crew of unarmed Labourers, who understood nothing more than the Plough and Harrow. So that now this Town seemed to be reduced to its utmost Crisis, either of being taken, or for ever freed of this malignant Enemy. And indeed the Turks had so far advanced upon the Bulwark of St. 
Andrea,
 that now nothing remained of it, more than ruines, and undigested heaps of Earth and stone, in defence of which the chief Commanders applying themselves in person with all diligence, the Marquess St. 
An∣drea Montbrun
 was wounded by a stone in the face, the Cavalier 
de Bret
 was buried in the ruines to the very Neck, and with difficulty drawn out of the Earth by Assistants about him; two other Cavaliers were wounded with Granadoes, and the Cavalier 
Fuillere,
 who car∣ried the Standard of 
Malta,
 was shot into the Eye with a Musket. The Proveditor General 
Carnaro
 serving at the repair of the Breach, was so wounded in the Belly by a Granado, that his Bowels burst, of which he died in three hours; and with a piece of the same Gra∣nado the Count 
Vignole,
 a French Gentle∣man of great Valour, was likewise slain: And so hotly the Turks plyed this Breach, that from the 
28th.
 of 
May
 to the 
2d
 of 
June
 they sprang five Mines, which brake all the Palisades of the Christians; the which the Turks seconded with that fury and mettle, as if they intended to win the place and make an end of their work, before the arrival of the Forces expected from Christendom. And this Post was now grown so dangerous and weak, that the Captain-General, the Marquess of 
Mont∣brun,
 and all the chief Officers took up their Quarters at this place, where his Excellency kept an open Table, and the Marquess took up his Lodgings at Night, that so the other Officers might have no excuse on account of attendances or orders to abandon these Quar∣ters.


The Princes of Christendom all this time for∣got not their besieged Brethren in 
Candia.
 Pope 
Clement
 the IX. pressed the most Christian King to make ready his succours in due time,
 who had already himself prepared all things, and elected the Duke of 
Beaufort
 his General of all the Forces by Sea, whether of French or other Nations. This Duke, like a couragious and brave Prince, thinking it little glory to command at Sea, where the Enemy was of an inferiour and unable Force to encounter him, did therefore desire Licence from his King to make tryal of his Fortune in the Field, where he might evidence his Valour in the face of the Infidels, and signalize his Fame either by Death or Victory. The King, unwilling to hazard so worthy a person of his bloud out of his due Command in the rank of an ordinary Souldier, at first denied his requests; but the Pope interceding for him, whose General he was, with holy Arguments, and devout Contem∣plations of Martyrdom, and glory of dying for the Christian Cause, at length obtained a concession from the King, who of himself was flexible to so pious a request, esteeming it unholy to deprive his Kinsman either of the Palm of a Martyr, or the Lawrel of a Conqueror.


The Summer being come, and all things pro∣vided,
 the Duke ascended his Ship at 
Tolon
 a City in 
Provence,
 the 
6th.
 of 
June, New-style,
 with about seven thousand Land Souldiers, com∣manded by the Duke of 
Navailles,
 with the Marshals 
Lebret
 and 
Colbert,
 and several other Worthies and Heroes of undaunted Courage, and arrived before the Town of 
Candia
 the 
19th.
 of the same Month, having casually encountred together in the Seas on the 
17th.
 with fourteen Sail of Venetian Ships, laden with Horse and Ammunition to mount the Troops, and relieve the Town: which happy encounter and speedy passage, seemed a happy Omen of the future success. The appearance of this succour seem∣ed to the Besieged as sent from Heaven, and administred unto them new hopes and cou∣rage; and the salutes passed between the Town and the Fleet with the usual Ceremonies, and all the imaginable testimonies of joy and triumph.


No sooner were they arrived than the two Generals, with other principal Officers,
 imme∣diately in their Shallops took the best view and survey they could of the Enemies Camp, and the Condition of the Besieged; in which whilst they entertained themselves, they espied a small Vessel making towards them with St. 
Mark
's Colours, in which was the famous Engineer Signior 
Castellano,
 dispatched by the Captain General 
Morosini
 with an axact plat of the Town, and disposition of the Turkish Camp, which being particularly viewed and considered, it was evident, That if the Turks should make some very forcible Attempt before the new For∣ces could be landed (as it was very probable they might) they would put all in hazard of being lost; wherefore the Captain General pressed to have some succours immediately supplied to be assistant in that case of extremity; To which the Duke of 
Navailles
 immediately consented, and landed himself that Night in person with suf∣ficient Force to mount the Guard on the Breach of St. 
Andrea,
 whose first Rettenchment was continually battered by the Turks; and though there was a second Retrenchment in hand, yet time being required for compleating there∣of, that part of the Town would be re∣duced

to its ultimate hazard; for should the Enemy spring a Mine (which they feared was already formed under the present Work) it would lay all open and naked, without other Fortification. The Duke being ashoar, was received by 
Morosini
 with all demonstrations of Civility and Respect due to a personage of his Quality and Employment; and with a wel∣come suitable to the present extremity of his Affairs: all Ceremonies and Complements were soon passed over, the urgency of matters not permitting them time to be long imper∣tinent;
 so that falling into the Discourse of the common safety, it was resolved that the succours should be immediately landed, which was performed with that diligence and ex∣pedition, that in two days the whole Army came safe on shore, excepting only some few, cut short by shot from the Enemies Camp.


On the 23d. the Generals and other Officers, held a Council of War,
 amongst whom was also the Marquess of St. 
Andrea;
 and did un∣animously conclude, that the Town was no longer tenable, or to be maintained unless by some extraordinary enterprize attempted on the Enemy, and by some furious Sally per∣formed with resolution, and stratagems of War, in order unto which it was resolved, That the 
27th.
 should be the day of sally both with Horse and Foot, and that the Fleet not to lose their part in this action, should play with their great Guns on that side of the Turkish-Army which lay incamped on the Quarters of St. 
Andrea.
 All the Forces were landed on the 
26th.
 and the whole night fol∣lowing was spent in preparations for the next days sally: the Army being drawn up made four Batalions, the first called the Admirals commanded by the Sieurs 
Martel, Vandre,
 and 
Gravier;
 the second was the Vice-Ad∣mirals commanded by the Sieurs 
de la Monthe
 and 
Planta;
 the third was the Rere-Admirals under Command of Chevalier 
de Bouillion, Garbaret,
 and the Chevalier 
Dailly;
 the fourth was the Batalion of the Sieur 
d' Almeras
 com∣manded under him by the Sieurs 
Panetier, de la Rogue, Fontier, Bitault,
 and the Chevalier 
de Nemond;
 and on the left hand of these afore∣said Batalions, the Guards of the Duke of 
Beau∣fort
 were disposed. The Duke of 
Beaufort
 un∣willing to be a Spectator in this glorious Action, without bearing a part in his own person, af∣ter he had given order to the Fleet to accost the shore on the side of St. 
Andrea,
 as near as consisted with their security, and from thence with their great Guns to annoy the Enemies Camp as much as was possible, came that night on shore, resolving to fight in the Head of the Forlorn Hope, from which hazardous ad∣venture no intreaties or counsel of his friends could prevail to disswade him.


The Forlorn consisted of 400 men, on the head of which marched fifty men with hand Granadoes, flanked with three Troops of Horse, Commanded by Count 
Dampire:
 the Regiments of Guards, with four Troops of Horse for their Wings, flanked also with three Regiments of Foot, followed the For∣lorn. The Reserve consisted of the Regiments of 
Harcourt, Conti, Lignieres, Rosan, Montpesat,
 and 
Vendosme,
 flanked with four Troops of Horse under Command of the Count 
Choiseul,
 which placed themselves on a rising ground, to hinder all Communication between the Vizier, whose Camp was before St. 
Andrea,
 and the Janizar Aga, who lay before 
Sabionera.
 Be∣tween the first and second line, were placed fifty Musketiers of the King, to be assistant on occasion; and the other Troops of Horse were to take the left hand along the Trench leading to the 
Sabionera:
 the Regiment of 
Montpeyroux
 was to mount the Guard on the Fort of St. 
Demetrius
 to secure the Retreat, if occasion should require. In like manner five hundred Pioniers were ordered to level the Trenches of the Enemy on the Quarter of St. 
Andrea,
 whilst the Body of the Turks Army was imployed in repulsing the violence of the Sally.


Things being disposed in this manner, and the morn approaching, the Forces marched out by the Gate of St. 
George
 with all silence possi∣ble; covering their Matches, that the fire might not alarm the Enemy; the Onset was to begin with the dawning of the day, and the Signal was to be given by firing of the chief Mine Roy∣al; which being large,
 and furnished with a great quantity of Powder, might (as was sup∣posed) make way to the slaughter of the Turks whom the Christians might find terrified and disordered by such an unexpected accident. This Mine was reserved for the last extremity, but being low was full of water; so that the Powder was stowed on floats and rafts to sup∣port it, but yet received so great a damp and moisture, that when they came to spring it, the Powder took not fire, which was the first disap∣pointment of this Enterprise. Though some are of opinion, that the Mine was so vast, and contained such a quantity of Powder, that the Engineers were timorous to spring it, lest it should reverse on the Besieged, as well as take effect on the Enemies Camp. But be it how it will, a quarter of an hour before day the Generals expecting no longer, the Forlorn Hope which lay within half a Musket-shot of the Enemy, assaulted two Redoubts, took them,
 and put them all to the Sword: with the like courage the other Regiments entred the Line, and making themselves Masters of the Trenches after much blood and slaughter, and storming a Fort on which was the Battery directed against St. 
Demetrio,
 possessed themselves of it, and therewith of a great Magazine of Powder belonging to the Enemy, spiking all the Cannon that were found therein.


The day by this time being clearly broken out, discovered the action; so that the Turks with all expedition put themselves into a Body on the Hill near New 
Candy,
 from whence ob∣serving and contemning the small number of the Christians, came thundring down in great numbers to regain their Trenches. The Duke of 
Navailles
 perceiving his Forlorn hardly be∣set, came in to their assistance with two Regi∣ments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, which behaved themselves with that gallantry, as ingaged the Turks again to quit their Trenches. But whilst success seemed thus to smile on the Christians, the Magazine of Powder which was newly won, containing an hundred thirty four Kintals of Powder (by what accident is not known) took fire, and blew up all into the air, by which many were destroyed and wounded, especially of the Battallion of the Guards, with many Officers. This fatal blow quite turned the Scale of Fortune. For the

Souldiers hearing the dreadful clap, and feel∣ing as it were the Earth to tremble under them, supposed it to be the eruption of some Mine near them,
 with which they were so amazed, that they began with confusion to disperse to the right and left, and put themselves into shame∣ful flight. In like manner the Forces near the Sea sensible of the blow, began to retreat, and abandon their design, which no perswasions of their Officers, or other incouragement could animate them to prosecute; but that the faint∣ness of a second Attempt (an infirmity accorded of ancient Times to be incident to the nature of the French Nation) prevailed upon their spirits, beyond any possibility of arrest, so that in a disorderly manner they fled into the Body of the first Battalion, where being now united with the Reserve, they for some time sustained the shock of the Enemy; until other Bodies of the Turks from New 
Candia
 and St. 
Andrea
 over-powered them with greater multi∣tudes, so that then they wholly abandoned the field, and every one as well as he could, sought his Sanctuary and refuge within the Precincts of the Fortifications. Howsoever 
Choiseul
 and 
Lebret,
 each of which had a Horse killed under him, incouraging their Troops, disputed the case yet longer, and still with other Officers made head upon the Ene∣my; but at length with the Duke of 
Navailles,
 and several other Gentlemen, who made their way through the Enemy with their Swords, they were forced to retreat honourably into the Town. The Duke of 
Beaufort
 was said to have laboured much in resisting the shameful flight of his men, and venturing his Person into danger, from whence he resolved never to retreat, was overwhelmed with unequal numbers, and so fell amongst the common heaps: but his body, though much sought after, being not found, it was believed rather, that he perished by that fatal Magazine of Powder, which blowing up, affrighted and disordered the whole Christian Army.


But not only did misfortunes attend the Land-Forces, but the Fleet at Sea shared in the dis∣asters. For some few days after the wind blow∣ing hard from the Sea, caused the Ships to ride at a distance from the shore. The whole Fleet consisted of eighty Ships small and great, fifty Gallies, and six Galleasses, being the whole Force of that Year from 
France, Italy,
 and 
Malta.
 All which being at Anchor in due order as near the shore as was safe or conve∣nient, made many shot into the Turks Camp, but with little execution: during which Action, the 
Santa Teresa,
 a French Ship of seventy Brass Guns blew up, and her whole Company lost, being about three hundred men, of which seven only were saved; the Admiral of 
France
 be∣ing near to this Ship, received five shot from her which passed through her, and by the Splinters and fall of Timbers; the Vessel called 
La Reale
 had six Cavaliers killed, and forty Souldiers Slaves were killed and wounded. After this it was proposed in Council, That another Sally should be made of ten thousand French; to which the Duke 
De Navailles
 assent∣ed, on condition that they might be preceded in the Van by four thousand Venetians, who were well acquainted and versed in the nature of the place, and knew the several Redoubts, Galleries, and Trenches of the Enemy. But the Captain General being desirous to reserve his own experienced Souldiers to the ultimate and last occasion of emergency, refused to assent thereunto.


The loss the Turks sustained that day was uncertain, of the French were only an hundred thirty five heads brought in by tale, as I was in∣formed from one who was present when they were counted, amongst which were many prin∣cipal Officers.
 For besides the Duke of 
Beaufort
 were slain the Count 
Rosan,
 the Chevalier 
di Villarceaux,
 the Chevalier 
de Quelas,
 the Sieur 
de Guene-gaud,
 Marquis 
de Fabert
 Major of the Regiment of 
Lorrain,
 the Sieurs 
de Montreuil
 Captain of the Guards, 
de Beauvais
 and 
Do, Garnier, La Paneterie Touvenin, Lanson, Belle∣brune, Hautefage d'Avenne, Maran de S. Jean de Chauveniere, Goindreville
 Captain of the Regiment of 
Bretagne, Forcan, du Boulet
 Cap∣tains of the Regiment of 
Harcourt, Chaselet, Martinval de Bossemoat, de la Haye, de Bourneuf, de Vandre Martel
 Captain of a Ship, the Che∣valier 
Lodevé
 with nine Captains and eight Lieu∣tenants Reformades of the Brigade of 
Picardy, Navarre,
 and 
Normandy.
 The Sieur 
Lebret
 was shot through the Buttocks with a Musket-bullet; besides whom were wounded the Sieurs 
de Montagne
 Colonel of a Regiment, 
de Castelan
 Major of the Guards, 
de Cavison, Croiselles, de Montigny,
 and 
de Moissac
 by the Bat∣tery which blew up: the Chevalier 
d'Ail∣leurs;
 was hurt with an Arrow through the Arm 
De la Marliere
 Lieutenant-Colonel of the Regiment of 
Lorrain
 with five or six Of∣ficers of that Body, and 
Villiers
 Lieutenant-Colonel of the Regiment 
Jonzac
 were all wound∣ed. The Marquess of 
Lignieres
 had his Thigh broken and a Finger shot off, and his Lieute∣nant-Colonel had his Arm broken. The Marquess of St. 
Vallier
 Collonel with five or six of his Officers, the Chevalier 
de Novion
 Colonel with several Officers of the Regiments of 
Bretagnie, Mont∣pezat, Harcourt,
 and 
Conti
 were all wounded, with four other Captains of Horse, and four Lieutenants; also the Marquess of 
Ʋxelles,
 the Chevalier 
de la Haugette,
 the Count 
de Losse
 Captain of the Guards to the Duke of 
Navailles,
 the Count 
de Montbrun
 Commander of the Kings Musquetiers, and the Sieur 
de Tagni
 Quarter-master-General were wounded: who being Persons of great Quality as well as Cou∣rage that left their Country, and exposed them∣selves to dangers, with no other motive than their own gallantry or defence of the Christian Cause, ought be numbred amongst the Heroes and Champions of our Age. Of Prisoners there were not above seven or eight taken, amongst which were the Sieur 
de Bois-Dauphin
 a Norman, and Son of a Marshal of 
France,
 and the Sieur 
de Chateau Neuf,
 the first for his Youth, Beauty, and Courage greatly esteemed by the Turks, and both entertained by the Vizier with more generosity than usually pos∣sesses the Nature of Turks: who after this success, having gathered and thrown the heads of the slain according to their manner into a heap, did one day in merriment pitch them upon the points of their Lances, and ranking them in file and order, with Hats and Feathers on them, beat the French March amongst them with shouts and Vollies of Muskets.


Matters succeeding in this manner unhappily, and the Enemy already almost in the midst of the Town, being come to the last Retrench∣ment, beyond which could be raised no more

inward Fortifications; the Officers as in like cases of misfortune began to throw the blame upon each other, and the contest between the French and Italians grew as hot within the Town, as the War was without; so that the Duke of 
Navailles
 appearing discontented,
 though in reali∣ty he might well be discouraged, and might be apprehensive with due reason that the Town was in a desperate condition; howsoever he pretended, that the time was almost expired, which the King had prefixed for the continuance of his Forces in 
Candia
 and that therefore he could not think of any other design for them, than that which was in order to their imbark∣ing. The Captain-General being greatly sur∣prised at this resolution, endeavoured to per∣swade him to the contrary, and being accom∣panied with the General of 
Candia,
 and the Proveditor General waited on the Duke at his own Quarters, where he represented to him in the most efficacious terms possible the present dangerous condition to which the City was reduced; until which time, under the Pro∣vidence of God, they acknowleged the preserva∣tion thereof to the magnanimous Arms of their religious King; and therefore in such a con∣juncture of misfortunes and extremity they knew not unto whom they might have recourse for assistance, but to the Generosity of his Ex∣cellency, and of those Gentlemen, who for no other end but that of Religion and Honour, had undertaken so great a Voyage, and had vol∣luntarily cast themselves into the hourly dangers of this Siege: That the Succour they demanded was really great and most important for defence of the place, in regard that thereon their whole safety depended. Howsoever it might have cost some labour, though not much blood to the French Forces, if they would have work∣ed on a new Retrenchment with the same ce∣lerity and diligence, as they formerly used, whereby the Siege might be prolonged until the the Winter, or till the Christian Princes might take new measures, and send greater Recruits Hereunto 
Navailles
 gave answer, That the zeal which the King his Master conceived for the con∣servation of 
Candia,
 was evidenced by better effects, than the empty promises without fruit of other Princes; and that accounting the pre∣sent number of Forces and Gentlemen of con∣siderable Quality which were ingaged in this War, together with the great expence and charge his Majesty had been at in maintenance of a Fleet to transport them, his Majesties affe∣ction to the Republick was unquestionable: and that both he and his Officers who had the ho∣nour to command those Forces had undertaken along Voyage, and entred into dangers with constancy and readiness of mind, and had assault∣ed the Enemy almost before they saw them, and given relief to the Town before they set their foot in it: but if the issue of affairs did not cor∣respond with a
 success agreeable to their good intentions, and the primary design of this Enter∣prise, they must have patience, seeing that it costs no other than the slaughter of French-
, and that there had been a large effusion of the Noble and Illustrious as well as of the common blood. It was a species of ingratitude not 
o remain contented with such forcible ar∣guments of friendship; and it was a breach of modesty to pretend, that because his King had 
 them eight thousand men, that therefore they should continue in 
Candia
 so long as one remained alive. It was true, that besides the Kings service he was acted by some inward mo∣tives of Religion, but that he could not trans∣gress the Commands and Instructions of his Majesty, which injoyned him to imbark his Forces in order to their return about the 
20th.
 of that present month of 
August.
 In reply to which, though the Captain-General and the other Venetian Officers, and also 
Bali Rospigliosi
 the Admiral of the Popes Gallies urged his stay with all the instances and ar∣guments imaginable, yet nothing could pre∣vail to detain him until the arrival of other Forces, only he was contented to leave six hundred men in the Town during the time that he continued at 
Standia:
 so that by this time having imbarked his Forces, and lastly the six hundred men left on the Works, the Duke took his farewel and departed: so that the Town being as it were deserted and for∣saken of its chief hopes, all things were given for desperate, and men began to be weary of their lives, as well as of the War and of their labours; and whereas with the assistance of the French, (as it was said in the Council) the Town might have held out until the next Spring, it was now by this grand revulsion reduced to its last Crisis, and so weakened, as that no possibility of preservation remained but in honourable terms of Surrender. And though the French in their Voyage home about 
Malta
 encountred positive Orders to remain on the place, yet judging the Town might al∣ready be surrendered, and so the return dis∣graceful and in vain, proceeded notwithstand∣ing in their course for 
France,
 for which default and want of constancy the Duke of 
Navailles
 being arrived at 
Tolon,
 sustained the punish∣ment of his Princes disfavour, and ordered for some time not to approach the Court.


The Turks, by departure of the French,
 increasing in hopes and courage, made an assault on the Quarters of 
Sabionera
 and St. 
Andrea;
 and first attaquing some Souldiers to the number of about thirty, who were placed on the Guard at the Post of St. 
Pelagia,
 they cut most of them off, and put the rest to flight; with which the Turks being more animated, advanced to the Palisade of the new Rentrench∣ment; but Vollies of Cannon, and showers of Musket-shot, and stones pouring on them, gave some stop to the 
ury of their career. 
Grimaldi
 observing that the Enemy was at a stand, brought up his Voluntiers and Cavalry which served on Foot, and together with the Forces from 
Brunswick
 so plyed the Turks with stones, Granadoes, and shot, that the Fight was con∣fused, bloody, and horrid; howsoever the Ene∣my so persisted, that the Commanders gave Order, That the gross of the Army should fall on; but the Souldiers were so broken and torn, that they refused to advance, though thrust forward with the point of Sword and Spear. The Captain-General in the mean time taking his course along the Marine, on which part also the Turks were far advanced, caused a Mine to be sprang under the thickest crowd of the Turks: which consisting of an hundred Barrels of Powder, made such a destruction, as abated much of the storm, and induced the Enemy to retire within their Re∣doubts. The Marquess St. 
Andrea,
 in like manner performing the office of a valiant and experienced Souldier, applied himself to all

places where danger most required his pre∣sence, and recovered certain Breast-works which the Enemy had gained in the Skirmish.


Nor was the storm less furious and bloody on the part of 
Sabionera,
 nor was the success and advantage on the Christians side less consi∣derable, in all which the Souldiery deserved great commendations and renown; the two French Regiments of 
Perasi
 and 
Jonsac
 under the Command of the Sieur 
Choiseul
 did won∣ders; as also those few which remained of the Regiments of 
Savoy
 commanded by Signior 
Arborio:
 Signior 
Rados, Micolo Polani
 a Noble Venetian, the Proveditor 
Cornaro,
 the Colo∣nels 
Gabriel, Givii,
 and the Sergeant Major of the Troops of 
Brunswick,
 and Serjeant Major 
Bellegarde,
 as also the Commander in cheif of 
Malta
 gave honourable testimonies of their Bravery and Valour. In short the Cap∣tain-General praised them all, which was the best reward he could bestow on such generous Souls; and then sent Orders to 
Standia,
 That the Forces arrived with the Duke 
Mirandola
 should immediately be landed: these Forces, which when they were first imbarked, amounted to the number of a thousand five hundred men, were now by Calentures and other sick∣nesses caused by the excessive heats of the sea∣son reduced to six hundred; and though they were unhealthy and unexperienced Souldiers, yet the extremity of Affairs was such, as called them to immediate service, and to be placed on the Guard of the new Retrench∣ment.


But all this could give little relief to the perishing condition of this miserable Town; which was not only weakened by departure of the French, but by at least five hundred others, such as Swedes and Germans, and other Na∣tions, who notwithstanding all care and endea∣vours to the contrary, crowded under the French Banner. Likewise the Batalion of 
Malta
 imbarked, which though reduced to a small Body, was yet very considerable for the Quality and Valour of the Cavaliers; which example all the Voluntiers followed, and there∣by reduced the Town to a condition beyond all possibility of defence; for that in actual service not above four thousand men remained, and of these at least an hundred a day being killed, the Town must necessarily in a short time become a prey to the Enemy; wherefore the Captain-General called a Council of the most eminent Officers;
 and because the mat∣ter was of great importance, he judged fit also to have the opinion of the Commanders of the Galleasses, and of the other Cap∣tains of the Fleet. At this Council were present.




Francesco Morosini
 Captain General.


Giacomo Contarini
 Duke of 
Candia.


Girolamo Battaglia
 Proveditor General of Arms.


Daniel Morosini
 Proveditor of the Kingdom.


Giacomo Cornaro
 Proveditor of the Kingdom.


Alvise Minio
 Commissary of the Ammuni∣tion and Provision.


Marquis
 St. 
Andrea Montbrun
 General of the Army.


Marquis
 of 
Frontenac
 Lieutenant General.


The Baron 
Frederick de Spaar
 General of the 
Tramontani.


The Cavalier 
Bartolomeo Varisano Grimaldi
 Sergeant General.


Baron 
Chilmerseck
 Serjeant General.


Count 
Francis Salvatico
 Governor of the Arms of the City.


Cavalier 
Verneda
 Chief Engineer, and Su∣perintendent of the Artillery.


On the other side sate the Commanders at Sea, which were as followeth.


Lorenzo Cornaro
 Proveditor of the Fleet.


Alvisé Magno
 Captain in Extraordinary of the Galleasses.


Iseppo Morosini
 Captain in Ordinary of the Galleasses.


Georgio Benzoni
 Captain of the Gulf.


Ascanio Giustiniano
 Governor of the Gulf.


Angelo Morosini
 Pay-master.


Gio. Batt. Calbo
 Commissary of the Ammu∣nition and Provisions.


Alexandro Locattelli
 Cancellier.




All which having taken their places, the Captain General began to declare, That the extremity of the place was so well known and evident to them all, that there was no need for him to inform them of the particulars; only that he had called them together to know their opinions and counsels in what manner the de∣fence of the Town might be best prolonged, and what advice they would give him touching the present premures and emergency of Affairs. He added further, That he had by good ex∣perience proved them to be as well judicious and wise in their Counsels, as they were valiant in the Execution; and that now was the time to lay aside all ostentation of speech, and to attend unto that which was solid reason and advice, which he desired every one to deliver freely with a clear and real sense and affection towards the grand Concernment. Then he ordered the Cancellier to read a short preamble of the matter on which they were to deliver their opinions, desiring every one to express his judgment in Writing; But after some few had subscribed their Declaration, so much time was spent therein, that it was conceived more expedite for every person to declare his opinion by word of mouth.


As to the first point all generally concurred, that considering the small number of the De∣fendants, the Town could not hold out much longer; for that the Enemy on the side of St. 
Andrea
 was arrived to the last Retrenchment, which being low, weak, and composed of bad matter, could not long resist their power; that on the side also of 
Sabionera
 they were so far advanced by the lower grounds towards the Arsenal, that in a short time they would block up the Port, and cut off all provisions and succours from the Town; and that if the Enemy were resolved to adventure the loss of two or three thousand men by a general storm; there would remain no possibility of with∣standing their Force. This being generally assented unto, and concluded on all hands, another Question was propounded; namely, That considering the premises, what was to be done which might render the most effectual service to the Republick; it was well known how important that place was to the Publick, and what vast Treasures of Gold and Silver, and what plentiful Effusions of bloud had been expended and poured forth in defence thereof; and that therefore it ought to be maintained to the utmost and last gasp of strength; but

that it ought also to be considered, That the Town being either taken by assault, or the Port blocked up, there would certainly ensue such deplorable Consequences as every person may imagine; and the Republick be damaged by losing all that which is now in a possibility of being saved. It was therefore put to the Vote, beginning on the side of the Inferiors, as the custom is, and so ascending to the chief; and it was resolved that they should capitulate, and enter into a Treaty with the Turks. When it came to 
Grimaldi
's turn to speak, he con∣fessed clearly, That the Town could not hold out for many days, and though it was more glorious to the Defenders to dye on the Walls of it, yet it would be of worse service to the Publick; howsoever he was of opinion, that rather than surrender, it would be better to burn it, or blow it up with Mines; in execu∣tion of which, the wounded and unserviceable people should in the first place be shipped away, then taking the opportunity of a dark and quiet Night, the Infantry might be all em∣barked; it was true, as he confessed, that the action was difficult and full of hazard; howso∣ever, two things moved him to this Counsel; One was, The little assurance he conceived of the faith of the Turks; and the other was, The gloriousness of the action: for as this City had been in an extraordinary manner de∣fended, and of which the World cannot give the like example; so the end thereof would not be less renowned and famous, it not being a greater triumph to drive the Enemy from the Walls, than being vanquisht to leave a bloudy Victory, and instead of a Palace a heap of stones and ashes. Many of the Council, and amongst them Marquess St. 
Andrea Mont∣brun
 was of the same opinion, and the Com∣missary 
Minio
 endeavoured to second it with efficacious Arguments; But in fine, after a long Discourse, they all concluded that the resolu∣tion was more generous than practicable; by reason that so many people could not be em∣barked without knowledge of the Enemy, who was not only quartered near, but within the very Walls of the City.


The Captain General was of a different opinion; for that besides the difficulty of em∣barking the Souldiery, there were also some other considerations which might disswade this resolution, and render it more prejudicial to the Publick than a Surrender by Composition. After some short debate, all at length concur∣red in the same sentiment, from which also 
Grimaldi
 did not much dissent, confessing that the proposition he had made would prove difficult in the Execution; howsoever, consi∣dering the little faith which the Turks observe, he thought it more secure to confide their safety to Fortune and their own Swords, than to the engagements and moderation of a perfi∣dious and enraged Enemy. In short, he sub∣mitted wholly to the better judgments of the Council, and more particularly to the Cap∣tain-General, and the Marquess of St. 
Andrea,
 who were best acquainted with what more nearly concerned the service and interest of the Prince.


In fine, the conclusion was, That they should enter into a Treaty with the Vizier, and endeavour to obtain the most advan∣tageous Conditions possible. Howsoever, it was thought fit to advertise first this their de∣termination to the Auxiliary Forces at 
Standia;
 and to renew the instances they had formerly made to them for three thousand men,
 with which, and with two thousand Gally Slaves they would endeavour the making of another Retrenchment, whereby the Town might be conserved for some time longer. Howsoever, in this Interim the Captain General being willing to touch the Viziers pulse, that he might better discover in what manner he stood affected towards a Treaty, dispatched one Colonel 
Thomas Anand,
 an Englishman, of courage, and of able Parts, and of intire honesty, together with one 
Stefano Cordili,
 an intelligent young man to the Vizier's Camp; and that his design might not be discovered by those of the Town, they were ordered to pass from 
Standia
 with a white Flag
 up the River 
Gioffiro;
 and that being come to a Treaty, they should only discover the mind and inclinations of the Turks, without making known their intentions, or entering into par∣ticulars.


Being come in this manner prepared to the Vizier's Camp, they told the Turks, That they were come to renew the Treaty begun by Signior 
Molino,
 which had been broken off by the Arrival of the French and Pope's Forces; to which a Turk, then come from the Vizier's Tent, resolutely answered, That they should think of no Articles, nor Treaty without a Surrender, To which 
Anand
 replyed, That they would do well to acquaint the Vizier so much, for that perhaps he might be of ano∣ther opinion; and so not urging farther they departed; but returning after Dinner the same Turk came down again, called 
Achmet
 Aga, a Confident of the Vizier's together with 
Pa∣naiotti
 the Vizier's Interpreter; and then with more earnestness declaring, That nothing would be heard, unless in the first place they were resolved to deliver the Town, and threatned them in case they returned without this Pro∣position: The Captain General being advised hereof, the next morning 
Anand
 and 
Scordili
 went again on the same message; and meeting the Turks under 
Paleocastro,
 they acquainted them that they had orders to treat about a Surrender; but first desired to know what Ar∣ticles they would give them, and what Town in exchange for this. In this manner a Treaty being begun, it was resolved for better expedi∣tion to erect Tents nearer to the Town for the place of Conference, where the Plenipotentia∣ries on both sides were to meet. 
Ibrahim
 Pasha, late Pasha of 
Aleppo, Achmet
 Aga, the Kahya∣begh of the Janisaries, the Spahyler 
Agasi,
 and the Interpreter 
Panaiotri,
 were the persons chosen by the Turks on the part of the Chri∣stians, after some Debate, no other persons were chosen besides 
Anand
 and 
Scordili,
 who meeting the Turks at the time and place ap∣pointed, demanded of them some other place in exchange for that of 
Candia.
 To which the Turks with some heat replyed, That it was against their Law to deliver Towns where Moschs were built, into the hands of Christians. To which the others answered, That this could not be their Law, since that in a Treaty some months past begun by the Cavelier 
Molino,
 they had offered to deliver up into the hands of the Christians 
Candia Nuova, Sitia,
 and 
Girapitra,
 all places where Mahometan

Moschs were erected; and though the Turks might now imagine it easie to win the Town by force, they assured them that greater diffi∣culties remained; and that if they remembred what bloud, what labours, and what Treasures their small acquests and advance had cost them, they might thence calculate what Force still remained to conquer, and that the last gasp of this dying Fortress would spend it self with more ruine and destruction than they had felt in all the other approaches and assaults there∣unto. In fine, the Turks seeming resolved to be sole Masters of the whole Kingdom of 
Candia,
 the Venetians began to condescend to receive some compensation in another man∣ner.


Howsoever, the difficulties were not yet ended but greater appeared, for the Turks de∣manded satisfaction for the charge of the War; and the Haratch or head-mony, which for all those years of the Wars they had not received from the people of the Isles of the 
Ar∣chipelago;
 they demanded also a Tribute for the Forts and Islands of 
Cerigo, Tino,
 and 
Clissa,
 and the other Conquests in 
Dalmatia;
 all which points caused new Disputes, which were maintained with those heats, and with that obstinacy, as if it had been impossible for both parties ever to meet in a conclusion. Notwithstanding, after long Debates, on the fourth of 
September
 they came to agree of giving hostages, and to certain proposals con∣cerning the manner of surrendring the place. The Turks demanded to have the Outworks put into their hands, with one of the Gates of the City, and the Palisade of the new Re∣trenchment: To which 
Anand
 and 
Scordili
 answered, That this was not a proposition to be made to the Captain General, for that they were assured, the Garrison would sooner suffer themselves to be cut in pieces, than to commit themselves to the mercy of the Turkish Soul∣diery; whose faith is recorded in the History of 
Famagusta,
 and may serve for a true ex∣ample and mirror of their treachery and faithlesness to all Ages. In this manner the Treaty had like to have been broken off; but at length they concluded, That it was ne∣cessary to render an accout to the Vizier of the particulars of this Conference, ad∣journing the Treaty until the next Morn∣ing.


Notwithstanding all which, the Turks did not abate in the least point their progress in the War, labouring in their Works, and fighting with more heat than ever. The Venetians on the other side were not less active, firing con∣tinually their Cannon and Granadoes, and making some little Sallies, endeavoured as much as they were able to cover the weakness of their Forces. The Turks had raised a new Battery which broke a great part of the Pali∣sade of the new Retrenchment, upon which it was expected that they should make a strong attempt, for whose better entertainment two Mines were prepared to receive them; but they deferring the assault, the Captain General gave orders to fire both the Mines at once, which consisting of a hundred and fifty Barrels of Powder, made the ground to tremble both in the City and in the Camp, overthrowing several works with miserable slaughter of the Enemy.


The Turks observing this resolution in the defendants, became more tractable, and less severe in their demands; so that 
Ibrahim
 Pasha with the rest contented themselves with no other security for performances of Conditions than Hostages; of which three were consigned mu∣tually on both sides. After which, other Ar∣ticles were, with less Difficulty, concluded; so that in the morning of the 
6th
 of 
September
 the Turks demanded that the Christians should give all their Articles in Writing; whereupon the Council ordered 
Grimaldi
 to draw them up; which were in substance as followeth.


First,
 That for obtaining a good and lasting Peace, it is agree'd, That the City of 
Candia,
 with all its Cannon which were planted there before the time of the War, be consigned into the hands of the Vizier.


Secondly, That quiet possession be given to the Republick of 
Suda, Carabusa,
 and 
Spina Longa,
 with the Territories thereunto belonging, with the Fortress of 
Clissa
 in 
Dal∣matia.


Thirdly, That the Venetians may carry away all the Cannon which have been brought into the Town since the beginning of the War.


Fourthly, That for embarking the Soul∣diery, Pionieers, and Inhabitants of all Quali∣ties and Conditions, with their Arms, Provisi∣ons, and Baggage twelve days time shall be granted and assigned.


Fifthly, That what shall remain unshipped at the end of the twelve days aforesaid, the Vizier shall, with his own Boats, assist to the lading thereof.


Sixthly, That during this time of truce, no person whatsoever shall transgress his Limits, or pass the bounds of his Station or Quarters; and that he who doth shall be treated as an Enemy.


Seventhly, That so soon as these Articles shall be subscribed under the white Flag, all Acts of Hostility shall cease both on one side and the other.


Eighthly, That for security of performance of these Articles, three Hostages be mutually given on one side and the other.


Ninthly, That for better assurance, that the Venetians will use all their endeavours to embark their Men and Goods, the Turks may employ two Officers for Eye-witnesses of the same.


Tenthly, That for better effecting hereof, all Ships, Gallies, and other Vessels may freely approach near unto the shore, and enter into the Port both by Day and Night.


Eleventhly, That the Venetian Fleet may remain at 
Standia,
 or at any other Island in the 
Archipelago,
 until such time as they are dispatched, or that things are duly prepared for their departure.


Twelfthly, That all Commissions given by one side and the other be revoked, and that whosoever shall after the space of forty days commit any Act of Hostility against the tenor of these Articles of Peace, shall be punished with capital punishment.


Thirteenly, That so soon as an Ambassa∣dor from 
Venice
 shall arrive at the Port, all Slaves or Prisoners of War taken under the Venetian Colours shall be freed and re∣leased.


Fourteenthly, That what depredations shall be made at Sea or Land after these Articles

are subscribed, and before the publication thereof, shall be faithfully made good and re∣stored.


Fifteenthly, That a general pardon be given to the Subjects of both sides, who have acted contrary to their Faith and Allegiance, during this War.


Sixteenthly, That in Vertue of these Capi∣tulations the former Articles be likewise con∣firmed which were made in the Year 1571, and that no Tribute or Present be demanded from the Port, unless as hath formerly been paid for such Islands as the Venetians hold in the 
Archipelago.


Seventeenthly, That of these Articles two Copies be made, one in Turkish with its Translation into Italian, subscribed by the Vizier, and sealed with the Grand Signior's Signet; and the other in Italian underwrote by the Captain-General, and sealed with the Seal of the Republick.


These Articles being signed, the Hostages were given both on one side and the other. Those given by the Venetians were 
Faustino da Riva
 Lieutenant-General, 
Giovanni Battista Calbo
 Commissary, and 
Zaccaria Mocenigo
 who had been Duke of 
Candia.
 Those given by the Turks were 
Belin Assan
 Pasha, 
Mahomet
 Aga of the Janisaries, and 
Gurgi Bei
 Tefterdar or Treasurer.


During this Siege, of the Venetians side there were killed and wounded thirty thousand nine hundred eighty five, of the Turks one hundred eighteen thousand seven hundred fifty four.


The Batteries which the Turks raised a∣gainst 
Sabionera
 and St. 
Andrea,
 consisted of fifty nine Pieces of Cannon, carrying from fifty to an hundred and twenty pound weight of Bullet.


The Storms which the Turks made upon the Town were fifty six.


The Combats under ground forty five.


The Sallies made by the Venetians ninety six.


The Mines and Fornelli sprang by the Vene∣tians eleven hundred seventy three, by the Turks four hundred seventy two.


The Venetians spent Barrels of Powder fifty thousand three hundred and seventeen.


Bomboes of all sorts by the Venetians of fifty to five hundred weight, were forty eight thousand an hundred and nineteen.


Granadoes of Brass and Iron an hundred thousand nine hundred and sixty: Granadoes of Glass eighty four thousand eight hundred seventy four.


Cannon shot of all sorts two hundred seventy six thousand seven hundred forty three.


Pounds of Lead eighteen millions forty four thousand nine hundred fifty seven. Of Match pounds thirteen millions twelve thousand five hundred.


What quantities the Turks might consume of Ammunition is not certain; only it is ob∣servable, That the Brass taken up in the streets which came from the Enemies Bomboes was so much, that whole Ware-houses were filled with the Metal, and so much sold as yielded many thousands of Crowns.


The Articles being subscribed, and Hostages given, the Captain-General attended with all application of mind and industry imaginable to imbark the Men and Ammunition, com∣mitting in the mean time the care of the City to 
Cornaro
 the Proveditor of the Fleet.


During these days that all things were pro∣viding in order to a Surrender, there was great silence in the Turkish Camp, and no disorder in the City; the Souldiers on the Ramparts, and the Turks in their Trenches saluted each other with civility, and entertained communi∣cation and discourses together with friendship and freedom of several passages relating to their War, nothing of quarrel, or scuffle, or rude words happening out between them in all the term of the twelve days. The Vizier sent divers times civil Messages and Presents of re∣freshment to the Captain-General and Marquess St. 
Andrea,
 which they returned with equal respect and generosity; and so excessive were the Turks in these offices, that the Venetians began to be jealous, lest under this mark and guise of courtesie some fraud or design should be covered according to their own Proverb: 
Chi ti fa piu carezze che suole, ó ti ha engannato ó enganar ti vuole.


In short, all things were dispatched with that diligence and care, that on the 
27th
 of 
September
 the City was consigned; all the In∣habitants departed thence, not one remaining in the City, except only two Greek Priests, a Woman, and three Jews.


In this manner the Whole Isle of 
Candia,
 the cause and occasion of all that Blood and Treasure that was spilt, and exhausted in twen∣ty five years War, fell at length to the for∣tune and increase of the Turkish Empire, with its most impregnable Fortress of the World, strengthened with as much Art and Industry, as the human Wit of this Age was capable to invent, after a strait Siege of two years, three months, and twenty seven days. For the space of twelve days allotted for the Surrender being expired,
 on the 
27/17th.
 of 
September
 being Friday, the great Cross erected on the Wall was after midnight taken down, and advice given to the Venetians, so soon as the morn∣ing dawned, that the Turks did that day at∣tend the Surrender, which was accordingly performed by the Principal Citizen about nine of the clock of the same morning who offer∣ing the Keys of the City to the Great Vizier in a Bason of Silver on the breach of St. 
Andrea,
 was by him presented with a Vest of Sables, and five hundred Zechins in Gold, and to his Servants were given two hundred. To 
Morosini
 also a Present was offered worthy his Quality; but he refused it, saying, That he would never give a seeming occasion to the malicious World to slander him with the least appearance of having sold his important Charge. Whilst these things were transacting on the breach, some of the most cowardly and dis∣orderly amongst the Janisaries pressed forward to have entred by force, in violation of the Articles so lately agreed and confirmed; but some of the Garrison not yet imbarked, keeping themselves still on the Guard, repulsed the most forward in the Riot by killing three or four of their Companions: which distur∣bance and insolence of the Souldiery, when made known to the Vizier, he assembled the disorderly together; and first upbraiding their cowardise, who durst not enter in the time of War, would now counterfeit Valour in the time of Peace, sentenced fifteen of them to be impaled on the breach, which piece of Justice

and Gallantry was immediately executed. This rumour being appeased, the 
Topegibashee
 and 
Cebegibashee,
 or the Generals of the Ordnance and Arms took quiet possession of the Forts and Cannon of the City, and whilst the Turks entred over the breach, the Christian Army withdrew and imbarked themselves as fast as convenience and decency would permit, who after the departure of the French, and of such who accompanied them, were not com∣puted to be above two thousand five hundred men, and those sickly, ill accoutred, and half naked; and thus this City and whole Island became subject and a prey to the Ottoman Arms. Amongst the Officers which took possession of the Town were the Tefterdar and the Aga of the Janisaries. The Tefterdar as he passed over the breach of St. 
Andrea,
 and observing how low and weak the Works were on that side, turned to the Aga of the Jani∣saries, and with some disdain said to him, We have here spent ten days in the Surrender of this Town which we might have taken in two hours.


The Turkish Army taking possession on Fri∣day the 
27/17th.
 of 
September,
 the Vizier made his Entry on Friday the 
4th.
 of 
October;
 in which time they had erected a triumphant Bridge over the breach of St. 
Andrea,
 on which the Vizier entred into the Town, and passed directly to the Church of St. 
Francis,
 which was converted to a Mahometan Mosch, where having said his Namaz or Prayer, he went to the house where the Marquess St. 
Andrea
 was lodged, which was prepared for him, with a sumptuous Entertainment of five hundred Dishes at the ex∣pence of the Grand Signior.


This City in four parts of five was ruined and demolished in the time of the Siege, all the Bells and Ornaments of the Churches and Houses to the very Locks of the doors were carried away; the Arms remaining were old and rusty, and not above three hundred and fifty Pieces of Cannon left on the Walls, and those for the most part very small: the Inhahitants remain∣ing were only five, as we have said before, un∣less some few decrepit Jews and Greeks, which might make up the number of about thirty; so that never could be a more sad spectacle of deso∣lation, nor a more clear Mirror of the miseries of War.


The Great Vizier being possessed of the Town, dispatched away an Express with the good News thereof to the Sultan, who posted as fast as wind and weather would permit. And here the Reader may easily apprehend what joy pos∣sessed the minds of the Turks in all places where the rumour flew of this Cities Surrender, which had for so many years baffled and put a stand to the Ottoman Sword, And though the joyful tidings added wings to the Messen∣gers hast, yet the uncertainty of the Grand Signiors abode retarded some dayes the arrival of the News: which will seem very strange to him that considers, that the motion of so great an Emperour in the Glory of his Fortunes should be less obscure than the light of the Sun, perceptible by all conditions, who inhabit that side of the Globe, where his rays are visible. At length the Messenger found the Sultan with∣in the Woods and Mountains of 
Nogyopont
 where he had passed the heats of the Summer,
 and some part of his discontent in those solitary retirements: it being now towards the end of 
September,
 and the Winter approaching, the Isle was incapable to entertain so great a Court, and to return back seemed as dishonourable as it was dangerous, the Souldiery and People being equally discontented, the one by the ill success and government of Affairs, and the o∣ther by oppression of Taxes: but this joyful News cleared all those clouds and ombrages of doubtful and disconsolate thoughts, which the Grand Signior received like a dream, being at first so surprised with such an unexpected hap∣piness, that he could scarce believe it; but at length recollecting his scattered spirits, without delay returned the Messenger again with his Embrahore or Master of his Horse to the Vi∣zier with the Present of a Sable Vest, a Dag∣ger, and a Sword, being the usual signals of the Sultans favour, and with a Letter freighted with Encomiums and Praises of his Valour and Fortune. And whereas the Vizier had per∣swaded him to return to 
Constantinople,
 he answered, That he was resolved to winter at 
Salonica,
 where with the Spring he expected his presence, and from thence in company with him, should be ready to chuse any Seat, which in his judgment the Vizier apprehended most conducing to the benefit of the Empire.


The Captain-General 
Morosini
 having in the mean time imbarked his Forces, sailed to 
Suda
 to provide and fortifie that place, 
Spina Longa
 and 
Carabusa,
 poor Rocks and Appendages to the greater Isle of 
Candia,
 with all necessary supplies of Victuals and Ammunition: which only serve for a Prospect into 
Candia,
 and to keep alive the Title of the Venetian Republick to that Kingdom. 
Suda
 is the most conside∣rable of the three, but yet not strong, the Sea being fordable between that and 
Candia,
 and not of long resistance, whensoever the Turk shall think it worth his time to subdue. Here 
Morosini
 attended the Ratification of the Peace from 
Venice,
 and the disbanding of the Turkish Army, in which time four French Ships with Succours of Men and Ammunition arrived at 
Candia,
 but coming late were disappointed of their design, and so returned back into their own Country.


The Turks having now finished their work, dispeeded a way their Janisaries and Pioniers by all occasions of shipping: those that remain∣ed were imployed all the Winter in filling the Trenches without the City, and many Slaves taken out of the Gallies to repair the breach of St. 
Andrea:
 in which work, whilst they threw up the difordered rubbish, so poysonous a stench evaporated from the bodies of the slain, which lay buried in those ruines, as begat a Pestilence and other diseases in the City and in the Gal∣lies; but labouring continually on that work, they soon acquitted themselves of the contagi∣on, by help of the Winters cold which then approached.


In this manner expired the Action of this Year, fortunate in its success to the Turks; for though they gained but thirty Acres of Land with expence inestimable of Blood and Treasure, yet the Glory and Fame which attended it, be∣ing the consummation of twenty five years Wars, and the Theatre where the whole World were Spectators, was of greater value to the Turks than any other consideration, and may with time prove a place of advantage to the farther increase of their Western Empire,

unless God Almighty by his Mercy and Pro∣vidence give a stop to the progress of this Grand Oppressour.


But before this Year ended,
 behold the mi∣sery of Christendom, by reason of discontents and animosities in the Imperial Court, the Count 
Serini
 Prince of 
Croatia,
 the Marquess 
Fran∣gipani
 and Count 
Nadasti,
 joyned with other Nobles of 
Hungary,
 sent Messengers to the Grand Signior offering themselves Subjects and Tributaries to the Turk, desiring his Pro∣tection of their Religion and Liberties, design∣ing to act the part of 
Bethlem Gabor.


The Great Vizier imployed himself this whole Winter past in repairing the Fortifications of 
Candia,
 regulating them in some measure ac∣cording to the Turkish Model, and in repair∣ing and beautifying the Town, which was done with such admirable expedition, that in a few months most of the houses demolished in the time of the Siege were again erected, and the Churches converted into Moschs and adorned, three of the principal whereof took the Names of the Grand Signior, Great Vizier and Cap∣tain Pasha, and were endowed by them with an honourable Revenue, sufficient to maintain them in Reparations, Lamps, and Talismans. But the Turks were not more pious towards their Moschs than the Christians were careless and cold towards their Churches; for the Venetians inserted not one Article in favour of a Christian Church or a Religious House, which would have been granted as soon as demand∣ed, only a Greek who was Interpreter to the Great Vizier called 
Panaiotti,
 a Person of Parts and Learning, at the expence of two thousand two hundred Dollars; and an Armenian Merchant called 
Apro Chelabei
 at the charge of a thousand four hundred purchased two Churches for their respective Nations.


The Grand Signior in the mean time return∣ed to 
Salonica
 to pass the remainder of the Winter, which place being famous for multi∣tude of all sorts of Game,
 drew is heart, and made him impatient till he arrived those Plains, more desired by him than the Elysian fields; for having made his Entry into that City, the next day he designed to hunt: but being put in mind that the English Ambassadour Sir 
Daniel Harvey,
 who (as we said) arrived at 
Constanti∣nople
 the year before, attended his Audience, he was contented to grant it to him the next morning. But yet not to lose his hunting, at midnight he sent Officers to the Ambassadour to prepare for the next days Audience very early; and to gain time, ordered his Horses to be all ready, that so having dispatched that Cere∣mony, he might immediately mount into the Saddle and pursue his Game. Howsoever he was not in so much haste, but he testified due respect to His Majesty of Great 
Britain,
 and the esteem he had of the English Nation, or∣dering the Capitulations to be renewed; and commanding the Chimacam, that if any one should break or infringe them, that he should cut him off without farther argument. But as to renewing the Capitulations, the Chimacam falling at the Grand Signiors feet, beseeched him, That that particular might be deferred until the arrival of the Great Vizier, whose proper power and act it was to make War and Peace; and therefore for him to intermeddle about Capitulations was to invade the Viziers, Authority, which he durst not do without put∣ting his life in danger, or at least rendring his Person obnoxious to his irreconcileable displea∣sure; with which the Grand Signior being sa∣tisfied, ordered that the renewing of the Ca∣pitulations should be deferred until the return of the Visiier, and so dismissed the Lord Ambas∣sadour from his Presence; but this work of re∣newing the Capitulations was reserved for the care and conduct of Sir 
John Finch,
 who suc∣ceeded in the Embassy after the death of Sir 
Danil Harvey.


The Grand Signior arising from his Throne mounted into his Saddle to follow his excessive delight in Hunting, which now he pursued e∣very day without respect of cold or wet, or Horses or Attendants; but like an impetuous 
Nimrod
 raged amongst the timorous Hares and flying Harts, over-spreading the Woods with vast numbers of poor Jews and Peasants, which he had commanded forth to drive for Game, not respecting the extreme rigour and Frosts of Winter, by which many of those poor Wretches lying abroad in the nights, were benumbed, and dyed. And so far did his humour transport him in this Recreation, that he was discouraged at no inconvenience or labours which attended it; for one day appointing his Hunting at a certain place, which to pass on Horse-back was a great circuit, but a near∣er cut over a Gulf or Arm of the Sea, he ordered his Horses round, whilst he in Person attended with the Chimacam and several of his Grandees, passed over to the other side in a Gally. But being impatient of his Sport, and not able to give time to his Horses to make their way, ascended his Gally, commanding them to row away with all speed; and arriving at the other side some hours before His Horses could come, would yet land: and being weary of expectation, resolved to meet them on foot through all the dirt and mire of a low and rich soil: where whilst he travelled heavily, and almost tried, by good fortune they espied a Miller driving his Horse laden with two Sacks of Meal; whom when they had called, and made him to lighten his burden, and take off the Pack-saddle, the Chimacam himself stripped off his own Sables Vest, and covered the Horse with it, on which the Grand Signior mounting in great state, rode like a Prince till he met his own Retinue, which passage served to fill the discourse at night of that days Hunting, and deserves to be chronicled with our English Dialogue between the Miller and the King: howsoever we make use of it here to demon∣strate the strange and passionate humour which possessed this Sultan in his Hunt∣ing.


Little other recreation did this Grand Signior take,
 unless it were in the Company of his chief Sultana, called the Hasaki Sultana, by whom having had a Son, which beginning now to play and speak, reconciled much of his affection to the Female Sex, but yet with that moderation and well regulated love, that he confined him∣self wholly to this one Woman, having sent for her to be his Companion in all journies and ad∣ventures of Errantry, whilst the other Ladies as incumbrances and impediments to the speedy motions of the wandring Court, were dispeeded to 
Constantinople
 under the Government of the Queen Mother, as we have before declared; of which priviledge this Sultana beginning to be

sensible, endeavoured to encrease and conserve the Affections of her Lord by all the arts and tricks of love imaginable; for she was really, or else feigned to be, so enamoured of him, that she pined and macerated away her self for his absence; and when he was indis∣posed in his health, or intended a long Journey from her, she would fall into Swoundings, and Paralytical Fits, or something else, which was an undoubted symptom of true affection, such as commonly intervenes amongst us in the chast embraces of single marriage; that the Grand Signior, whose love to Women were not naturally as vagrant as his delights after the chase of wild Beasts, was so much satisfied in her alone, that he could be no more with∣out her than she without him; so that, like 
Diana,
 or some Mountain Nymph, she became a Huntress after her Prince, as he a Ranger af∣ter his Game.


And now in this place it may be pertinent to add; that on the 
30th.
 of 
December
 of this year 1669. Sir. 
Daniel Harvey
 his Majesties Ambassadour, being then on his departure from 
Salonica,
 Mr. 
Willam Hedges
 who was with him there, being the Treasurer to the 
Levant
 Company in 
Turk
,
 and 
Signior Antonio Perone,
 the Druggerman or Interpreter, having occa∣sion of business attended that day on the 
Keis-Efendi,
 or chief Secretary; who so soon, as they came into his presence he called out to them, I hope said he, that you are come to turn Musselmen, or believers; for your great Champion 
Serini Ogly,
 (for so they call 
Serini
) is become Feudatary, having submitted, and put himself under protection of the Grand Sig∣nior. It was but the night before, that certain Messengers from Count 
Serini,
 and his ad∣herents arrived at this Court, proffering to ac∣cept the Standart from the Grand Signior, and pay him Tribute, so they might obtain the power and protection of the 
Ottoman
 Arms against the Emperour. This proposition though in appearance so advantagious, that it might seem to admit of no doubt in the accep∣tance; yet both the Grand Signior and the Chimacam were so ready after the late suc∣cess at 
Candia
 to joyn in their Complement to the Vizier, that they would neither con∣clude, nor give answer to these Messengers, un∣til first they had consulted his sence, and opini∣on on the proffer, wherefore to loose no time according to the usual expedition of the 
Turks,
 two gallies were the very same night dispatched with these Messengers to the Vizier at 
Candia,
 to give him notice of this tender, and to demand his counsel, and assent thereunto: with like speed the gallies were returned with the Viziers approbation, though afterwards on better con∣siderations the 
Turks
 touched this cause so ten∣derly, that 
Serini
 and his complices being de∣tected, the plot Miscarried and the Conspirators brought to condigne punishment, as shall hereafter be related; what suspition the Counsel at 
Vienna
 might have of this design is uncertain, yet this is out of all doubt, that they had no as∣sured knowledge thereof, until it was first brought them by Mr. 
Hedges;
 and yet so much time was taken up herein, as that he travailed from 
Salonica
 to 
Constantinople,
 where he arrived the 
13th.
 of 
January,
 and there remaining some time for the better Setlement of his affairs be∣fore his journy thence for 
England,
 by Land he departed on the 
14th.
 of 
Feburary,
 and on the 
29th.
 of 
March
 following, was by Leiutenant General 
Esterhas
 received in to 
Raab,
 to whom giving this first Intelligence about 
Serini,
 and his adherents, was courteously treated, but yet detained, until advice was given hereof to Ge∣neral 
Montecuculi
 then at 
Vienna,
 and his li∣cense, and pass given to Mr. 
Hedges
 for his farther proceedings in his journy. Answer hereof being returned, he had licence given him to depart, and a guard to conduct him safe to 
Vienna,
 which is very necessary on those Frontiers. At 
Vienna
 Mr. 
Hedges
 being examined upon Oath by Count 
Capelliers
 to the truth of the foregoing Relation, Troops were immediately dispatched to the Castle of 
Serini,
 where they so seasonably arrived, as to take possession of it for the Emperour some few hours before the Turkish Forces, (having received a stop by cut∣ting of the bridge) came to seize it for the Grand Signior: (Count 
Serini
 perceiving by this Act, that his design, was discovered, fled with 
Frangipani
 his Father-in-law towards 
Transil∣vania,
 but being on his way thither over∣taken by the Emperours Edict, he was toge∣ther with 
Frangipani
 seized at Colonel 
Careis
 House, and thence brought to 
Vienna,
 and lodged at the Convent of Father 
Nicholas Donilard
 an Irish Frier in the Suburbs of that city; where 
Serini
 having seen, and discoursed personally with Mr. 
Hedges,
 he declared to him, 
That if the Turks had been, as good as their words, he had not been there a prisoner at that time.
 In this particular two things seem strange, and unusual. First on the 
Turks
 side, that a matter of this secrecy should be so openly divulged and dis∣coursed by them at 
Salonica:
 And secondly, on the Emperours part, that a business of this Impor∣tance commonly known at the Grand Signor's Court, should want a person to advice, and transfer it to 
Vienna;
 until it came acciden∣tally to be published by a stranger, who having taken a circuit with it by way of 
Constantinople,
 and his leisure there to accomodate his own affairs, vented it rather as a Subject of discourse, then a new discovery. 'Tis true, the 
Turks
 are very commonly open in their counsels, and have a qualitie to keep nothing secret though recommended to them under never so many Injunctions of privacy: yet that the Emperour who commonly maintains a Minister tending at the 
Ottoman
 Court, should have no other in∣telligence hereof, then such an accidental, and unexpected conveyance, is a matter which af∣fords occasion to upbraid the Negligence of the 
Germans,
 and at the same time to ad∣mire and praise the divine Providence and Justice.






Anno Christi 
1670.
 Hegeira 
1081.


THE Spring coming forward, the Great Vizier declared, That after St. 
George
's day, which is the 
23d
 day of 
April,
 (called by the Turks 
Cassim gheun
) he resolved to depart from 
Candia;
 and therefore ordered, That all Ships, Saiks, Brigantines, and other Vessels, which were found in any Port of the Grand Signior's Dominions, should be sent to 
Candia,


to transport him and the remainder of his Army to 
Rhodesto
 in 
Romelia,
 from whence he designed his March to meet the Grand Signior at 
Adrianople.
 But before his depar∣ture he took a view of the Island, taking his progress through the whole circumference of it, and numbring all the Inhabitants which paid Harach, or Pole-mony, found them not to exceed two and twenty thousand persons. For though in the time of 
Dellee Mehmet
 Pasha, who was the first that brought the Ottoman Sword into that Country, there were listed fifty five thousand, who paid duties of Harach; yet now the Plague, the Sword, and other miseries of War had reduced them to that small number, of whom ten thousand (as is reported) perished in the Mines, and before the Walls of their own City; and great numbers of Olive-Trees being cut down and burned by the Souldiery in tiem of the War, is the reason that that Island yields not half the quantity of Oils as in former times.


The Ambassador of 
Venice
 Signior 
Alivisé Molino,
 before mentioned, was now at 
Candia,
 designing to accompany the Vizier in his Voy∣age to the Grand Signior; for adorning which Embassy the Republick had appointed a Ship to carry the Presents and several Persons of Quality for attendance of the Bailo (for so their Ambassador is called;) and in regard in that passage the ship was to touch at 
Zant,
 they laded on her a hundred thousand Ze∣chins for payment of that Souldiery, which with the Captain General were returned from 
Candia
 to that place, with Presents for the Grand Signior and his Court; but it pleased God, that this Ship failing down the Gulf, met with so furious a storm of Wind, that she suffered shipwrack on the Coast of 
Italy,
 where not only the ship and goods were lost, but every soul upon that ship perished; amonst which was 
Lorenzo Molino
 Son of the Am∣bassador, and 
Ottavio Labia,
 another noble Venetian.


The Great Vizier entertained himself so long in 
Candia
 that the month of 
May
 was well entered before he departed thence;
 and by the way touched at 
Scio,
 where he was met by all the Officers and Governors of the adjacent Jurisdictions, who came to made tender of their Presents and Services; but the Vizier in a plausible manner, accepted of their courteous Offers, but returned their Gifts, saying, That he was so sensible of the great oppressions and expences the neighbouring Countries had suffered by reason of the War, that he was resolved to superinduce no new Charge by Victory and Peace.


In like manner from all parts was a con∣fluence of poor oppressed people, who came to petition for justice and relief against the corrup∣tion and tyranny of their Governors in the respective Countries. But the Vizier admitted no Audience for Complaints, whether it were to maintain an apprehension of his clemency and gentleness, by acting nothing that was cruel or severe, or to enjoy himself after his cares and turmoils in the War; he almost for four∣teen days continuance entertained himself in private by the cool and crystalline Fountains of 
Scio.
 Some report, that he gave himself at that time so excessively to Wine, being over∣joyed at his success, and conclusion of the War, that he was never capable, during his abode there, of serious thoughts or counsels; so that his Kahya, or Secretary, could hever be ad¦mitted access, unless he were called, though on the most urgent occasion of business. Others interpreted his retirements to be in order to serious considerations about the management of Affairs at his return; as how to satisfie the expectations of the Grandees, who patiently at∣tended an amendment of abuses in the Govern∣ment; how he might pacifie the minds of the Souldiery, who were jealous of Couspiracies against the lives of the Royal Brothers, and how to steer in an even course at Court between the security of his Master, and satisfaction of the Vulgar; for all the World lived in hope that alteration of times would amend abuses, and that the last remedy of all was the return of the Viziers Authority. Howsoever, it is certainly reported, That the Vizier was become exceedingly intemperate in wine, and drowned much of his cares in the fumes and vapours of it, supposing himself, as 
Tiberius
 did in 
Caprea,
 exempt from the eyes of the World, whilst he remained in 
Scio,
 which the Sea had separated from the greater Continent.
 And yet the Vizier, is believed, never to have tasted Wine, or known whether it was bitter or sweet, till the pride of his success in 
Candia
 transported him to make his joy extravagant, to which the Officers about his Person invited him, as that which cheared the spirits, strengthened the Nerves, and induced a strange kind of delight and pleasure in the fancy, beyond any thing of Poppies, or Opiate Compositions, or 
Biram
-Pasha's Pills, or Berse, or a thousand other inventions, fit only to confuse mens reason, and stupifie the brain, and benumb all the senses, in which some, as I have heard, had so practised themselves by degrees, that they could swallow five drams in twenty four hours, though I never knew any, unless one Turk, whom I saw eat above three; but then they could eat nothing else, nor were they fit after∣wards to receive or digest any other nourish∣ment, Nature being used to that poyson, re∣jected all other founder nutriment. But Wine (they said) cheared the heart in that manner, and comforted the stomach, that the Turks began now generally to drink it, unless he were some Pharisaical Hypocrite of the Ula∣mah, or some superstitious aged and ignorant Professor.
 So that the vice of drunkenness be∣came more common amongst the Turks, than a∣mongst the Germans, or our selves: I am sure more intolerable, and administred to more mis∣chiefs, by how much the Turks being unac∣customed to Wine, knew less how to com∣port the heats of Intemperance.


And here I shall make a little digression from my purpose in hand to acquaint my Reader of the effects which I have observed to be produced in those who accustom themselves to the use of Opium.
 In all the Country Vil∣lages amongst the Turks, the more aged sort of men who have most leisure, and least necessity to work, addict themselves to Opium for alleviation (as they say) of their cares, and to forget their sorrow, for pleasure in the taste there can be none, being very bitter to the palate; which being taken in a morning in a small quantity, about the bigness of a Tare, superinduces at first a strange chear∣fulness about the heart, and thence raises a more pleasing vapor to the head, than any

can proceed from the spirits of the best and the highest Wines: but afterwards as it begins to digest, the vapour becomes more gross, and consequently a kind of stupefaction is induced over the brain and nerves, which with drowsiness and sleep passes away like a drunken fit. The Youth amongst them which drink Wine abhor Opium, until growing into years, and to the care of a family (as a sign of which they suffer their beards to increase) they are taught by their Imaum, and more by example of others, that Wine being against their Law, is only dis∣pensable in wild and unbridled Youth, but in those of riper age is a vice to be reproached by all sober and well-governed men. In the place of which they take up the lawful and innocent Pill of Opium, which makes men serious and setled (as they say) because that it operates not like Wine, which makes men mad, and rash, and violent, but disposes them to be Sots, and to sit grave and quiet without doing hurt to any man, which is a qualification accounted very laudable amongst them, and is one of the greatest Vertues which they endeavour to ac∣quire in their Tekeés or Monasteries. This being the reason for which it is taken and allow∣ed, it is grown a common custom almost a∣mongst all the Country-people, who in the morning before they go to work take first their Opium, and upon it three or four dishes of Coffee; for it is observable, that none eats Opium but who accompanies it with great quantities of Coffee, which is doubtless a kind of Opiate in it self, and partakes very much of a Narcotick Quality; by this means and constant use some arrive to take strange quan∣tities; the most that ever I knew any man take was three drams in twenty four hours, 
viz.
 a dram and a half or thereabouts in the morning, and as much an hour afternoon: the which for more exactness I had the curiosity to see weighed. The same person offered for a small reward to take five drams in twenty four hours; but then he said, it required a long time to digest, and did not doubt but to over∣come it: but I was too scrupulous to put a man into a sleep, from whence I feared he might never awake. This person was of a thin and livid complexion, his skin shriveled, no more beard than a few hairs, his mouth commonly open, because his chap was fallen; his counte∣nance putting me often in mind of the Picture I have seen of the 
Gorgons
 head; for had it been incompassed with Snakes instead of his Turbant, it might have served for a perfect Original. He had arrived to the years of forty eight, and from the years thirty he had entred into Opium from great excess of Wine: in which condition he found that his stomach required littled other nourishment, being content with a small quantity of bread and water for his other Diet, Opium supplying him with all the other Delicacies he could de∣sire: he was the father notwithstanding of two or three children, which he confessed to have begot in the strength of his Opium, having no desire to accompany with his wife, until he was first invigorated with his usual Dose, being till then like a Trunk or Log, wanting spirits almost to turn his body. For his Opium was that only which could revive all, which about a quarter of an hour after it was taken began to operate, and then we discovered in his eyes, which before were dull and heavy, scarce opening, a certain quickness and sparkling, and then soon after he was fitted for the work of the day, and could labour as others, and take a journey on foot of seven or eight miles to Market, and return home at night: his body was always bound, or his belly constipated with the hardness of his excrement, and yet he was subject to no other sickness, unless his vitiated desire to this Poyson which can nourish no wholesome or healthful body. The Turks, as I have learned, make little other use of Opium than this; yet sometimes they will put it into their Camels ears, and the nostrils of their Horses, when faint and weary, wherewith they revive again, and soon recover their strength and force to travel.


The Vizier having thus passed some days of Entertainment at 
Scio,
 entred again his Gally, and passing through the Streights of the 
Hellespont
 arrived at 
Rodesto,
 where having landed many of his Janisaries and such of the Army as remained with him, after a few days continuance he marched to 
Adrianople,
 where he was received by the Grand Signior with all evidences of satisfaction, and entred the City triumphant after the manner of the Turkish 
Allai.


The Ceremonies and Complements being past, which usually intervene between Great Personages after a long absence, the grand Con∣sultation was, In what manner to prevent the seditious irruptions of the Souldiery, and how to reconcile the Jealousies between the Grand Signior and his Brothers. For the former, two things were concluded necessary. First, to divide the Militia of the Janisaries, which was immediately executed, and eight thousand of them, under pretence of Incursions, were sent through 
Moldavia
 to remain on the Fron∣tiers of 
Poland.
 Secondly, it being observed, that most of the Souldiery drank Wine, from whence in ancient times arose many Mutinies and Seditions of the Souldiery, dangerous to the Ottoman State, as namely in the time of 
Mahomet
 III. when the Janisaries in the heat of drunkenness entred the Seraglio by force, and demanded the Heads of the chief Favourites: And as then it was judged the best Expedient to cool the hot brains of the Janisaries, to pro∣claim a Prohibition of Wine at 
Constantinople,
 and to command upon pain of death, That those who had any Wine in their Houses should bring it forth, and stave it; so now the use of it was universally forbidden in all the parts of the Grand Signiors Dominions, and a special Command was sent to all places re∣spectively under the penalty of death, and a thousand maledictions, cursing Wine as come from Hell, and as a Liquor produced by the Devil to ensnare mens souls, and inebriate their heads, and confound States. And so generally was this Prohibition enjoyned, that his Ma∣jesties Ambassador at 
Constantinople
 with long solicitation and charge obtained licence for his Family, and the Merchants there to make Wine; but for the Merchants at 
Smyrna
 there was more difficulty, and this year Wine was not made in their Houses according to custom, and not without scruple permitted to be imported from the Greeks Islands, and other parts where the Command extended not its force; for the Prohibition was to all places where Moschs or Turks Inhabitants, the Villages or Isles where Christians only lived were not included. To

this Prohibition were added on every Friday Sermons to the People inveighing against Wine, and cursing the Drinkers of it, in which affair 
Vanni Efendi
 the Grand Signiors Preacher was much concerned, from whom the Original of this Counsel was judged to proceed. And now to please the Reader, who perhaps may be curious to know the stile of this Prohibition, I have here inserted the Command 
verbatim
 as translated out of the Original, and directed to the Kadi of 
Smyrna.




TO the most perfect of the Judges a∣mongst Musulmin (or Believers) the most worthy amongst those Powers which profess one God,
 the Mine of Vertue and Wisdom, the Exemplar of Justice to all People, the Inheritor of the Sciences of the Prophets and Apostles, the Ornament of his Office and (through the Grace of God assisting) our President in 
Smyrna,
 whose Vertues may they ever be augmented. At Receipt of this my Royal Command know, That Wine and Games at Dice, and figured Cards, and of Arrows without feathers; which are Lotteries, are the filthiness of Diabolical work (according to the testimony of the miraculous Revelation) are Fomenters of malice and wickedness, and are the fer∣ment of that Faction and Sedition which corrupt and seduce the Servants of God, which being prohibited by Authority, and yet used, provokes the anger and disdain of Almighty God against us: And whereas by this Mother of all wickedness (that is, Wine) the Musulmin Kingdoms are defiled, there appears an evident alteration of the Musulmin Law and Faith, and an inlet to actions of foul impression. Praised be the high and most great God, that in the days of my years abounding in Felicity, the ob∣servation of lawful Precepts hath been con∣firmed, and unlawful things have been pro∣hibited; and now I know that this is the sum of the most important Affair conducing to my Kingdoms and my own Felicities, and in general the principal and greatest care, and the best and most necessary Canon of my Empire: so that being desirous to satisfie the Creator of the World, my Royal and immutable Will resolves to cleanse and purifie the Musulmin Kingdoms of this pro∣hibited and filthy abomination; wherefore when this Royal Command comes to your hands, wheresoever there are Taverns of Wine, let them be rased and thrown down in all Cities and Towns ennobled with Musulmin Moschs, let the buying and selling thereof be prohibited, with all drinking and use of Wine; and likewise I command, That in 
Constanti∣nople, Brusa,
 and 
Adrianople
 the Imposi∣tion thereupon be wholly taken off. And that in all other Cities and Towns adorned with Musulmin Moschs, there be not a drop of Wine suffered or admitted in; and that Musulmins neither privately nor secretly drink Wine; and whosoever is or shall be Author of this sin, and to alter my Com∣mand in this particular, either now or here∣after, may he be punished by the Ʋniversal Lord of all the World. Likewise when this my Command of high Reputation ap∣pears, which is a Royal Writing, let it be annexed to the Decretal Rolls, and be put in execution according as it is obligatory. And when this Command comes to your hands, you are to have all due care of this injoyned particular, That it operate according to the Tenor of this Royal Injunction, partici∣pating of Prosperity and Majestick Power, by virtue of which you are to reprove, repre∣hend, hinder, and prohibit, according to the Law of God, the drinking of Wine; and that it may be wholly taken away, let the Tax and Revenue which proceeds from thence be taken off, and in all guarded and governed Cities and places of my Kingdoms, let the Taverns be ruined and overthrown. And therefore you are to make known and publish to all Citizens and Inhabitants the force of this my Royal Command, as well in the City of 
Smyrna,
 as in other Cities and Towns ennobled with Musulmin Moschs, and you are to ruine the Taverns which are found there. And you are to take away the Houses of Entertainment amongst the Franks which are in 
Smyrna
 that sell Wine, nor shall they sell Wine in their own houses, but you shall hinder and prohibit them: and if those Taverns shall be the Possessions of private men, you shall advise the Owners of them; or if they be bequeathed by Testament to the Deputies of the 
Muteveli,
 you shall admonish them with earnestness and threats, That in the place of Taverns they raise other more profitable and lawful Buildings, and that they re-edifie them in a different form from the first. And the Taverns being ruined and demolished ac∣cording to my Royal Command, and the Butts and other Ʋtensils thereof taken away, you shall make a publick Arz thereof, and send it to my Royal Stirrup; and you being admonished thereof by my Royal Admonition, you are to have a care that neither in the City nor Suburbs thereof, nor in Cities adorned with Royal Moschs any person whatsoever bring in Wine, or one drop thereof, or that the buying or selling thereof be admitted, and that no Musulman drink Wine. For if after this I come to understand, That any person have brought in Wine, though it be but one drop, I swear by the Holy Souls of my Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers that those who bring it in, or sell it, or drink it, shall be punished with such tortures, as were never inflicted on any before. In short, this being a business so important as to the Faith, as to my Empire, my strong intention and firm resolution is to cleanse and purifie in the highest degree as well the Frontiers, as the Royal Seats of my Empire from so foul a

sink of so much filthiness and dissention; and therefore do injoyn this Royal Writing of high felicity so far, that nothing shall be able to change or alter it, or rovoke this Command of Majestick Reputation. And for the fu∣ture, let him be who he will, that shall offer to oppose, or alter, or change this my Com∣mand declared by these Presents, or have in∣tention or design to the contrary, may the curse of God be upon him. In conformity here∣unto know you, that are Judges, that this being my Will and Pleasure, and ultimate Resolution, you are to register this noble Command in the Book of publick Acts and Decrees, that so it may be preserved; and for execution thereof, you are to use all your diligence and power, and therein to take due care; for if after these Admonitions, Con∣firmations, Menaces, and Rigors, Wine be either bought or sold in the Cities or Suburbs, or other places, as before; or that there re∣mains any Tavern not ruined, or if in any wise a drop of VVine be bought or sold, you shall receive due punishment, and your self suffer the same torments which are threatned against those who are publickly guilty of the transgression of this Law. Therefore know this, and knowing it, give credit to my noble Firme.


Dated in 
the Month
 Rabiul Evel, Hegeira 
1081.
 
in
 Adrianople.




And now one would imagine that this Com∣mand being a Hattesheriff signed with the Grand Signior's own hand, would have been of durable and perpetual Force and Authority. But experience hath shewed us the contrary, that in one Year after, Licence being first given to Franks, to make Wine in their own houses, and especially to all Christian Ministers; in one year more the indulgence became uni∣versal, and Taverns were again admitted, and still continue as common and free as in former times.






Anno Christi 
1671.
 Hegeira 
1082.


THE Ship which carried the Presents for the Turks and designed to trans∣port the Ambassadour, being cast away, new preparations were made, and the Gally 
Brazzana,
 commanded by 
Alexandro Zeno,
 a noble Venetian, was dispatched with them, being ordered to transport Signior 
Molino
 the Ambassadour to the Port, who was received with the usual honours due to his Quality and Character; all which Ceremonies and Offices being past, several matters occured which were not so well expressed in the Capitulations, but that they needed an explication; and new Orders and Models for redress of Affairs in 
Dalmatia:
 For the Morlacchs, who in the time of the War had submitted themselves to the obedience of the Venetians, began now to infest the Country, and to enter into those places, which in the first years of the War they had destroyed and abandoned; the Turks on the other side opposed them, and the Country be∣ing open, many skirmishes happened, and as many troubles ensued as in the time of the War. For adjusting these differences 
Mahomet
 Pasha of 
Bosna
 was dispatched into those Countries with Authority and Instructions; where on the other side he was met by 
Antonio Barbaro,
 Proveditor General of 
Dalmatia
 and 
Albania,
 appointed by the Senate to accord and settle the differences of the Confines; and the place designed for meeting of the Commissioners was appointed to be between 
Climno
 and 
Clissa;
 but such was the fury of the people, and the passion that both parties had to recover their ancient pos∣sessions, that the Turks in the Month of 
Novem∣ber
 by force of Armes made themselves Masters of 
Obronzo
 and 
Dernis,
 which were surrendred without much opposition, by reason of the small numbers of the Morlacchs, who neither having Garrison nor Fortifications were easily surprized, under the pretence of peace. But it succeeded otherwise at 
Scardona,
 where by the assistance of a Gally and some Brigantines, the Turks, who were the Aggressors, were repul∣sed; and in like manner at 
Risano
 they were beaten off, and put to flight with much confusion and slaughter, with the death also of 
Ʋsuff
 Bey, their chief Commander, and Author of all these troubles.


The Relation of these disturbances was car∣ried to the Port by the Bosnacs, who were con∣cerned in these Affairs, with all circumstances of aggravation which might incense the Grand Signior, and move the Vizier to take part in their Quarrel; But he being desirous to main∣tain that Peace which he himself had concluded, moved the Grand Signior to dispatch a Has∣acheé, or one of his Royal Officers, to render him an exact account of the true state of the Affairs of that Country. In which Interim 
Ma∣homet
 Pasha of 
Bosna,
 the Commissioner hap∣pening to dye, the Vizier moved, That the Morlacchs should surrender up those places which they had lately possessed, and that new Commissioners should be again sent for adjusting the Limits of the Confines, and the Possessions of the Inhabitants. The Senate of 
Venice
 accept∣ing this proposition, gave Orders to their Gene∣ral 
Barbaro
 to withdraw the people from the places in dispute, and in the Month of 
May
 1671. made and constituted the Cavalier 
Nani
 Procurator of St. 
Mark,
 their Plenipotentiary, with full authority to compose all differences touching the Frontiers. On part of the Turks one 
Mamut,
 once Pasha of 
Buda,
 and late Chima∣cam of 
Constantinople,
 was nominated and impowred with like faculty; he was a person with whom I was well acquainted, and of whom we have had occasion to discourse, when he was Kahya to old 
Kuperlee.
 He was a Native of the Country of 
Bosna,
 who are reputed for men of much more affable and courteous dis∣position, and of more pleasing Conversation, than the common temper of the Turks who are for the most part of haughty, sullen, and satur∣nine Complexions.


These Commissioners, with 
Thomas Tarsia
 Interpreter, met about the end of 
July,
 in the plains of 
Island
 between 
Zara
 and 
Sebenico
 under Tents erected for that purpose: At this meet∣ing were present also the Mufti, and Treasurer of 
Bosna,
 and all the Kadi's and Military Officers of that Province, which might make a Body of four or five thousand men, ill armed, and badly accoutred: With 
Nani
 the Commissi∣oner

for 
Venice,
 were present, 
Alberto Magno
 Captain of 
Zara, Farsetti
 Proveditor of 
Clissa;
 divers military Officers, such as the Cavalier 
Varisano, Grimaldi
 Serjeant General, Count 
Rados,
 the Count 
Scorto, Vimercato, Cesarini,
 with divers other Colonels, and Persons of Qua∣lity, and Nobles of the Province, some of which were Representatives for their principal Cities, such as 
Zara, Sebenico, Spalato,
 and 
Trau.
 His Excellency the Comissioner 
Nani
 had three Troops of Horse, and as many Companies of Foot, for his Guard, and at 
Possidaria
 were two Gallies and four Brigantines to attend him: so that his Equipage appeared as well Martial, as agreeable to a place ordained for a Treaty of Peace.


On the 
27th.
 of 
July
 the Commissioners had their first Conference in the Pasha's Tent, the Debate continued many hours with much heat; which did not only relate to the late Conquests, but new difficulties arose in regard that 
Ferat
 Aga, appointed Commissioner for the Port, had in the year 1573 assigned Bounds and Limits to the Confines, according to his pleasure and arbitrary will, which not being assented unto by the Ve∣netians, a new regulation was made by the said 
Ferat,
 together with Cavalier 
Soranzo
 in the year 1576. Time afterwards, and the turbu∣lent spirits of the Inhabitants had altered these Limits, and by reason of the long War the Land-Marks and Bounds of the Confines were re∣moved or wholly destroyed. The original Copies of the Writings of Agreement were rot∣ted, and much defaced, the names of the places and the scituations being wrote in divers Lan∣guages, were confused, and the reports of the peo∣ple were so different, proceeding from the diver∣sity of their Interests, that little of judgment could be founded on their relations. At length, as to the Confines of 
Zara,
 it was agreed, That they should be regulated according as they were limited by 
Soranzo
 and 
Ferat;
 for better set∣tlement of which, and to avoid all doubtfulness or mistake, the Commissioners took the pains to travel several days journey in person to erect the bounds and Limits of each people; in which though many contests and differences arose be∣tween particular persons, yet at length personal interests were forced to give way to publick de∣terminations.


In like manner the Confines of 
Sebenico
 were determined, being bounded by the River 
Checa,
 and being arrived at 
Scardona,
 the Pasha 
Ma∣mut
 desired that he might have the conveni∣ence of passing in the Gally, and accordingly he was received aboard, and treated with that ge∣nerous entertainment which is agreeable to the magnificence of the Republick; and landing at the River of 
Belulla
 on the Banks of the Vally 
Daniel,
 where the Pasha had placed his Tents, the Turks who with a greedy eye swallowed in their thoughts the possession and enjoyment of all these Plains, would have enlarged their Con∣fines to those marks which 
Ferat
 Aga had singly placed according to his own arbitrary pleasure, including also 
Verpogly
 within their Li∣mits.
 This 
Verpogly
 was a small Redoubt on the top of a Hill once belonging to the Veneti∣ans, which at the begining of the War they abandoned, as costing more to maintain and defend, than the value or consideration of it; the Turks afterwards possessed it, when they had a design to besiege 
Sebenico,
 but afterwards for∣sook it, and retired; upon this place 
Mamut
 much insisted, producing a Command from the Grand Signior, ordering that it be taken in, fortified, and garrisoned. But 
Nani
 with more force of Argument insisted on the contrary, pro∣ducing ancient Writings, and undeniable Testi∣monies to prove that this place did really, and of right belong to the Republick; by which though the Pasha was fully convinced in his own mind; yet being over-awed by the insolent im∣portunities of the Inhabitants, he was cautious and fearful of declaring his true sense in the case; but rather endeavoured to overcome the Ve∣netians sometimes with flatteries, and anon with menances, having to that purpose, besides his own Forces, ordered the Beglerbey of 
Greece
 to approach those Confines with an Army of about ten thousand men. But all this did not move the steddy Constancy of the Venetian Commissioner from his reason and right; for maintenance of which he appeared firm and re∣solute, and being necessitated for convenience of Water to remove his Quarters to the Lake 
Rebenich,
 gave some jealousie to the Pasha by this retirement of an intention to break the Peace; howsoever, 
Nani
 declared his meaning to the contrary, and that there might be no in∣terruption to their proceedings, proposed that these differences might be remitted to the Su∣preme Powers; and that in the mean time, un∣til answers came, they might proceed in the adjustment of other parts of the Confines. But the Pasha assented not hereunto, but desired rather the dispute should be referred to the Port, and that in the mean time he himself should retire to 
Cettina,
 and the other to 
Spal∣lato.
 Scarce were the Messages sent, and the Dispatches made (by 
Isaac
 Aga,
 a Person whom I well knew) before 
Mamut
 Pasha, after a short indisposition ended his days: he was a man of about ninety two years of age, at which years I have admired to see him ride abroad, and transact his affairs with great dexterity, with a strong memory, and a sound judgment. And here it is admirable to observe with what con∣stancy and patience the Turkish Officers do usually support their laborious employments; they contemn all difficulties and incommodious∣ness of living, as if they did not feel them, in∣uring themselves to colds and hearts, to watch∣ings and labours, being abstemious in their diet, and as occasions require, not indulging to sleep; and no question but this aged man travelling in the scalding heat of the Sun, and suffering much for want of plenty, as well as of good water, dried up that little radical moisture which remained, and caused this Autumn-fruit to fall, which perhaps might have continued a short time longer on the tree, had it not been desic∣cated by drought, and shaken too hard by the motion of travels and labour.


The News of 
Mamut
 Pasha's death being arrived at the Port, a Commission was imme∣diately granted to 
Chusaein
 Pasha Imbrahor, or Master of the Horse to the Grand Signior, to succeed in his government and business of Treaty concerning the Limits of the Confines; with which Authority and Instructions 
Chusaein
 posted away, and being well informed by 
Isaac
 Aga of the ill nature and rapacious disposition of those Borderers, arrived with intentions to agree, and with courteous and benign thoughts towards-Cavalier 
Nani,
 who had gained a great esteem and repute amongst the Turks of a generous and noble dispo∣sition.


On the 15/5 of 
October
 the Commissioners m


in the Valley of St. 
Daniel,
 shewing a courteous and kind aspect each towards other. Where∣fore laying all considerations concerning the Limits assigned by 
Forat
 Aga,
 and the Contests about 
Verpoglie,
 the Line drawn from the Mountain 
Tartarus
 was agreed, and determined to be the true and undoubted Confines of 
Sebe∣nico.
 The Valley of St. 
Daniel,
 for the pleasure and fruitfulness of it, administred more of diffi∣culty; but at length the Arguments of 
Nani
 pre∣vailed, and induced the Pasha to assent to those Bounds, which had been assigned by 
Soranco
 in the year 1576. giving, to avoid future mistakes, the true names to those places, which the Turks for their advantage, and to confuse things, had altered and disguised, that they might not be known. Thence proceeding to the Teritory of 
Trau,
 where was less of difficulty or trouble; for the Wars not having made much alteration in that place, the Lines were evidently described by 
Soranco,
 according to whose description the Fields, Plains, Rocks, and Mountains were mea∣sured out and, allowed.


Lastly, They came near to 
Spalato,
 where before the War there was little of any Terri∣tory assigned; but now by the Conquest of 
Clissa
 there was assigned unto it a spatious and fruitful Country, extending it self to the foot of the Mountains. As to 
Clissa
 there was no difference at all: howsoever the Turks would on no means admit, that the Venetians should keep 
Salona
 and 
Ʋragnizzo,
 because by that they would cut off all communication between 
Clissa
 and 
Spalato,
 and thereby render it a place useless, and of more charge than benefit; and because those two places of 
Salona
 and 
Ʋragnizza
 had been the Dowry of a Sultana Wife of 
Russen
 Pasha, and by her given to endow a Mosch, which therefore according to their Religion could not be given away, nor alienated. But 
Nani
 in∣sisting as vigorously on this, as on other points, shewed himself resolute to maintain this parti∣cular, as being that, which if not granted, would certainly in a short time be occasion of those quarrels and dissentions, which must necessarily break forth into an open War: for that there could be no security of Peace to the Inhabitants of 
Salona,
 whilst they lived amidst their Ene∣mies, and just on the Skirts of 
Clissa, Spalato,
 and 
Sasso. Chusaein
 having well comprehended this consideration, and being desirous to dispose matters towards a durable Peace, slighted the opinion and sense of the Borderers, and so con∣cluded all matters, and in presence of 
Nani
 subscribed the Agreement on the 
24th.
 of 
October
 in open Divan held in the Campagne of 
Salona;
 the which was also mutually subscribed, and Copies interchangeably given. And in this man∣ner the difference about the Confines was con∣cluded, and the long War between 
Venice
 and the Turks had an end.


Whilst all things were reducing themselves into a posture of Peace, the Timariots disband∣ed, and the Janisaries retired to their Cham∣bers, in the month of 
October
 returned the Turks Envoyé from 
France,
 bringing with him an Ambassadour from that King called Mon∣sieur 
De Nointel,
 a Person of an excellent tem∣per, grave and serious in his Treaties and com∣portment; and to give this Embassy the greater reputation, he was attended with three Men of War and a Fire-ship, which sailing along the 
Hellespont
 and 
Propontick
 without opposition, came to an Anchor near seven Towers, from whence sending advice of their arrival to the Chimacam demanded to be resaluted by the Seraglio, they promising as they passed to shew the first demonstrations of courtesie; but that being denied, as no usual or customary, the French Ships passed the Seraglio silently without firing a Gun, or any significations on either side, whether of Friendship of Hostility: the Ships came to an Anchor at 
Fonduclé,
 where the Ambassadour remained aboard unsaluted and unacknowledged by the publick Ministers of the City; until the Great Vizier, who suppos∣ed that a breach with 
France
 ought to have bet∣ter foundation than a meer Punctilio of Ho∣nour, seemed more to despise than take notice of the affront. For he who knew so well to dissemble, after he had seen the French Troops ranged both in 
Hungary
 and 
Candia,
 against the Ottoman Forces, and yet politickly connived thereat, and acepted an excuse, did not esteem it prudence to ground a War for want of the smoke of a few Guns; but on the contrary or∣dered, That the Ambassadour should be received with the usual Form and Solemnity of Recep∣tion. The French having the advantage by this success, the Souldiers and Sea-men belonging to the Ships committed many insolencies in 
Pera
 and 
Calata,
 which never were revenged or ac∣counted for; and when the Ships departed, above an hundred Slaves escaped from the Gallies and parts of 
Constantinople,
 and gained Sanctuary aboard: amongst the rest one Mon∣sieur 
De Beau-jeu
 a Knight of 
Malta,
 who had for a long time been Prisoner in the seven Tow∣ers; but at length knocking off his Irons, and by help of a Cord letting himself down from one of the highest Towers in the night, recovered the Ships, and regained his liberty. Nor yet did this nor other affronts, whereby the French did really brave the Turks, administer sufficient subject of choler to the Vizier; for passing all by, as if nothing had been done, or nothing worthy his notice, frankly gave his Orders to let the Ships pass the Castles, which upon the foregoing causes and pretences had been before detained: adding, That it was natural, as well for men as for birds, to endeavour to procure their liberty, and therefore were not blameable but that those to whose care they were commit∣ted, wanting due circumspection and vigilance in their Office, should pay for the escape of their charge by the price of their own lives or liberties.


The French Ambassadour in the mean time proceeded in his Journey to 
Adrianople,
 where the Court resided; and having passed through the several degrees and Punctilio's of Visits and other Ceremonies, at length descending to mat∣ters of business, proposed the renovation of the Articles of Peace, with an addition of thirty two Particulars to be altered or adjoyn∣ed. The Vizier who all this time kept more in his heart than he evidenced in his counte∣nance, refused to condescend to a concession of the most easie and reasonable of their demands, offering only to renew the Capitulations 
ver∣batim
 according to the Tenour of the ancient Cannon, without other alteration than the Name of the present Sultan, and the Date of the Month and Year, and herein he was so con∣stant and fixed, that no arguments or colours of reason could seem to move him in the most minute and less important points of circum∣stances; and this perhaps lest the World

should imagine, that the Turks were affrighted into Terms and better Treatments of Friend∣ship, or that Immunities and Privileges in the Ottoman Court were acquired rather by rude usage adjoyned with menaces and neglects, than by more candid and fawning Addresses.


In this manner the French Affairs rather went back than forwards in the Ottoman Court, and it seemed that the Turks late Em∣bassy into 
France
 and of the French to the Port served to augment the differences more than allay them. For the new Ambassador falling short in his expectation, having obtained nothing of those many Particulars which he demanded, retired male-content from 
Adria∣nople
 to his usual Residence at 
Constantinople,
 where he resolved to attend what farther In∣structions should be given him from 
France;
 and supposing his Master would ill resent his usage so contrary to what was promised in general terms, did suppose, that his next Orders would be of revocation, and that those frequent disgusts and disrespects so often re∣ceived, and given on one side and the other, would at length burst out into an open defiance. The Turks apprehended so much themselves, and as their affairs and designs proved after∣wards with 
Poland,
 they were displeased that they had given the most Christian King so just an occasion of quarrel: for understanding to∣wards the latter end of the Year 1671. that great Preparations for War were making in 
France
 both by Sea and Land, they were con∣scious that their demerits had justly deserved the chastisement of the French Arms, in re∣venge of the many injuries they had offered that Nation, and therefore paused a while, and observed the motion of these Enemies, before they would engage themselves in a War with 
Poland.
 But at length the beginning of the Year 1672. having discovered the designs of 
France
 to be only intended against 
Holland,
 the Turks reassumed their purposes so long premeditated against 
Poland,
 with an arrogance natural to Turks, and with a scorn not only of 
France,
 but of all Christendom. For his most Christian Majesty judging perhaps, that the rude treatment of an Infidel Prince so far remote, intrenched not so much on his Honour and Interest, as the quarrel he had with the neighbouring States, seemed to contemn for the present, or rather to defer the revenge of former injuries until a more fit and commo∣dious season; wherefore in the mean time his Ambassador upon new Instructions from 
France
 brought purposely by a Man of War, repaired a second time to 
Adrianople,
 where he inti∣mated unto the chief Ministers the great desire his Master had to maintain that League and Friendship, which for above an hundred years had continued inviolate and uninterrutped: and therefore waving all other former Particulars of demand, declared himself satisfied, only to renew the Capitulations, with that single altera∣tion of their Customs from five to three in the hundred, according to that Priviledge which the English and all other Christian Merchants enjoyed, whose League and Friendship was subsequent to that of others. The Great Vizier being now freed of that suspicion and fear he apprehended of the French Fleet, and being assured that their Arms were not now probable to disturb him in his designs intended, he seriously smiled in his sleeve at these Addresses, and with a kind of scorning neglect bid the Ambassador welcome to the Court, saying, That he should have what he desired. Where∣fore the Capitulations were transcribed, and the alteration made in the value of their Customs; but the Vizier who meant nothing less than to yield them this Priviledge, defer∣red the signing thereof from day to day, paci∣fying the daily importunity of the Ambassa∣dor with dilatory excuses, until at length having protracted the time to the very day that the Grand Signior and he began their March towards 
Poland,
 without so much as granting the Ambassador a personal Audience, did then with soft and gentle words signifie to the Interpreters the grand pressures of his Affairs at present, that would not permit him time to perfect all matters with the Ambassadour, whom they should assure, that at his return with Glory and Victory from the Enterprizes in hand, those requests should be granted, and his promises performed; and in the mean time his Nation should remain secure in these Do∣minions, as in former times, and the League and Friendship continued and maintained. The Ambassador was strangely surprised at this last Farewel; but being a Gentleman of great Morality and Vertue, knew, no doubt, how to bear such a disappointment with an equality of mind agreeable to the greatness of his Soul; and therefore with a due resentment of the in∣jury received, he returned to 
Constantinople,
 whilst the Sultan and his Vizier proceeded in their March towards the Confines of 
Poland.


But before I enter into a relation of the mo∣tives of that War, and the success thereof, which is the Subject of the following Year, let us return to the place from whence we have digressed, and observe in this Year of Peace and repose of this Empire, what the Sultan con∣trived for security of himself by the death of his Brothers.


We acquainted you formerly in what man∣ner the Sultan was disappointed in his designs against his Brothers, by means of his Mother, to whom the Janisaries had committed the care of their safety, which she according to her promise had maintained, and tendered equally with her own. But now the Vizier being re∣turned from the Wars, and the most seditious amongst the Janisaries withdrawn from 
Con∣stantinople,
 it was thought fit to make a new attempt on the Princes still residing in the old Seraglio, which was performed with those duc preparations and secrecy, that it took effect on Sultan 
Orchan,
 the eldest of the two, who in the Month of 
September,
 1671.
 dyed by a draught of poyson, which was ad∣ministred to him as a Present from his cour∣teous Brother; some say he was strangled, and that before he submitted his neck to the Bow∣string, he killed one of the Executioners with his Hanjarre. This Prince was reported by the people to be a comely Person, of a strong and robustious body, of large and black eyes like Sultan 
Morat:
 his death was lamented by all, and presaged as fatal to the Empire, in re∣gard that that very night that he was murthered the Moon suffered a greater Eclipse than it had done for many years before, which happening out in this conjuncture was interpreted as omi∣nous, and served to increase the maledictions and evil speeches, which the Turks in all places

cast out upon those who gave this counsel to the Sultan.


About this time the State of 
Genoua
 desirous to change their Officers in 
Turkie,
 sent a new Resident to 
Constantinople,
 and a Consul to 
Smyrna,
 which change was prinicipally obtained at the request of the old Ministers, who weary of an employment so tedious, without a benefit corresponding to their melancholy life, and perceiving their Trade decline before it was ar∣rived to any tolerable state or degree of reputa∣tion, by the assistance and mediation of friends sollicited their Letters of Revocation. For the Trade of 
Genoua
 being cheifly founded on hopes of those advantages which they expected from a coarse or base alloy of mony, did in∣stantly decay so soon as the Turks discovered themselves to be abused by the vast quantities of Temins imported, as we have before related: after which their profit failing, the Consulage consequently decayed, which is the only sub∣sistence and encouragement of such Officers as are necessary to reside for the continuance of that Peace, which but a few years before they unadvisedly made with the Turk. The new Resident had no sooner arrived at 
Constanti∣nople,
 and considered the poor and mean estate and ill foundation of their Trade, the grow∣ing charge of the Residency, and the great debts thereof that were to devolve upon him from his Predecessor; but he perceived into what a Labyrinth of troubles he had ingulfed himself, instead of being preferred according to his hopes into a place of Honour and happy retirement. In which confusion of thoughts arising one morning before day from his bed, and sitting on his Close-stool (as the servants of the house report) reached at a Towel, which being intangled within the Lock of a Carbine that hanged always charged near his bed, un∣fortunately drew the Trigger too hard, which with that gave fire, and shot the poor Gentle∣man into the belly with a brace of Bullets, of which being mortally wounded, after Con∣fession and some Prayers in a few hours he passed to another life: unhappy mischance, if it may be called a chance; for I have under∣stood from a sober person of that Nation, that the anguish of mind which he conceived at the evil condition of his Affairs, wrought in him a deepness of melancholy and despair, under which languishing some days, did at last most miserably lay violent hands upon him∣self.


And now it is time to recal to mind the Con∣spiracy of Count 
Serini,
 Marquess 
Frangipani,
 and Count 
Nadasti,
 Persons of Quality and of great Power in 
Croatia
 and 
Hungary,
 who (as we said before) had sent their Messengers to the Great Vizier then remaining in the Leagure of 
Candia,
 with overtures of submission to the Ottoman Power. It was strange News to the World to hear that the House of 
Serini
 should abandon the Christian Party, and those re∣nowned Defenders of their Country should apostatize, though not from Christianity, yet from that Cause and Liberty which their An∣cestors and themselves had defended with Blood, Treasure, Valour, and Constancy. But dissentions and animosities sown by Satan, the Enemy of the Christian Church, did strangely corrupt the minds of those famous Persons, and raise in them a Spirit resolved to avenge the neglect and injuries put upon them by the Ministers of the Imperial Court, though at the expence and hazard of their fortunes and lives, and ruine and shiprack of their Honour and Consciences: For the neglects and affronts undeservedly cast on 
Nicholas Serini
 during the late War (as before related) and the con∣tempt and scorn put on the Croatian and Hun∣garian Nobility, was supposed to have fired the hot and ambitious Spirit of these Persons, who could more easily endure the slavery of the Turkish yoke, than condescend to the Go∣vernment and prevalency of a contrary Party. Wherefore in prosecution of their design, the complices of 
Serini
 being resolved to submit to the Turk, dispatched two other Gentlemen to the Ottoman Court (besides those which were sent the year before to 
Salonica
) who arrived at 
Adrianople
 the 
11th
 of 
February
 1670/1 de∣manding the protection of the Sultan, for which they promised a Tribute of thirty Purses, or fifteen thousand Dollars every year for those Lands they held in 
Croatia.
 To make Answer hereunto a Divan or Council was called, in which were weighed all the Arguments and Reasons on one side and the other. The Muftee opposed their receiving into protection, as being against the Capitulations and Agree∣ment so lately concluded with the Emperor, wherein the receiving or abetting of Rebels is expresly forbidden, and provided against by one side and the other; but 
Vanni Efendi
 the Preacher who used to be always of a different opinion to the Muftee, urged to have them re∣ceived, because that the advancement of the Mahometan Cause, and enlargement of their Empire was more sacred than the conservation of their League with an Infidel Prince. And that the Ottoman Court was no longer to be termed the Refuge of the World, if it could not yield that protection which oppressed King∣doms and distressed Princes petitioned to obtain. In this manner the matter being controverted without Agreement, it was in fine resolved to refer the matter to the determination of the Grand Vizier, who was now a few months past return'd triumphant from 
Candia.
 But by this time Intelligence being come by way of 
Bosna,
 that the Emperor had already entered 
Croatia
 with thirty thousand men, that he had taken 
Chiacheturno
 in 
Cotoriba,
 and that 
Serini
 and his Associates were taken already or fled, either to 
Vienna
 to beg pardon of the Em∣peror, or 
Transylvania,
 or to some other place, that the Marquess of 
Bada
 had fortified 
Sequas
 and other Castles of 
Serini
 with German Gar∣risons; the Turks esteemed it too late to ad∣minister help to this desperate cause, and there∣fore refused to own the Partronage of a People, to whom they could neither pretend by Rea∣son, nor defend by Arms. The Vizier also like the Fox, contemned those Grapes which he could not reach, and with an abhorrency as it were of the Revolt or the Rebellion, as a zealous Hater of all perfidiousness, refused to afford protection to any of the Complices in the late Confederacy, which he politickly de∣signed in reference to the Emperor, whose friendship he would seem to conserve most faithfully, lest he should interrupt him in the carrying on of that War, which he then medi∣tated against 
Poland.
 But what became after∣wards of these Conspirators is the subject mat∣ter of the German History, it is sufficient to acquaint the Reader here that their design be∣ing

seasonably discovered, they were interrup∣ted by the hand of Justice, and met that Fate which is due to Traitors and Rebels to their Country, having abused the goodness of their Prince, to whom clemency and mercy are connatural. We shall therefore leave these men to render the next account to the Judge of all things, and prosecute our Relation of the Wars of 
Poland,
 which now was the next prize held up to the Turkish Militia, and was that adventure which was to consummate the glories of the Great Vizier. Howsoever, this gave beginning to that Rebellion in 
Hungary,
 which to this Year 1679 hath been continued, without prospect how far it may proceed, and what may be the issue of such direful Effects.






Anno Christi 
1672.
 Hegeira 
1083.


WE have formerly acquainted you how coarsely the Chimacam of 
Adrianople
 had in the year 1667 treated the Ambassador of 
Poland,
 who came to complain of the in∣cursions made into their Country by the Tar∣tars; desiring that not only satisfaction might be made for the late spoils, but that that un∣ruly and savage people might be restrained from the like Attempt for the future. But the Vizier being now returned in person it was thought necessary, That to preserve this gross Body of Empire from corruption, it should be exercised with motion, and the vigorous agita∣tions of a new War.
 To what place they should now convert or employ their Arms, was the important subject of a grand Consul∣tation; they had lately made up a peace with the Venetians, so that on that side it was too early to make an irruption, the parts of 
Persia
 were too remote and distant to carry on a War with success and pleasure; the fields of 
Hungary
 had been lately traced, and they were satiated with the blood of 
Austria
 and 
Germany;
 some∣thing now of novelty must be proposed, and the forgotten ways of 
Poland
 must be again opened, there being something, it seems, of wantonness in prosperous Arms, which delight in variety, and abhor as much to fight often in the same Country, as Travellers do to see the same place twice. The Polanders had unto this day so preserved the Limits of their Country with honour and gallantry, that the Turks could never secure to themselves one palm of Land within their Territories, until the civil and most detestable Discords of that Country laid them open to the fury of their Enemies, who embraced this most grateful op∣portunity, which facilitated their Design, and made that easie which they had so long desired, and with care studied and contrived. But for the better understanding of these Affairs it is convenient for us to take the Thread of History at some distance off, that so we may with better light comprehend the Causes, O∣riginal, and Occasions of this War.


The hatred and jealousies which the Otto∣man Port hath always nourished and conserved against the Kingdom and Dominions of 
Po∣land,
 are ancient and inveterate, having their rise from the valiant opposition and successful repulses it always made against the various attempts of the Turks; whereby the Poles were animated to treat always at equals with them, and with terms agreeable to that vain glory and swelling pride, which are natural to their Nation.
 But that which renewed the memory of past actions, and raised an expectation in the Turks to avenge the injuries by subjugating the Cosacks, was one 
Bogdan Chimilniczki
 Ge∣neral of the Cosacks, who growing powerful in that Country, with the strength of a nume∣rous Army, abhorring the Pride of the Polish Nobility, denied obedience to their Kingdom, resolving to make himself the absolute Prince of that Province, from whence various fortunes of War succeeding, he was at length forced to join himself to the Tartars, and crave the pro∣tection of the Turkish Arms. In the mean time, 
Poland,
 invaded by the Swedes, Mosco∣vites, and Transilvanians, was dismembred of 
Livonia,
 and a great part of 
Lituania
 and 
Verania,
 the first possessed by the Swedes, and the latter by the Czar of 
Moscovy,
 and the Rebel Cosacks; which confusions rejoyced the Turks, and gave them the first hopes, not only to free themselves from the frequent Piracies the Cosacks committed on them in the Black Sea, but to impose upon them the Ottoman Yoke; to which end they maintained a secret correspondence with the Generals of that peo∣ple, promising them the assistance of Men, Mony, and Arms, but yet with that caution, that they would not seem unprovoked to quarrel with the Poles, or without just cause to violate the peace of 
Choccin,
 to which they pretended a most religious and reverend regard.


Wherefore, that they might not appear causeless Actors against that solemn League, they secretly encouraged those Incursions, which in the Years 1666 and 1667 we have already mentioned to have been made by the Tartars into 
Poland,
 as far as the Walls of 
Leopolis;
 which action, that the Tartars might not have occasion to abett and maintain, the Poles resolved to send a most splendid Embassy to the Turks, desiring that the Tartar 
Han
 might be deposed, for having unjustly violated the sacred peace of 
Choccin.
 For that as the Poles were obliged to restrain the Piracies and De∣predations of the Cosacks in the Black Sea, so the Turks were become security against the incursions of the Tartars. Scarce had the Am∣bassador 
Radiowski
 delivered this message, be∣fore he unhappily died at 
Adrianople
 (as we have before signified;) to whose Complaint and Demand, after many delays, no other answer was given, than that the Poles should first break their League which they had con∣tracted with 
Moscovy
 for thirteen years, without the consent, and against the pleasure of the Port, and then after that they might expect and promise themselves all due satis∣faction.


In this manner Affairs stood when King 
Casimir,
 weary of the Factions and Discords of the Nobility, resigned up his Crown to retire unto a private life. And now it being necessary to proceed to a new Election we may consequently expect various Commotions and Disturbances in this State, sufficient to artract the eyes of the Turks, and encourage the Cosacks in their intended Revolt. At length Prince 
Michael Korebut Wisnowieski
 being elected King, it seemed agreeable to reason, that all 
Verania
 should have returned to obedience of

him, to whom the best part of that Country did by right of patrimony, and natural inheri∣tance belong; but the success thereof fell out contrary to all expectation, for 
Dorosensko,
 then General, designing to usurp that Govern∣ment, proposed the project of uniting 
Verania
 to the Body of 
Poland,
 as a member of the Crown, by which means that Province would not only become free from its Vassalage to the Nobility, but obtain equal suffrages in the Diet, with all the other more free and priviledged Countries; and in this manner he might not only compel 
Poland
 to condescend to his designs, but confirm himself in the ab∣solute and supreme Authority of the Cosacks: This proposition therefore seemed so insolent, and favouring of Rebellion to the Polish Court, that a severe and menacing Message was dispatched to 
Dorosensko,
 threatning to take from him his Bulaua, or Truncheon of General, if ever he entertained any such ima∣gination so highly derogatory to the Majesty of the Polish State; he therefore thought it his time to cast himself wholly into the Pro∣tection of the Sultan, and accordingly dispatch'd Ambassadors to the Port to signifie their sub∣mission, begging to be received into the Arms of the Ottoman Power; and as an assurance thereof, that he might receive the (Tough) which is the Ensign of Authority, carried by Pashaws. The Vizier at the first motion hereof, reflecting on the evil consequences, in case the Grand Signior's honour should be foiled in this action, suspended a while a com∣pleat answer thereunto; but at length being instantly sollicited, and perceiving the Dis∣orders and Factions of 
Poland
 to encrease, the Cosacks were received for Subjects of the Empire, and obliged to wage War against all Enemies to the Ottoman Power.


Duke 
Michael
 being elected King, the first Act he performed was to send an Ambassador extraordinary to the Grand Signior, with no other Design than to acquaint him of his Electi∣on to the Crown, only in case an opportunity presented, then to move for a ratification of the Articles concluded at 
Choccin.
 This Am∣bassador, called 
Wisozki,
 being of a haughty and proud spirit, became the Author of all the mischief which ensued; for being of a temper which could not equally bear the honour of his important Office, lanched out into matters beyond his Commission, and in∣stead of imparting his Message, would become sole Arbitrator of all the differences between those two powerful Princes; for he being unac∣quainted with the Power or Affairs of the Turks, supposed nothing in this World com∣parable to the number, riches, and valour of his own Nation, and therefore gave himself that liberty of arrogant Language, that by way of Command and Menaces he rather seemed to act the part of a Governor or Um∣pire in the differences of State, than of an Orator or Suppliant for peace. In his conceit the Turks wanted both courage and power to invade 
Poland,
 and therefore supposed he might safely brave them into a ratification of former Articles, especially when he mentioned a hundred thousand Horse, which he under∣took before the Vizier to be able on his own account to conduct as far as the Walls of 
Adrianople.
 It was a strange humor of 
Rodo∣montado
 that inspired these two last Ambassa∣dors, and if from them we may take a pattern of the disposition of the rest of the Polish No∣bility, it will be no wonder to hear and read the Destractions that are amongst them, that they carry themselves with disrespect to their Prince, are emulous and factious amongst themselves, and that their pride and ignorance, which have flattered their humour, and triumphed amidst their Tenants and Vassals, should betray them to all those evils which we may fear may be the consequences there∣of.


The Great Vizier, considering the confi∣dence which this person used in his Discourse, imagined that the differences in his Country might be composed, and therefore in com∣pliance with his desire, offered in general terms to confirm the peace made at 
Choccin,
 without Addition of any new Article in reference to the Cosacks, being a business of that nature which admitted of no present determination; this, he said, was his ultimate resolution, which if the Ambassadour approved not, he might then advise it home, and expect a farther result of their Counsels. 
Wisozki
 being really possessed in his fancy of the Turks weakness, gave way to his passion, and with little judgment replied, That he approved not of the Proposition, nor needed he to transmit any such advice into 
Po∣land,
 he himself being a Plenipotentiary of as full a Power as the King and Council; for be∣ing a Nobleman, he was by consequence that necessary Member of the Republick, that nothing could pass without his Suffrage.


The Vizier amazed at this extravagant way of discourse, the which he supported with moderation and contempt, dispatched away a Chiaus into 
Poland
 with Letters, desiring that this Ambassadour should be recalled, as being a Person unable to manage matters of the least concernment; and if they supplied his place with an other, he should be received with due respect, and a plain way laid open to con∣clude his Negotiations to the satisfaction of both Parties.


Wisozki
 abounding in his own sense and humor, represented matters in a far different manner into 
Poland,
 alledging, That the Law of Nations was impeached by the violence offer∣ed to his Person, being imprisoned, and the usual Tain or Allowance of Ambassadours withheld from him; both which were not abso∣lutely true: for the maintenance he refused as too mean for his Quality and Office; and for his Imprisonment, it was no other than Con∣finement to the City of 
Constantinople,
 with a prohibition only from passing over unto 
Pera,
 where formerly in a house he had taken, he committed a thousand irregularities and disor∣ders, which caused the Vizier to recal him a∣gain over to 
Constantinople,
 denying him the liberty of passing more to the other side. These were the injuries which he complained of into 
Poland,
 still fancying, That if the Nobility were assembled to consider of these matters, the Turk would be so affrighted at it as to conde∣scend unto any terms he should propound. These reports of 
Wisozki
 took that impression with the Court, that esteeming all authentick which he said or wrote, without farther exami∣nation issued out Orders for a general Insurrecti∣on, and that all people should prepare for the War, rendring the Vizier no other answer, than that when their Ambassadour was set at liberty,

and had licence to depart, the like should be permitted unto theirs, and in the mean time the Chiaus was committed to safe custody, The Grand Signior highly angred at this obstinate misunderstanding, immediately ordered that 
Wisozki
 should depart, and at the same time commanded his whole Militia to rise and fol∣low him to the War; and so much the rather was he animated by the reports sent him from 
Dorosenzko,
 seconded by the Vayvods of 
Mol∣davia
 and 
Valachia,
 whose Letters declared the miserable confusions in 
Poland
 divided into divers Factions and Parties, their want of money, and the mutiny of the Souldiery inclined rather to betray than defend 
Verania.
 And now a Sword and other Presents usual in these cases, being sent to the Tartar 
Han,
 he was ordered to unite with the Cossacks, and to invade 
Poland,
 where being encountred near 
Batona,
 by a Bo∣dy of Horse under the Command of 
Luzecki
 Governour of 
Podolia,
 the Poles were defeated, and was the first bad Omen of the ill success of this unhappy War.


To second these beginnings, the Grand Sig∣nior having raised an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand men, marched towards 
Po∣land
 already sick and languishing with its own intestine distempers, and unable to contend with a Body united within it self, wanting nei∣ther internal vigour, nor nourishment to main∣tain its strength; the first Enterprise was the impregnable Fortress of 
Caminiecz,
 which had often in former times baffled the Ottoman Arms; but now being ill provided, destitute of Arms, Ammunition, Provisions, and but weakly manned, and what was worst, despair∣ing of any Relief, after eleven days Siege sur∣rendred it self to the pleasure of the Conque∣rour. Hence the Turks had an open passage through all 
Podolia
 and 
Volhinia
 to the very Walls of 
Leopolis,
 which they passed over like Travellers rather than Enemies, there not ap∣pearing one person in Arms to oppose them, delighting and sporting themselves in these most fruitful and delicious Countries of 
Europe:
 thus had private animosities and civil rancour posses∣sed the minds of the Poles one agaisnst the o∣ther, that they had rather yield themselves to the servitude of an Enemy, than condescend to the humor or counsel of a Citizen. Thus had the Turks passed all this Summer in the Plains and Cities of 
Poland,
 where it seemed rather Peace than War, all places submitting with∣out difficulty unto the Grand Signior as to their true and natural Lord and Soveragin, by which means the Inhabitants redeemed their Lives and Estates; for the Sultan willing to demonstrate his clemency, and to spare those who volun∣tarily yielded, and encourage others to submit to so gentle a yoke, forbad all the common out∣rages of Souldiers, not permitting Plunder or Booty to be brought into the Camp; nor grea∣ter Spoils to be committed, than if his Army had passed through his own Dominions; whether this obliging or winning manner of proceedings overcame the stout hearts of the Polanders more than blows, will be experienced in the sequel of this story; it is certain the Mili∣tia returned home poor and weary, and more broken by this years Expedition than by the long and tedious March to 
Persia,
 and hazar∣dous Battles during the Siege of 
Babylon;
 but the Sultan was desirous to return home, and give this first proof and testimony to the World of his war-like and invincible Spirit, of his clemency and of his success in Arms, that at his first appearing in the Field, all Armies and Fortresses submitted to his Power. The Poles on the other side being of an opinion and temper far different to that of their Ambasadour 
Wisozki,
 resolved to purchase the departure of their new Guests on any terms; so that these following Articles were agreed and conclud∣ed.


That the King of 
Poland
 should quit all Claim to 
Ʋkrain, Podolia,
 and 
Rusland.


That for 
Leopolis
 and the Country thereabouts should be paid a Tribute of seventy thousand Dollars a year; all other Capitulations for∣merly made were to stand in force and vir∣tue.


These Articles being signed, the Grand Sig∣nior committed the Government of 
Verama
 and 
Podolia
 to 
Dorosenzko,
 and the defence of 
Caminiecz
 to 
Chusaein
 Pasha with a Garrison of twelve thousand Janisaries; so that now being returned home, the Militia was permitted to repair to their several Countries and Dwellings, the following year being dedicated to the repose and ease of the Souldiery.


Towards the end of this Year, when the Ships of 
Barbary
 returned home, those of 
Tripoli
 con∣ceived a certain discontent against their Pasha named 
Osman
 for his covetous behaviour to∣wards his Souldiers; for having that Summer taken very rich Prizes from the Venetians and other Nations, the Souldiers expected at their return home to receive a division of their Spoils according to their just and equal shares. But the Pasha grown old and covetous, getting the whole into his hand, appropriated the greatest part to his own Coffers, distributing to the Soul∣diers an inconsiderable proportion of what they had gained the year before. Hereupon the chiefest Commanders amongst them becoming greatly enraged began to incense the Souldiery, which for interest or want of Pay, being always ready to mutiny, took fire immediately, and easily were blown into a Rebellion; so that first making Parties, and retiring into secret Junto's and Councils, they resolved to destroy the Pasha, and alter the Government, and thereby make themselves Masters of all the Treasure and Riches which 
Osman
 Pasha had in the space of thirty years amassed together. The Pasha having notice of all that passed, and apprehending the Conspiracies of this unbridled People to be dangerous, began to provide for his safety, and getting together so many as he supposed of his Party, and that were, or might be faithful to him, which joyned with his Slaves and Servants, made up a small Gar∣rison, wherewith to defend and preserve him∣self within his Castle, which being well provid∣ed of Ammunition and Victuals, he shut his Gates, denying access or admittance unto all persons upon pretence and account whatsoever. Hereupon the Mutiny appearing, the Souldiery drew into a Body in the open field, against whom several shot were made from the Castle; so that now the Civil War was begun, and the whole Force of 
Tripoli
 raised against the Pasha and his Castle, which being straitly be∣sieged the Defendants who were for the most part Servants and Slaves, failing in their cou∣rage, resolved to make Conditions for them∣selves to the best advantage; wherefore conspi∣ring against their Master, entred his Chamber

and strangled him in the night; and the next morning opening the Castle-gates, received the Enemy within the Walls, making manifest the death of their Master and their own Treachery. 
Osman
 Pasha being dead, every one acted for a time what the wildness of an unruly multitude could suggest, till such time as the Heads of the Rebellion could frame themselves into some form of Government, which for the present was resolved to be by a 
Dei,
 as most conve∣nient for commanding of the Souldiery, in∣tending for the future to take the 
Algier
 Govern∣ment by a Divan for their Pattern and Model of Rule, under which the people of that place had found and experienced the sweetness of li∣berty, riches, and success. These matters be∣ing agreed upon, some of their Men of War were sent to give advice unto the Grand Signior of the revolutions of their City, supplicating him to pardon the violence used against their Pasha 
Osman,
 whose Covetousness and Tyranny forced them for self-preservation to precipitate that Authority, which they knew on their com∣plaints, his Majesty would have granted them; and that he would be pleased to receive them into his protection and favour, as his faithful and humble Subjects and Slaves, and as an evi∣dence thereof would grant them a Pasha confirm∣ed by his Royal Signature. The Sultan, though at first shewed himself much displeased with this manner of proceeding against 
Osman
 Pasha; yet seeing that there was no remedy, suffered himself to be mollified by their Presents and submission, granting them a Pasha for their Governour, whose power proved as unsignifi∣cant as his doth, who bears that Title at 
Algier.
 Matters being thus reduced to some tolerable condition amongst them, they concluded, That the most beneficial course of life to render them considerable, as well as to amuse and divert the minds of their rude people from innovati∣ons against their Governours, was to grant free liberty to whomsoever pleased to arm out Ships of War; which Priviledge 
Osman
 Pasha reser∣ved to himself and his Confidents; and finding at present that they were able to set out six Sail from forty to fifty Guns, and four more from twelve to thirty, intending to accomplish in all the full number of fifteen Sail; those who trad∣ed in the Levant Seas began to apprehend, that this faithless and heady people would at a time, when they found their advantage and the temp∣tation of a rich Prize, break their Peace with his Majesty our King, the which 
Osman
 Pasha had notwithstanding conserved for several years without violation, moved perhaps thereunto out of an apprehension, that in such troubles which a War with 
England
 might bring upon them, he might lose or impair his riches, and bring the like confusion on his people, as he had late∣ly heard of in 
Algier
 on the like occasion: but how and in what manner these matters succeed∣ed, and how at length this people broke their Peace and Faith, we reserve to be recounted at the end of the Year 1674.


Towards the end of the month of 
August
 it pleased God to take out of this life unto a better Sir 
Daniel Harvey
 his Majesties Ambassadour at 
Constantinople:
 a man whose person being comely, was extremely grateful to the Turks; and for the experience he had at the Ottoman Court, was equal in the happy management of Affairs to any of his Predecessours.






Anno 
1673.
 Hegeira 
1084.


BUT it seems the Turks had made too much haste in their return to digest a Conquest of so large Extent; so that they were scarce well warmed by their Winter-fires, before they were alarmed again with Jea∣lousies of 
Poland,
 and the Seditions amongst the Cossacks, whom 
Dorosenzko
 wrote he could not keep in subjection, unless he had some Suc∣cours sent him from the Port. The rumors likewise that the Muscovite armed, and was resolved to Assist the Poles in recovery of their lost Country, increased the apprehensions of the Turks, who too late perceived the errour they had committed in so soon disbanding their Ar∣my, which before some were scarce got home, they were forced to recal. But now the year was well begun, and no grand preparations made; so that it was impossible to collect an Army in so short a time considerable enough to be honoured with the Conduct of the Sul∣tan; wherefore it was resolved, that all things this year should be disposed in a readiness against the next. But the Grand Signior had a project of his own to depart speedily with his Court, and to pass the heats of the Summer in the Moun∣tains of 
Zegna
 about five or six days Journey on his way towards 
Poland,
 which being reported to be a place well planted with Trees, watered with cool and fresh Springs, and abounding with all sorts of Game, made him impatient to take up his Summer-quarters in a Country so agree∣able to his humor; and that he might cover the design of pleasure with that of profit and policy, he pretended that the report of his pro∣ceeding so far would both hasten the Army, and give a terrour to the Enemy. But the Great Vi∣zier and his Council who weighed all things bet∣ter, were of another opinion, judging it neither honourable for the Court to be retired into Woods and Mountains, nor the advantage of such a surmise able to countervail the expence and inconveniences of that Journy; and there∣fore it was concluded to stand unto the first re∣solution, That the Grand Signior with the main Body of his Army should not move until the following year, but that in this interim all pre∣parations should be made for Provisions and Ammunition, in order unto which three thou∣sand Janisaries were already sent away to 
Kemi∣niecz
 under the Command of the 
Sampsongi∣bashee
 and six thousand more under the 
Zagar∣gibashee
 were to be landed on that 
Isthumus,
 which joyns the 
Crim
 Tartar unto the Main, from whence they had a short March to the assistance of 
Dorhsenzko. Chasaein
 Pasha lately come from 
Damascus,
 was nominated for General to be sent into 
Silistria,
 and there to command in Chief over the Militia of 
Dobriza, Bosna,
 and 
Rumelia
 in case of any alteration and disturbance in 
Poland:
 this Person was al∣ways accounted a stout and valiant Souldier, though seldom fortunate, and was the same that lost the Battel before 
Lewa
 in the last German Wars, as we have before intimated: he was about this time grown infirm by a hepatical Dysentery, which reduced him to a weak condition of body, with little hopes of reco∣very.


In the mean time arrived at 
Adrianople
 an Ambassadour from the great Czar of 
Muscovy,


bringing Letters dated in 
April
 of the preceding year, which was before the time that the Turks had entred 
Poland,
 the contents of which were, That the Grand Signior would do well to desist from his design against that Country;
 for that if he did proceed and invade those Dominions, he should find himself obliged to make War upon him, and with his mighty and puissant Power to drive him back to his own Jurisdiction. This Message appeared very unseasonable, and caused much laughter at first; for that the Turk had since the Date of that Letter invaded 
Po∣land,
 and possessed himself of vast Countries, and yet neither encountred any opposition from the Muscovite, nor so much as heard any ru∣mor of his Motion. Wherefore the Turks with scorn forbad the Ambassadour any far∣ther Addresses, and commanded him to be gone speedily, saying, That his Master had neither courage nor force to maintain his word of War, nor wisdom to manage a Treaty of Peace.


The Reports now from the parts of 
Poland
 spake matters to be in a quiet posture, and not likely to concern the Turks much for this year; wherefore the Grand Signior began again to renew his purposes of pastime and pleasure in the Mountains of 
Zegna;
 but because no true or perfect account could be given of the de∣lights, refreshments, and situation of that place, the 
Olack Celebi
 or chief Postmaster was sent to furvey the Country, and to return with a rela∣tion of all matters: but in the interim the design was altered; for the Grand Signior having be∣gun a Fabrick in which he had expended about eighty thousand Dollars, at a small Village about nine or ten miles from 
Adrianople;
 the place and novelty of the Building so well pleased him, that he found in himself an inclination to pass the whole Summer there; and becoming likewise enamoured of a young Lady in his Seraglio, notwithstanding his former tenderness to his Queen, and late aversion to all other Women, he judged it was possible to divertise his time well in those parts, and more to his contentment, than in wild woods and uninha∣bited mountains. Whereupon the intentions of 
Zegna
 were laid aside, and nothing thought of but the rest and quietness of the Court for this year.


But because it was reported, That the Czar of 
Muscovy
 made great Preparations for War, it was judged necessary to command the 
Crim
 Tartar to be watchful of his motion by Land, though the natural slothfulness of that people gave them no apprehension of their Arms for this year; howsoever it being probable, that they might prove more active and forward in the Black Sea, than they were capable to do by Land, by sending forth their small Boats down the 
Volga
 to take and pillage the Saiks and Ves∣sels belonging to 
Constantinople
 and other parts; the Captain-Pasha was ordered to pass into that Sea with thirty five or forty Sail of Gallies for de∣fence of the Coast, and for fortifying and repair∣ing 
Asac,
 and the Fortresses thereabouts but whilst these Preparations were making for the Euxine or Black Sea, the other Seas were neg∣lected and undefended; for the 
Alexandrian
 Fleet consisting in all of eight Sail,
 were encoun∣tred not far from 
Rhodes
 by some Maltese and Ligornese Corsaires: the Ships of the Turks were most of them very great and potent Ships, one of them was at least fifteen hundred Tuns, and was capable to carry an hundred Guns, the others of eight hundred or a thou∣sand Tuns, able to have resisted and overcome, had they been well armed, double the force that assaulted them; but being now engaged with an Enemy, though not so strong, yet better ex∣perienced in marine Affairs than themselves, they fought with them stoutly the first day; but the next day six Gallies coming to the Christians assistance, (which had been harbour∣ed in some Port not far distant, and led thither by the noise of the Cannon, to which also a calm giving the greater advantage) the Turks began to faint in their courage, so that four Gallions and two Saiks yielded to mercy, which was a Prize of so great value, that it was sup∣posed never to have been equalled since the time of Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 when the loss of the grand Sultana and other Ships gave the first occasion of War with 
Venice.
 This great Ship which was reported by those who saw her to be both longer and broader than the Soveraign, carried only sixty Guns, and was manned ac∣cordingly only with about an hundred Seamen, and about two hundred more which were Land∣men, wholly unacquainted with the Sea or with Naval Fights: the biggest Ship amongst the rest was belonging to the Queen-Mother, and the others to the Grand Signior, being freighted principally with Sugar, Coffee, Rice, and o∣ther Provisions for the proper maintenance of their Courts, which we may suppose will high∣ly inflame these grand Personages, with anger and disdain, when they reflect on their own proper losses which touch them so nearly as their peculiar Goods and the Furniture of their Kitchins.


The Turkish Court now angered with this loss, was more moved in the midst of 
May,
 when a Messenger from 
Poland
 arrived with Letters from the Grand Chancellour, declaring with modest-terms,
 That their Kingdom was unable or unwilling for many respects to pay the promised Tribute; so that if they did not judge fit to wave or lay aside those pretensions, they should be forced to take up Arms in defence of their Honour, Safety, and Priviledge of their Dominions. The Turks surprised with this un∣expected Message, too late perceived the errour of the last years proceedings, which were car∣ried on with a clemency and confidence not agreeable to the disposition and humor of such an Enemy, as is unacquainred with servitude, and so far from being able to support a Foreign Yoke, that they cannot endure subjection to their own Civil Government, every Nobleman (of which there are many in 
Poland
) being am∣bitious to be a Prince, judges himself better than his elected King. Hence proceeded all those dis∣sentions which laid them open to the late inva∣sion of their powerful Enemy, the apprehension of whom having obducted for a while those sores of Faction which festered amongst them, and that principle of self-conservation, which by a forcible nature inclined them to Union, at length armed them with a resolution to avenge the Liberties of their Country, and assured them of the Truth of that Saying, That 
a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.


The Turks now wished that they had either made a true use of their Victory, and the op∣portune

Conjuncture of the last years Affairs to have setled and secured their Conquests, or that they had never begun the War; for now find∣ing themselves engaged in it,
 they were in ho∣nour obliged to proceed, and lose the fair oppor∣tunity which presented to make their advantage in 
Hungary;
 to which place they had been, and were still invited by the Rebles of that Country, who to revenge the Cause of 
Serini, Nadasti,
 and some other Discontents and Aggrievances of which they complained, and to defend the Protestant Religion, in which by the zeal of some Churchmen, they were disturbed, resolved to abandon their Allegiance to their natural Prince, and rather seek a protection for their Estates, and allowance for their Religion un∣der the Turks, than remain beholding for either to a prevailing party at the Imperial Court. The chief Authours of this Rebellion were 
Petrozy, Sepesi, Tende, Gabor, Sutrey,
 and other principal persons amongst the Hungarians, who having on their own strength opposed them∣selves against the Emperour the last year were defeated in divers engagements, and at length reduced to a very low and miserable condition. Wherefore they renew again their Petitions and Presents to the Sultan, sent by their Agents about the beginning of this Month of 
April,
 beg∣ging his assistance and protection, representing the easiness of the Conquest, and how large a Gate they were able to open to his Armies, and make a plain way for him into the most fertile and opulent Countries of the World, of which he seemed already half possessed by reason of those Discontents and Factions that were a∣mongst them.


The Turks though well satisfied of the rea∣sonableness of the design, yet being engaged in honour against 
Poland,
 knew not how to retract, and therefore dispatched away the Messengers for the present with fair hopes and secret pro∣mises, well treated in private, though they received rather a Denial than Encouragement in publick. For the expedition against 
Poland
 was that which employed solely the wisest heads of the Empire, who as it were in fury issued out immediate Orders,
 That all those who eat the Grand Signior's Bread, should without farther delay prepare themselves for the Wars against 
Poland;
 and that Provisions and Ammuniti∣on should be supplyed in all places according to the usual proportions; The Tugh, or Horse-Tail, (the Signal for departure) was set forth, the Tents ordered to be carried into the Field, and such haste made in all parts, as if the raising of an Army were the business, but of one day; resolving immediately to proceed against their Enemies, to whom the Sultan returned a most dreadful and menacing Letter, full of expres∣sions agreeable to the Turkish Style, which threatned Confusion, Sword, Famine, Fire, Destruction, and a thousand other more direful Judgments: but the Collection of this great Army, and the appendages belonging there∣unto, were not so suddenly provided as to ad∣mit of such a dispatch as the Sultan's fury pre∣tended; wherefore in cooler blood it was con∣cluded, That for this Summer they should not pass much beyond the other side of the 
Danube,
 that the Winter Quarters should be designed in 
Silistria,
 from whence they might more effectu∣ally threaten and affright their Enemies with their near approach.


About this time the French found an oppor∣tune season to accommodate all their Affairs with the Port, and to put a period to the several Articles and particulars they had for many years demanded. For now the French King not only appeared very formidable by reason of his success against 
Holland,
 but likewise instrumen∣tal to promote the designs of the Port, whilst he kept the Brandenburghers employed, and diverted the whole Armies of the Empire; and now also that they might engage him not to contribute assistance to the Poles, they judged it reasonable policy to evidence to that Ambassa∣dour more external demonstrations of kindness, and strain their courtesie beyond the terms which they could cordially, and in reality afford them. Wherefore, at length the Capitulati∣ons were renewed, and some Articles and Privi∣ledges superadded, which are these that fol∣low.




FIrst, That all religious Persons and Bishops of the French Church shall remain and continue quiet and unmolested in their respective Habitations and Dwellings, with liberty to perform all their Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies.


Secondly, That the Religious of 
Jerusa∣lem
 and of 
Bethlem
 shall conserve those religious places which they have anciently possessed, and there may continue to cele∣brate their Worship of God, and all their Devotions, without any disturbance.


Thirdly, That if these Religious of 
Jeru∣salem
 or 
Bethlem
 have any difference or dispute with the Officers thereof, it shall be remitted to the decision of the Port.


Fourthly, All Frenchmen, and all under their Banner, shall safely at all times go to 
Jerusalem,
 and return without molesta∣tion.


Fifthly, The two Churches in 
Galata
 be∣longing to the Jesuits and Capuchins, and anciently possessed by them, are now again con∣firmed by these Presents; one of which be∣longing to the Capuchins having been burnt, free liberty is given for the rebuilding thereof, and to remain as formerly in the hands of the French; and in the Hospital in 
Galata,
 if they will read the Gospel after their fashion, none shall give them disturbance or hinder them.


Sixthly, Whereas the French Nation formerly paid 
5 per. Cent.
 Custom, now in regard they have been ancient friends to the Port, and that they have renewed their Capi∣tulations, they shall pay no more than 
3 per Cent.
 and accordingly let no more be de∣manded.


Seventhly, All Portugueses, Sicilians, Catelans, Messineses of 
Ancona, &c.
 that have no Ambassadors at the Port, if they come under the French Banner, shall pay no more than 
3 per Cent.
 according as the French pay.


Eighthly, In payment of their Customs, they shall pay the Currant Mony such as passes in our Treasury, and the Farmers

of the Customs shall not refuse the same.


Ninthly, The Mesteria they shall pay ac∣cording to what the English Merchants pay, and no more.


Tenthly, All the Merchandise they bring, or shall bring, shall be valued accord∣ing to the present estimation, and no more pretended of them, and if the Customers will notwithstanding raise the esteem of the Goods above the value, then if the Merchant will pay his Custom in 
specie,
 it shall not be re∣fused.


Eleventhly, The Custom of Silk being paid — a new Custom ought not to be de∣manded.


Twelfthly, The Custom being once paid, the Customer shall not refuse to give his Teschare, and the Merchant being willing to transport his Goods to another Scale, another Custom shall not be demanded.


Thirteenthly, The Officers and Customers at 
Sidon, Birut, Aleppo,
 or 
Cairo
 shall not compel the Merchants to take Goods by Eorce, not under any pretence whatsoever take one Asper from them, nor demand mony to be lent unto them.


Fourteenthly, The French Vessels may bring Goods from the 
Indies,
 by way of the Red Sea, unto the Port 
Suucis,
 and having paid their Custom once there, whatsoever Goods they cannot sell in that Country, they may have liberty to transport over land to 
Alexandria,
 and there relade them again on their own Vessels without paying another Custom, or receiving molestation from any person. Howsoever, this Capitulation is to be understood with this condition, that this point shall be signified to the chief Officers of 
Cairo,
 who having called a Council of the most knowing and experienced persons to con∣sider hereof, and they concluding that this point is in no wise prejudicial to that Country, nor to the Interest of the Believers then this Article to be of force, but if they advise the contrary, then this to be of no effect.


Fifteenthly, If the Fryars, or Merchants, or Druggermen will make Wine, and transport it abroad, none shall hinder them.


Sixteenthly, The French Consuls, and all under their Banner, having a difference with any of or above, four thousand Aspers, it shall be decided at our publick Divan.


Seventeenthly, If any man slaughter shall happen in the street where French dwell, they shall not be liable to pay the price of the Bloud, unless it be proved before the Justice that a Frenchman was guilty there∣of.


Eighteenthly, The Druggermen in service of the French Nation shall enjoy the same priviledges, as before specified.




Nor was the French interest only available at that time to obtain the foregoing Articles, and renew their Capitulations with such Addi∣tions: but likewise to procure Licence for the Ambassador to travel into the remotest parts of the Ottoman Dominions;
 for though it were a thing never practised before, and denied (as is well known) to other Christian Ambassa∣dors; yet it was granted to Monsieur 
de Nointel
 with so much freedom, that first in a Brigan∣tine he went to 
Scio,
 thence visited the chief Isles of the 
Archipelago,
 thence crossed to 
Rhodes,
 and so proceeded to 
Satalia, Cyprus,
 and 
Jerusalem:
 so much confidence had the Turks, contrary to their custom, in this Am∣bassador: for as they stile all Representatives from Foreign Princes their pawns or pledges of Peace, so had not the Turks in that con∣juncture thought the interest of 
France
 worth the obliging, they would never have deviated from their ancient Custom, and given an example for other Ministers to demand a pri∣viledge of the like nature.


But to return again to the designs against 
Poland,
 the Sultan about the end of 
July
 marched with such Forces as were then in a readiness towards the Confines of that Country; and though he had not with him above fifteen thousand men, yet it was concluded that the Fame and terror of the Grand Signior's mo∣tion would either abate and bring low the spirits of the Poles, and induce them to dis∣patch an Ambassador with terms of Peace, or at least this readiness of the Turkish Camp would be an early preparation for the designs of the next year, and put the whole Empire into a timely motion, and that uniting with the Forces of the Frontiers, they might make a Body sufficient to resist any sudden Incursion. This resolution being taken, the Great Vizier led the Van, and encamped on the Banks of the 
Danube
 near a place called 
Isacgee,
 where he with all diligence built a Bridge of Boats to pass his Forces with the greatest facility to the other side, on which lies the Country of 
Mol∣davia.
 The Sultan about a days journey short of the Vizier, fixed his Court and Camp at a place called 
Babadog;
 with intention after some days to cross the River, and proceed as far as 
Kemenitz,
 that by the influence of his powerful Presence he might encourage his Army there, and provide all things necessary for security of that Garrison. But in the mean time ad∣vices coming that the Polish Army, consisting of about twenty thousand men, was roving about the Confines of 
Leopolis,
 under the Command of General 
Sobieski,
 and that a re∣conciliation was passed between the King and him; and that 
Zircha,
 Commander of the Cosacks, joyned to considerable forces of the Moscovite and Calmuck Tartars, had made incursions into the parts about 
Osac,
 caused the Sultan to desist from his designed progress to 
Kemenitz,
 and to pass no farther than over the River into 
Moldavia
 for hunting or other pastimes. By these matters the Turks being fully convinced, that the Poles resolved not to pay their promised tribute, nor to send an Am∣bassador with propositions, which were con∣descending or supplicating for Peace; the Sultan himself dispatched away an Aga with Letters into 
Poland
 full of threats, menaces, and pro∣testations of bringing all that ruine, misery, and destruction on their Country, which always attends the most cruel and bloudy War, if they did not retrieve their error by a speedy

submission and compliance with those Articles which were the last year accorded. And this was the last motion the Turks made towards a Peace, which they were desirous to embrace on any terms honourable, that so they might have opportunity to divert their Arms to the more mild Climates of 
Hungary,
 where, be∣sids the entertainment they expected to re∣ceive from friends, who invited them, they should not be liable to half those inconve∣niences of Cold, Frosts, and Famine, as they were probable to meet in the parts of 
Po∣land.


But the Poles were so much in earnest, and so little esteemed the menaces of the Sultan, that they anticipated his threats by some acts of hostility, and showed that they so much scorned his anger that they were resolved to be the first Aggressors.
 For the great Mareschal 
Sobieski
 with his Lieutenant General 
Wisno∣witzki
 marched forward, and boldly passed the 
Niester
 with fifty thousand select Souldiers. The General of the Turkish Army, 
Chusaein
 Pasha, alarmed hereat, immediately issued forth such Orders for preparing and fitting his Camp as were agreeable to a speedy Battel; and that he might understand the state of his Camp, he called the Prince or Vayvord of 
Moldavia
 to examine him concerning the state and con∣dition of his Forces; the answer he gave proving not satisfactory to the expectation of the Turk, who was enraged at the approach of the Enemy, with high and proud words in∣sulted over the Prince, giving him no better terms than Dog and Infidel, and at length struck him over the head with his Pole-Axe; notwithstanding which, and the disgrace he put upon him, imprudently that night com∣mitted unto him, and to the Prince of 
Valachia,
 the care of the Guards, which consisted of three thousand Men. The Valachians as near Neighbours and Associates with the others,
 seemed at first more grievously to resent the affront, than did the Moldavians, and there∣fore that Night took their Prince by force and carried him to the Polish Army. The Prince, that he might make a Vertue of Ne∣cessity, complained of no force or violence offered unto him by his Souldiers, but as if he had voluntarily revolted, showed outwardly a fair and serene countenance towards the Poles, until such time as with forty of his Men, he found an opportunity to escape; but being by next morning at break of day overtaken by five Troops of Polonian Horse, his whole Retinue was slain by them, excepting five of his men, who with himself, saved themselves by the swiftness of their Horses; Howsoever, the Prince received a wound on his left hand with a Sword, with which presenting himself before the Great Vizier, and by that testimony boasting of his Faith and Loyalty to the Otto∣man House, was conducted by him to the pre∣sence of the Sultan, who, in reward of his fidelity and valour, vested him with a rich Coftan, and restored him again to his Princi∣pality with addition of three hundred Aspers a day pay. His Wife and Children which re∣mained as Hostages at 
Constantinople,
 being upon the News of the Princes Revolt clapt into the seven Towers, were again released, and conducted to their house with all imaginable honour and magnificence.


But the Moldavian Prince was more in earnest, and heartily disdained the affront of∣fered him by 
Chusaein
 Pasha, towards whom, and the other Turks, though he carried a serene and calm coutenance, yet he nourished a secret flame and storm within himself; to vent which, and revenge the affront, he maintained a correspondence with 
Sobieski,
 giving him in∣telligence of all matters in the Turkish Camp,
 how he might most easily surprize the Forces of the Pasha of 
Sivas,
 and the four Generals of the Spahees of 
Alchabolick.


The Christians made use of this intelligence accordingly, by making their assault on the Enemy on the weakest side, when the Prince having reserved his anger until an opportune Season, turned his face against the Turks, and with a courage agreeable to his spirit and com∣mand, he entered the Tabor, or Intrenchment of 
Chusaein
 Pasha, and wounded him with his own hand. The heat of the Fight continued fourteen hours, in which none behaved himself more valianlty than did 
Solyman
 Pasha the Beg∣lerbeg of 
Bosna,
 who though he was as brave and fought as stoutly as any man could having six Horses that day killed under him,
 he was at length forced to fly and abandon the field, following 
Chusaein
 Pasha, of 
Sivas
 and 
Ciddi∣ogla,
 who made better use, in saving them∣selves, of their horses heels, than their own Arms; But in this Flight his Horse pitching his foot into the hole of a wooden Bridge, which he was to pass, was there stopped until he was overtaken by a Souldier with a Hat, who shot him through the Body; so that con∣tinuing his flight more faintly than before, he was overtaken by a Palonian Hussar, who with a Lance bore him to the Ground, where he was trod under foot, and cut in pieces by the Enemy: The other three Pashaws were wounded; the Generals of the Green and Yellow Sangiacks of the Spahees were taken Prisoners, and two other principal Comman∣ders of the Spahees were killed. The Zagar∣geebashee, who commanded eighteen Cham∣bers of Janisaries, was taken prisoner, the Stan∣dard of the Janisaries taken, and they wholly cut in pieces and destroyed, consisting of eight thousand five hundred men; all the Troops and Attendants of those Pashaws, with four Sangiacks of Spahees, were slain upon the place, which in all were computed to be about twenty five thousand men. The booty taken was very considerable, for besides the ordinary Baggage they took two thousand purses of money, then newly brought for payment of the Souldiery, and twenty five thou∣sand Waggons of Provisions and Ammuni∣tion.


After this success and important Victory the Poles became Masters of the strong Fortress of 
Chotin,
 and other smaller Palanchas, on the Banks of the 
Niester,
 making their Incursi∣ons into 
Moldavia,
 as far as 
Jash,
 which is the principal City of that Country. And thus far was 
Kaplan
 Pasha proceeded with the Re∣cruits of about four thousand men, when the News came of the fatal Rout, and the fame thereof encreasing by the fearful Relations of such as fled from the Battel, alarmed the Turks with such frightful apprehensions, that they retreated back again to the other side of the 
Danube,
 and united themselves to the Forces of the Vizier. But 
Chusaein
 Pasha, though he saved his life, yet could not con∣serve

the Air of the Sultan's favour; for so soon as he arrived at the Court, he received an ill welcome; for according to the manner of Turks,
 who punish the ill success of a Ge∣neral equal to Crimes committed, he was im∣mediately put into Chains, deprived of his estate and honours, and sent prisoner with the attendance only of two servants unto the Castles of the 
Dardanelli,
 where the disturbance and unquietness of his mind reduced him to an infirmity of Body; so that being sick, and without Friends or Physicians, he sent to Sir 
John Finch,
 his Majesties Ambassador, as he passed up the 
Hellespont,
 to afford him the use and assistance of his Physician; but the Am∣bassador excused himself, letting him know, that his Retinue being passed before on ano∣ther Vessel, he was sorry it was not in his power to accommodate him in the manner he desired.


The Winter being now well entered, which is very wet and cold in those Coutries, caused the Armies on both sides to draw into their warmet Quatters, there to meditate and con∣trive their designs for the more active season. During these Affairs the King of 
Poland
 died; so that the Election of a new Prince,
 the manner of reconciling their intestine Diffe∣rences, and the means to defend their Coun∣tries, were Subjects of important Considera∣tion, and matters more than sufficient to em∣ploy the wisest heads of that Nation for a longer time than their common Enemy was resolved to afford them. The Turk on the other side though full of revenge and anger for their last misfortune, yet patiently took this loss as the paring only of his Nails, that his Claws might grow the longer, and was so rowsed with this blow, that he summoned all the Nations of his large Empire to come in to his assistance, towards which forty thousand Carts laden with Provisions were appointed to rendezvous on the Banks of the 
Danube
 to∣wards the end of the month of 
March.
 Yet in the mean time the Turks not having patience to see their perfidious Prince avail himself of his Revolt, and in Despight of the Ottoman Power to to seat himself in his Principality of 
Jash,
 were resolved to drive him thence; and in order thereunto not ex∣pecting a milder season, immediately dispeeded some Troops of Tartars, and two thousand Spahees under the Command of a new Prince, to drive him out of the Country. In the mean time the Poles, since their late Victory, kept the Fortress of 
Kemenitz
 straitly blocked up on all sides, and thereby reduced them to such a want of food and other provisions, as might probably cause them to surrender before the Summer could open a way to their relief.


But before I conclude this Year, I must not omit to acquaint the Reader, that in the month of 
September
 an English Factor at 
Smyrna
 descended of good Parents, and educated under a severe and religious Master, one who had a reasonable Estate of his own, and in good busi∣ness and employment, did notwithstanding in the absence of his Partner, with whom he was joyned in Commission, carry out of the house 215 ½ fine Cloths belonging to several Principals of 
England,
 with a considerable Sum of ready Mony, Jewels, and things of value: of which having possessed himself, he went before the Kadi, and there in presence of divers Officers of the City turned Turk, hoping by the Privi∣ledge of the Mahometan Law, whereby no Christian testimony can pass against a Turk, to appropriate unto himself that whole Estate, which he had thus treacherously got into his sole custody. And it being impossible for Turks to attest the Marks, Numbers, or know the Estates of Persons being in 
England,
 he judged himself out of the reach of any Power or Art to dispossess him of his unjust and wicked ac∣quests. Howsoever the Consul did so closely pursue him both at 
Smyrna
 and at the Turkish Court, that in the space of seven months he regained all the Cloth, and the best part of the Mony and Jewels out of his hands: and in fine reduced this Renegado to so low a condition, that he humbly supplicated the Consul to con∣trive a way for his passage into 
England:
 at which time His Majesties Frigate the 
Cen∣turion
 being then in Port, he was imbarked thereupon, and so returned into his own Country.


The Particulars of all which having been amply related in Writing and Letters to pri∣vate Friends, I purposely omit the same in this place, that so I might cast a veil over the nakedness and shame of our Nation in that City. Howsoever I judge it requisite to re∣count this Story in brief and in general heads, That men may know there is a God who rules above, who rejects impious and licen∣tious persons, confounding the designs of those who betraying their Trust, deviate from the common Rules of Morality and Honesty.






Anno 
1647.
 Hegeira 
1085.


THis Year began at 
Smyrna
 with the hap∣py Arrival of Sir 
John Finch,
 sent by His Majesty for Ambassador to the Grand Signior in the place of Sir 
Daniel Harvey,
 who dyed in 
August
 1672. at his Country-house not far from 
Constantinople.
 His Excellency entred the City on the first day of 
January
 1673/4 rejoycing the English Factory with the sight of their new Ambassador, (that Office having been now void for the space of sixteen months) who was welcome also to people of the Country, judging him fortunate for arriving at the Feast of their great 
Biram:
 nor less pleasing was the News thereof to the Court, especially to the late Pasha of 
Tunis,
 whose Goods and Monies taken by one 
Do∣minico Franceschi,
 out of an English Ship called the 
Mediterranean,
 in her passage from 
Tunis
 to 
Tripoli,
 this Ambassador had recovered from 
Ligorne
 and 
Malta;
 which being an acti∣on without example, was greatly admired and applauded by the Turks, and esteemed an evident demonstration of that great Interest and Power which the Glory of our King hath acquired in Foreign parts, and of the singular dexterity of such a Minister.


About the 
18th
 of 
March,
 Sir 
John Finch
 arrived at 
Constantinople
 being transported to the 
Dardanelli
 on his Majesties Fregat the Cen∣turion; and thence on a Gally hired at 
Smyrna
 for that purpose. Some few days after his ar∣rival, the Grand Signior and Vizier being at 
Adrianople,
 the Lord Ambassador had audience of the 
Chimacam
 whom he saluted with this speech.




I am come Ambassadour from Charles the Second King of
 England, Scotland, France, 
and
 Ireland, 
sole Lord and Soveraign of all the Seas, that environ his Kingdoms, Lord and Soveraign of vast territories, and pos∣sessions in the
 East 
and
 West-Indies, 
Defen∣der of the Christian Faith against all those that Worship Idols or Images. To the most Powerful and mighty Emperor of the
 East, 
to maintain that peace, which hath been so useful, and that commerce which hath been so profitable to this Empire: For the continuance, and encrease whereof I promise you in my station to contribute what I can, and I promise to my self, that you in your will do the like.


But to proceed to the Wars. The Polan∣ders being thus prosperous, made use of their success, and the sharp cold of the Winter-season to make their Incursions, and Winter-quarters through all the Principalities of 
Moldavia;
 for they being born in cold Countries, and ac∣customed to the Snows and Frosts, were more patient and enduring of extremity of weather than were the Turks, who were brought forth from more mild and moderate Climates: so that neither could the Poles be driven out from those Countries, nor 
Keminitz
 be relieved by them, until such time, that the Sun getting high, and thawing the Snows, and warming the Earth, prepared a season fit for return of the Turks who marching according to their custom with an Army composed of great multitudes, quickly compelled the Poles to retire. For the Grand Signior and Vizier having both seated their Winter-quarters on the Banks of the 
Danube,
 were ready at the first opening of the Summer to enter their Arms in∣to the Enemies Countries; and having called the Tartars to their assistance, did according to the usual custom make Incursions for depredati∣on of Slaves, Cattel, and whatsoever else was portable in a running March.


The 
Chan
 or King of this People was at that time greatly indisposed in his health, of which he advised the Great Vizier, as if he intended thereby to obtain a release from his personal at∣tendance that year in the War: But the Vi∣zier, who either supposed this excuse to be only a pretence, or that he had a kindness for his Person, immediately dispatched away his own Physician called Signior 
Masselini,
 an Italian born, a worthy Learned man, a good Chri∣stian, and my intimate Friend: with whom maintaining a constant correspondence by Let∣ters, he wrote me,
 That from the Grand Sig∣niors Quarters which were at 
Batadog
 near the Banks of the 
Danube,
 he arrived after seventeen days Journey in 
Chrim,
 where (he said) he was received with singular honour and kindness by the Great 
Chan,
 whom he found to be a Prince of admirable prudence, gentleness, and generosity, but greatly afflicted with a Hypo∣chondriacal Melancholy; which being an in∣firmity of some years standing, was with the more difficulty removed; howsoever he was so far from being uncapable to follow his Army, that he advised him to divert his mind with the thoughts of War: which counsel having taken, after thirty days abode in the Camp, he found himself much more chearful than be∣fore, and greatly relieved of that pressure of Melancholy and caliginous Vapours which of∣fended his Brain. 
We are now (said he) at 
Ʋssia
 at the Mouth of the 
Boristhenes,
 which we have passed from the other side unto this, where the River is nine miles broad, from hence we are marching towards 
Bender
 upon the 
Niester
 to pass into 
Moldavia,
 and there to joyn with the Ottoman Army. The Poles have sent to demand Peace, but with con∣dition, that 
Kemenitz
 be restored to them; which Proposition was with great disdain re∣jected, and will never be granted whilst this Emperour reigns. These people greatly de∣sired a Peace with 
Poland,
 which the Electi∣on of 
Sobieski
 for King may probably facili∣tate; for not only they, but the Turks also dread a March into 
Poland,
 and are so in∣veterately bent to take revenge on the Mus∣covites and Cosacks, who lately became their Subjects, that they could accept of any reasonable Terms of Accommodation with 
Poland.
 I for my part found 
Tartary
 a very pleasant Country, plentiful of all Provisi∣ons, and the people much more courteous and obliging to the Strangers and Christians, than those Turks with whom you and I have conversed.
 Thus far 
Masselini
 writes in commendation of the Tartars, and in farther confirmation hereof, I have read in some Books, That as to their Morals, there are very few Nations to be found less vicious, they are ex∣tremely severe and faithful, they have no Thieves or false Witnesses amongst them, little Injustice or Violence, and live in union and great tranquillity: the marvellous fidelity of the Captive Tartars in 
Poland
 is every day to be observed, who never fail to return at the time appointed, when they are licensed upon their word to go and procure their Liberties by the exchange of Polish Prisoners, which they execute punctually, or return themselves, not failing a minute. And it is observed, That the Polish Gentlemen do rather trust the young Tartars, which are in their Service, with the keys of their Money and Jewels, than any of their Houshold.


The time for Armies to draw out of the Winter-quarters, and take the Field being now come, the Grand Signior and Vizier, with great numbers both of Horse and Foot passed the 
Danube,
 and prosecuting their March to the Confines of 
Poland,
 they relieved 
Kemenitz
 in the first place, the Poles at the News of their approach rasing the Siege. Thence they pro∣ceeded to 
Chuozim,
 a strong Fortress on the 
Niester,
 taken from them in the last year by the Christians, after the defeat given to 
Chusaein
 Pasha, as before related, the which was surren∣dred without much difficulty on Articles, which were ill observed, the whole Garrison being afterwards put to the Sword. Nor had they worse success against the Muscovites, who re∣treated backward as the Turk advanced, leav∣ing 
Asac,
 after it had been sacked and almost de∣stroyed, to be again rebuilt, which was speedily effected by the assistance of the Captain-Pasha, who was that year with thirty nine Gallies dis∣peeded into the Black Sea, and with great num∣bers of Slaves and Souldiers repaired the ruines which the Muscovites had made. In the mean time, whilst the chiefest strength of the marine Force was thus employed, a small Squa∣dron of about ten Gallies were ordered for the

Archipelago
 and the Levant, under the Com∣mand of one 
Mahomet
 Pasha, a Person that ma∣naged sundry great Employments; but his pro∣digality and profuse way of living was the cause that he could thrive in none, only he thereby gained so much interest and credit with the Grandees and Monied men of the Court, who are the Pages and Eunuchs, as served him to contract a debt of the thousand Dollars without any ability of his own to give them satisfaction: of which these Creditors being assured, made it their Petition to the Grand Signior to grant him the Command of that Squadron of Gallies, which was that year designed for the 
Archipelago,
 supposing that he in this Expedition being to pass unto many Islands and Conutries, knew how to make such use of his time, and the advantage of his Employment, as would gain him a suf∣ficient benefit whereby to satisfie and clear all scores and accounts with them. This Office being accordingly conferred, 
Mahomet
 Pasha prepared himself to depart, whilst the Creditors remained in ful expectation of a profitable Voy∣age and speedy returns; which to improve to the best advantage, the Pasha first visited the open and undefended Isles, from whence with the greatest severity and rapine imaginable he pillag∣ed and plundered what he was able, making some of them to ransom their whole Country with mony. Thence he proceeded to 
Scala No∣va,
 called by the Turks 
Koush-adasee,
 a place on the Coast of 
Asia,
 not far from 
Ephesus,
 where he demanded of the people (though all Turks) the Sum of five thousand Dollars, which they not finding to pay, were treated with all kind of force and violence, till at length paying down 1500, and engaging to pay the rest in a months time, the Pasha departed, leav∣ing an Aga, a Servant of his, to receive the money at the time agreed. In that interim, the Kadi coming to be changed, and another of more courage and spirit succeeding in his place, believed that the best service at his beginning and entrance into Office which he could perform towards the people, was to relieve them from the oppression of the Pasha, and perswade them positively to refuse the payment; who taking courage from their Chief, drove the Aga out of Town, with a thousand menaces and re∣proaches, Upon this News 
Mehmet
 Pasha re∣turned again full of anger and indignation, but found not that easie reception nor kind enter∣tainment, as before; but on the contrary, the Gates were shut against him, and the people abandoning their Habitations, with common consent resolved to make a Journey, to the Grand Signior: and to shew they were in ear∣nest, proceeded so far in their way as to 
Ephesus,
 which is about ten miles distant from thence: the prejudice and danger of which complaint 
Mahomet
 Pasha greatly fearing, sent Messen∣gers to pacifie them with good words and pro∣mises to relinquish his pretensions, in case they would return; but the uproar was so great, that they found as much difficulty to quiet it, as the Town-Clerk in ancient times had to appease the Tumult raised by the Silversmiths about 
Diana
 of the 
Ephesians.
 Being thus baffled at 
Koush-adasee,
 he vented his fury on some poor Islands which he could more easily master, and thence proceeded to 
Napoli di Romania,
 where the people being already alarmed with his behaviour, and violence of his actions in o∣ther places, and encouraged by the example of 
Koush-adasee,
 upon his arrival there, without farther ceremony shut their Gates, and appear∣ed armed against him upon the Walls; at which entertainment and unexpected opposition, the Pasha fearing some evil consequences, set sail from thence, and crossing again the Seas into 
Asia,
 made 
Rhodes
 his next Port. Thence he passed to 
Satalia,
 to 
Cyprus,
 and 
Scanderone,
 and so again returned for 
Constantinople,
 taking 
Smyrna
 in his way, committing most extreme rapine and violence on the people, whose com∣plaints having gone before him to the Court, he was immediately cut off at his arrival; but in the first place, his gains and ill gotten goods were seized on to satisfie the Grand Signior, and his Creditors of the Seraglio, who being sent to fish for Wealth, was served like the Cormorants in the 
Indies,
 which being made tame, and taught to fish for the benefit of their Masters, have a Ring clapped about their necks to prevent them from swallowing the prey they take.


But to return to the Actions at Land, which were matters of the greatest importance. The Turks had no sooner relieved 
Kemenitz,
 re∣covered 
Choczim,
 and caused the Muscovites to retreat, and draw their Forces into their Coun∣try;
 but being Masters of the Field, and hav∣ing the choice of acting according to their own pleasure, resolved to secure the places they already possessed, esteeming it more wisdom to make sure their late acquisitions, than to add thereunto new conquests, which they could not maintain. And therefore considering the in∣constancy of the Cosacks, who having abandon∣ed their subjection to 
Poland,
 had submitted themselves to their yoke; and also how unable 
Dorosenzko
 their Governour was either to keep them in obedience, or else to defend them from the Polonian Incursions; they resolved for pre∣vention of these inconveniences, and for a secure remedy against any sinister accidents of this na∣ture, to make seisure of that Party of the Co∣sacks, who had not submitted to them, and transport them into other parts, which they ac∣cordingly put into execution, and sweeping all the Countries as they passed, carried away men, women, and children into Captivity: part of which, such as belonged to the Grand Signior, had some Lands assigned them along the Coast near the Black Sea; the Armenians, who were a Trading people, and lived at 
Kemenitz,
 were transported to 
Philipopoli;
 of the Jews some were carried to 
Adrianople,
 and others to 
Con∣stantinople;
 but the younger sort of both Sexes were permitted to the Souldiery to carry them for Slaves to their own homes, and were in great numbers dispersed through all parts of the Em∣pire: a Policy anciently used by 
Pharaoh
 to his Egyptian Subjects, who having bought their Lands of them, did afterwards transport them from one end of the Land unto the other, that so he might keep them in the greater servi∣tude and subjection, 
Gen.
 47.21. 
And as for the people, he moved them from one end of the bor∣ders of Egypt to the other.
 And in this manner the success concluding the year, without any great Enterprise or Feats of Arms, the Sultan returned to his Court at 
Adrianople
 about the end of 
November,
 licensing all the Asian Horse and Souldiers of remotest parts to return to their own Countries, with liberty to appropriate the the following year to their repose and care for their peculiar concernments.




To these Wars amongst secular Persons and men of Arms were added Differences, and never to be decided Controversies between the Reli∣gious of the Roman and Greek Churches at 
Jerusalem,
 who contending for the possession of the Holy Sepulchre of the King of Peace, rent that seamless Coat of Christ, and managed their Controversie with more malice and ran∣cour each against other, than Princes do, who invade one the other with Fire and Sword. For the Franks or Western Christians subjected to the Popes Dominion, had possessed for several Ages a right to the Holy Sepulchre, and enjoy∣ed the honour of the custody thereof, notwith∣standing the pretences of the Greeks thereunto, who for many years in vain attempted at the Ottoman Court to obtain that Priviledge; for the Franks being ever more powerful by chari∣table contributions brought from Christendom, besides large Sums of Money from the King of 
Spain,
 and always outbid the Market of the Greeks, and consequently made use of stronger arguments, than the adverse Party could produce in defence of their cause. Until such time, that one 
Panaioti,
 a Greek born in the Island of 
Scio,
 having by his parts and excellent address arrived to the honour of being Interpreter for the Western Tongues to the Great Vizier, at length obtained that favour with his Master, that he seldom refused whatsoever he with rea∣son and modesty requested; and being a great Zelot in his Religion, and esteemed the chief Patron and Support of the Greek Church, he secretly begged in behalf of his Country, the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre at 
Jerusalem
 out of the hands of the Franks; which the Vi∣zier would not deny him, both to reward him for some services already performed, and like∣wise because he knew that a concession of this nature would again raise the spirits and animo∣sities of Christians; the allaying and appeasing of which being an office solely in the power of himself, and the supreme Authority, would certainly prove beneficial to the Ottoman Court. 
Panaioti
 having obtained this Command, and considering that the defence thereof would be a trouble to him, for that thereby he should cre∣ate Enemies which were no less than Kings and Princes to contend with, and perhaps should live to see it reversed, wisely laid it by him, there to remain dormant until the time of his death; which happening the year past, the Command was produced and brought to light, and was before the 
Easter
 of this year set on foot at 
Jerusalem,
 and by virtue thereof the custody of the Sepulchre sentenced by the Pasha and Kadi of that place to belong unto the Greeks, the which was occasion of so great trouble and confusion, as disturbed the Holy Feast, and pol∣luted the Sacrifices with the blood of one or two persons, who most earnestly contended for the Priviledge of their Nation and Religion. Nor could this difference be decided here, but both sides appealed to the Court above; which being heard and debated in publick Divan, the possession of the Sepulchre was adjudged in fa∣vour of the Greeks; the Franks being only to in∣joy a precarious the thereof, as Pilgrims and Strangers to the Country. Howsoever the Fry∣ers of 
Jerusalem
 would not tamely yield up their Right, but again resolved to try their For∣tune at the Court, having by means of 
F. Cani∣saries
 their Commissario with expence of a great Sum of Money obtained a review of the case, but without success; for all these endeavours and charge proved fruitless, the former sen∣tence being confirmed in favour of the Greeks; and the Franks having no other Expedient, ap∣plied themselves to the assistance of the French Ambassadour, to whose protection the Holy places are assigned by Capitulations. But nei∣ther the power of the French Ambassadour, nor of any other Christian Representative was avail∣able; for the Vizier either mindful of his pro∣mise to 
Panaioti,
 or being resolute to maintain the Command he had given, would on no terms be perswaded to revoke it; the which intention of the Vizier being made known to the Greeks their Patriarch earnestly pressed a hearing of the case; but the Fryars not willing to abide the shock, retired to 
Constantinople,
 lest the Greeks forcing them to Justice, they should be con∣demned 
in Judicio contradictorio,
 and a Hoget or Sentence passing, they should be condemned in Law as well as by Authority of the Hatte∣sheriff. Which to put in execution, the Pa∣triarch took out a Command whereunto was added, That the Fryers in token of their sub∣jection, should pay a Drachm of Silver a head to the Patriarch, and hold all their places of them. This was the issue of the present contro∣versies, which is certainly determined for the time of the Vizier without revocation, yet per∣haps in the time of another, it may admit of a review for money, especially being received when as yet the new Minister hath not satiated his covetous desires; howsoever, the expence will always bechargeable, and the success un∣certain. Thus have I seen and observed in this particular the effect and experience of two things; 
viz.
 The covetousness and pride of Fryars, and the conclusion of their Law-suits before Infidels. The Franks, or the Western Christians, had until this time the custody of the Holy Sepulchre, and the Greeks that of the Chappel of 
Bethlem,
 but the use was free to both; but the Franks not being able to enjoy the Sepulchre with contentment, whilst with envious eyes they beheld the Greeks in possessi∣on of 
Bethlem,
 were always contriving designs by force of money, and power of Christian Mi∣nisters to eject them from that Right; until that now in these contentions they have lost both; be∣ing neither able to recover the one, nor con∣serve the other.


Before we end this year of 1674. and begin that of 1675; it will be necessary for us to discourse of the cause, and original of that War which 
England
 had with the Govern∣ment of 
Tripoli
 in 
Barbary,
 and the success and conclusion thereof.


In the year 1672.
 Old 
Mahomet
 boar at 
Scio
 and of the 
Greek
 race who for many years by 
Baratz
 or commission from the Grand Signior had boaren the Office, and Title of Pasha of 
Tripoli;
 and being grown very rich, and covetous by the Pyracies his Ships made on the Christians, and oppression of his people, not dividing amongst the Souldiery, that just proportion of the prey, which of right be∣longed to them, so incensed the minds of that people, that conspiring against him they murdered him in his Castle, and seized all his riches, to the use of the Publick. The Pasha being dead all his creatures, and persons that boar Office in his time were displaced, and others of more justice, and bravery (as they

imagined), put in their places, and a New Governor being set up, he began to make a through Reformation, and to alter and change every thing according, to his own humor, and pleasure. In the first place he gave leave to all people to Arm in 
Corso,
 or to set out Private Men of War, as every one pleased, and was able; different to the practise of the former Pasha, who reserved that benefit, and priviledge to himself; and next it was proposed to constitute a Divan after the manner of 
Algier
 in whom the supream power of all should be lodged. In order hereunto they immediately, set forth to Sea six Sail of Ships from forty to fifty Guns, excellent Saylors, and armed them with the best and stoutest of their Men, together with four more from twelve to thirty Guns; with these Ships they took many prizes belonging to 
French, Vene∣tians,
 and other Nations; and though they had long desired to taste also of the sweetness of 
English
 Estates; yet not encountring a prize worthy the trouble and evil consequences of such a breach; they for some time deferred the de∣sign which they had long meditated. Till at length about the Month of 
August
 1674. they unhappily encountred the 
Martin,
 a rich Ship bound from 
Venice
 to 
Cadiz,
 which they carried to 
Tripoly;
 and on the 
17th
 of 
September
 following, they seconded this outrage, by other of the like nature, committed on the 
Hunter
 Fregat, 
Thomas Parker
 Commander bound from 
Ligorne
 to 
Smyrna;
 whom the 
Tripolines
 meet∣ing with six Men of War at the entrance into the 
Arche-pelago,
 they brought her into the Port of 
Tripoly;
 where having plundered all the strangers goods laden upon her, to the import of forty thousand dollars, the par∣ticulars of all which were given under Oath of the Commander, the Ship was dismissed, and dispeeded on her Voyage to 
Smyrna
 with no other damage to the 
English,
 then the embezel∣ment of 726 dollars, robbed, or pilfered by the Souldiery, together which such charge, as the Consul of 
Tripoly
 challenged for his service therein. This news being advised into 
England,
 as a breach of Peace, his Majesty out of his usual and gratious care of the welfare of Trade, was pleased to order Sir 
John Narbrough
 his Commander in chief in the 
Mediterranean
 Seas, to demand satisfaction from that people; who accordingly Sailing thither, and requiring restitution of the goods injuriously taken, re∣ceived a denial, and denunciation of War. Whereupon Sir 
John Narbrough
 wrote to the Consul of 
Smyrna
 in this manner.




These are to advertise you, that the people of 
Tripoly
 have broken the peace with his Majesty; they are resolved to take all the 
English
 Ships they can meet, and overcome. I have been there with a Squadron of his Majesties Ships to demand restitution of the goods taken out of the 
Martin:
 and 
Hunter:
 they refuse to make any, so that now it is open War with those people: I am now at 
Malta
 taking in water, I intend to fit at 
Ligorne;
 I suppose his Majesty will have a Squadron of Ships to look after these people of 
Tripoly
 this Summer. Sir, I pray signify this to my Lord Ambassador at 
Constanti∣nople,
 and to all others his Majesties Sub∣jects where you converss, that they way pre∣vent falling into their hands; in hast I conclude, and kiss your hand, and I re∣main


On board his Ma∣jesties Ship
 Henrietta 
at
 Mal∣ta. 
March 15th 
1674/5.


Your Humble Servant
 John Narbrough.




Sir 
John Narbrough
 having fitted himself at 
Ligorne,
 and recruited with an additional Squadron of six or seven Men of War he de∣parted for 
Tripoly,
 taking under his Convoy, the 
Vyner, Bristol
 Merchant, and Mediterranean for 
Smyrna;
 and now appearing before the Port of 
Tripoly
 in a formidable manner, the 
Pyrates
 began to repent of their late violation, know∣ing that they must now either disgorge their ill got goods, or prove the evil effects of War; their hearts began now to fail them, so that they unrigged all their Ships, laying them up close in the harbour, and with them for the present all thoughts of roving on the Seas; for supposing, that the 
English
 Ships could not lye alwaies in that Station, but that bad weather or want of provisions would enforce them some time to retire, they hoped in that interval to find an opportunity to lanch into the Seas, where being clear, and good Saylors, they might have room enough to escape. How∣soever Sir 
John Narbrough
 with his Squadron, continued with such diligence on the coast, plying them with continual allarms, standing off to sea at night, and towards the land in the day; that they found not the heart, nor op∣portunity to adventure abroad; until one of their Ships, which had formerly been their Rere-Admiral, bound with Negroes for the 
Morea;
 resolved to hazard an escape; but not being able to make her passage good, she was forced ashoar, and burnt by our Ship, most of the Negroes falling into the 
English
 hands; some few days after Sir 
John Narbrough
 fired three of their Galeots, burnt a Satee, took a fisher-boat and a Sambechin; with which success being encouraged, and the Enemy affrighted, their Ships were blocked up in Port for some months, whist ours found free pas∣sage on the Seas; until that at length growing weary of so long a demorage, necessity drove them to adventure abroad, which two of their best Men of War successfully effected on the 
8th
 of 
September
 in despight of the 
English
 Squadron, being assisted with calm weather, and help of their Oares: four others observing the success of the former in a few days after at∣temted the like, and escaped in the same manner. And now the Commanders of 
Eng∣lish
 Ships in diverse Ports, taking false mea∣sures, on confidence that the 
Tripolines
 were blocked up in their Ports, trusted them∣selves with unadvised security into the Seas; amongst which none was so unfortunate, as a Ship called the 
Bristol
 Merchant one 
Plummer
 Commander, laden with eighty two Bales of Silk, besides other rich commodities bound from 
Smyrna
 to 
Ligorne,
 whereon were several Merchants, some of which having lived many years in 
Smyrna
 had acquired plentiful Estates:

namely Mr. 
John Foley,
 Mr. 
Thomas Laxton,
 Mr. 
Jacob Turner,
 Mr. 
Phillip Gell,
 and Mr. 
Tison
 Nephew to Mr. 
Foley;
 Persons who expected a prosperous Voyage, and a happy arrival in their own Country: But observe here the course of humane disappointments, for being imbarked on the Ship aforsaid they set Sail from 
Smyrna
 the 
10th
 or 
11th
 of 
September
 in company with the Vyner which hap∣pened to be about two or three days after the 
Tripolines
 had first broken out of their Port; these two Ships by bad weather, or want of due care lost company each with other in the 
Arche-pelago,
 which proved a happy fortune to the 
Vyner;
 for the 
Bristol
 Merchant, some few days after being off of 
Cape Sapientia
 en∣countred the two 
Tripolines
 which first came out of Port, and being Vessels of forty to fifty Gunds, soon made themselves Masters of a Merchant-ship laden, and of mean force. The 
Tri∣polines
 were greatly elevated with this rich prize which they immediately carried to a place called 
Derno;
 and there landing their goods, and men; for better security transported them over land to 
Tripoli.
 The Persons we men∣tioned before, were forced for the most part to walk all the way a foot, being thirty four days journey, unless some times, they were favoured to mount a Camel, which is such an unpleasant way of riding, that walking is much more easie; and travailing in a sandy, dry Country, water was very scarce, the days journies being commonly proportioned according to the distance of the Wells of Water; which they drank with tetter Appetites, and Pleasure, then they formerly rellished the most pleasant Wines. Being arrived at 
Tripoli
 they were ill wellcomed by the severe looks, and hard diet which they received from their Hests; and the Plague raging greatly in the City, added to the miseries, and dread of the place.


The 
Tripolines
 encouraged with this prize, and with the expectation of the farther success of their Ships abroad, hoped to weary out the 
English
 Squadron, which still continued to infest and trouble their coasts taking their Corn, Boats, and interrupting all Commerce which that Town had with the Sea. At length the 
Eng∣lish
 resolved to make an attempt on the Ships in Harbour which they resolutely performed in the night, and with great success according to this relation which Sir 
John Narbrough
 gave under his own hand.




Friday the 
14th
 of 
January 1675/6.


I
 Being before 
Tripoli,
 in 
Barbary
 with his Majesties Ships under my command, namely these,



Harwich 
Fregats


Henrietta 
Fregats


Portsmouth 
Fregats


Anne and Christopher 
Fire ships.


Holmes. 
Fire ships.


Guinny 
Merchants Ships attending for Convoy.


Martin 
Merchants Ships attending for Convoy.




And seeing four of the 
Tripoly
 Ships of War in the Port of considerable force pre∣paring to go out, and cruise, I fitted a fire∣boat out of the fireships; and commanded, that all theboats of my Squadron being twelve in number, should be manned, armed, and fitted with Fire-works also; I ordered a considerable Officer to be a Commander in every boat, and my Leiutenant 
Cloudisly Shovel
 to be Commander in chief of them all; for being resolved by Gods permission to attack the Enemy that night in Port, I gave instructions requisite for such a design. About twelve a clock in the night my boats resolvedly entred the Port, took and seized the guard boat, and killed the people in her, boarded the Ships, and fired them, and ut∣terly destroyed them all, some Turks and Moors slain, the 
 fled to save them∣selves. These four Ships lay under the Dey's Castle Walls, which was all that were in Port, except a 
Tunis
 Merchant Ship, which I ordered should not be medled with and so escaped firing. This Action was per∣formed in less then an hours time without sustaining the least damage on our side, then the expence of some Ammunition, Fir∣works, and Fireboat, which were effectually bestowed, as designed, to the great astonish∣ment of the Turks, who endeavoured to impede our design, by plying several great and innumerable small shot at our boats, and men, which were within Pistol-shot of the Dey's own Castle, and Palace. Such was the wonderful mercy of God towards us, that not one man of ours, was killed, wounded or touched; nor a boat any way disabled, but all returned in safety, bringing the Guard boat, two Moors, and the Turkish Colours of the four Ships in triumph along with them to my Ship. Our men employed in the boats on this occasion were one hundred fifty and seven, they all behaving themselves, as be∣came Englishmen.


To God alone be the Glory.






Names of the 
Tripoly
 Ships of War that were burnt with their Guns.




 


Guns






White crowned Eagle


50






Looking-Glass


34






S
ta
 Chiara


24






French Petach


20






Guard boat brought off with one Peterero, and two Moors in her.




I verily believe that in case I had landed at that time with five hundred men only I might have carried the City, for the Turks were so amazed, that they fled out of

it, they fired several great and small shot all to random, without hurt to any of cur men, God being pleased so to direct it.


The 
26th
 of 
January
 I fired about one hundred shot into the City of 
Tripoly
 a∣mongst the Inhabitants.


The first and third of 
February
 I took and destroyed five Corn boats twenty Leagues to the Eastward of 
Tripoly,
 and landed and burned a Stack of wood and Tinther, which was for building their new Ship, and some smal Masts, and Yards, and some bags of bread brought off, and two Guns spiked, which could not be got off; it beginning to blow, and likely to be bad weather; so I was constrained to leave them, and repair on board, and leave the coast, The tenth of this 
Month
 the 
Portsmouth
 took a Sambe∣chee in her ballast thirty Leagues to the East∣ward of 
Tripoly,
 she belonging to that Government, the Moors got all ashoar but the Sambechee was brought to 
Malta.


From aboard his Majesties Ship,
 Harwich 
March 
the 18th 1675/6.


John Narbrough.




The 
Tripolines
 being discouraged, and af∣frighted with this boldness and diligence of the 
English,
 and apprehending that they would always infest their coast, which would be an utter ruine, and destruction to them; and be∣ing touched in the most sensible parts of their interest, and wilfare; they generally concluded, that there was now no safety, but by making a peace with the 
English:
 To farther which, and to assist in the Office of Mediation; it happened, that there was at the same time at 
Tripoly,
 one 
Haffse
 bey, a great man of 
Tunis,
 who had been Dei of that Country; but be∣ing droven from thence by his Nephews, was come to 
Tripoly
 with an immense treasure, intending afterwards to Transport himself to 
Constantinople,
 to make his aggreivances known at the Grand Signiors Court. Of this person we shall discourse more at large hereafter; but in this place it is pertinent to relate, how in∣strumental he was to effect this peace in which he laboured with the greater zeal, that so by assistance of the 
English,
 he might find a speedy and safe conveyance on their Ships of his Person, Goods, and Servants into the 
Morea,
 from whence he designed by land to 
Constantinople.
 The Treaty being thus began; a peace was con∣cluded between his Majesties of Great Britain, 
&c.
 and 
Halil Pasha, Ibrahim Dey, Aga, Divan
 and Governors of the Noble City, and Kingdom of 
Tripoly,
 Dated the fifth of 
March
 1675/6. Being the last day of the Moon 
Zel∣hedga,
 and 
Hegeira
 1086. By this instrument all the former Articles were again confirmed with addition of two others.


First, that all Persons taken under Eng∣lish Colours should be delivered to Sir
 John Narbrough 
and set at liberty without pay∣ment of any ransom for them; under which notion, Mr.
 Foley, 
Mr.
 Laxton, 
Mr.
 Turner, 
Mr.
 Gell, and 
Mr.
 Tison, 
with the Captain and Sea-men taken on the
 Bristol 
Merchant were freed; whose ran∣som otherwise might have cost dear, and perhaps almost the value of their private Estates.


Secondly, That eighty thousand Dollars
 (
which was the account made of the value of goods, and Mony taken on the
 Martin 
and
 Hunter) 
should be made good to Sir
 John Narbrough, 
in Mony, or Goods, and Slaves. To which was adjoyned such a submission, recantation, and acknowledgment for their late offence, and outrage, as testifyed the sorrow of their true repentance, as we shall see more at large in their following Ar∣ticles.


And now the peace being concluded; Sir 
John Narbrough
 returned to 
Malta;
 and soon after came back to 
Tripoly
 to receive the re∣mainder of the monies, and goods agreed for, the Slaves being delivered already. In this interim the six Ships which had formerly broken out of the harbour, and sailed to the 
Levant,
 hearing of the peace, returned to 
Tripoly;
 where great feuds and dissentions arose; the Souldiery accusing 
Ibrahim Dei,
 nick named 
Misser ogli
 as the beginner and Author of the War, and for continuing it so long with obstinacy, until they were reduced to their last extremity. In fine they threatned to cut him in Peices; but at length they were contented to cashier him only from his Office; after which he fled into the 
Morea
 and their Vice-Admiral 
Mustapha Grande
 was made 
Dei
 in his place; with whom, and with the Souldiers in general now returned; Sir 
John Narbrough
 renewed the Articles of Peace, and dated them the first of 
May
 1676; which are these that follow, Articles of Peace and Commerce between, 
&c.










Articles of Peace, and Commerce Between the most Serene, and Mighty Prince Charles the Second by the Grace of God King of 
Great Britain, France
 and 
Ireland
 Defender of the Christian Faith, 
&c.
 And the Most Illustrious Lords 
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dei, Aga Di∣van,
 and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary
 concluded by Sir 
John Narbrough
 Knight, Ad∣miral of his Majesties Fleet, in the Mediterranean Seas.


1.
 IN the first place, It is Agreed, and Concluded, That from this day and for ever forward; There be a true, firm and Inviolable Peace, between the Most Serene

King of Great Britain 
France
 and 
Ireland,
 Defender of the Christian Faith, 
&c.
 And the most Illustrious Lords, The 
Bassa, Dai, Aga Divan,
 and Governors of the City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary,
 And between all the Dominions and Subjects of either side; And that the Ships, or other Vessels, and the Subjects and People of both sides, shall not from henceforth, do to each other, any harm, offence, or Injury in word or Deed, But shall Treat one another with all possible respect and Friendship?


II.
 That any of the Ships, or other Vessels, belonging to the said King of Great Brit∣tain, or to any of his Majesties Subjects, may safely come to the Port of 
Tripoly,
 or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, or Dominions thereunto belonging; freely to buy, and sell without the least Disturbance; paying the usual Customs as in former times hath been payd, for such goods as they sell; And for the goods they sell not, they shall have free Liberty to carry on Board their own Ships without paying any Duties for the same; And when they please they shall freely Depart, from thence without any stop, hin∣drance or molestation whatsoever.


III.
 That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the King of Great Brittain, or to any of his Majesties Sub∣jects, as also those belonging to the People and Kingdom of 
Tripoly,
 shall freely pass the Seas, and 
traffick
 where they please without any search, hinderance, or mo∣lestation from each other; And that all Persons and Passengers of what Country whatsoever; And all Monys, Goods, Mer∣chandize and Moveables, to whatsoever People or Nation belonging; being on board any of the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly free, and shall not be stopped taken or Plundred, nor receive any harm or Damage whatsoever from either Party.


IV.
 That the 
Tripoly
 Ships of War, or other Vessels thereunto belonging, meeting with any Merchant Ships, or other Vessels of the King of Great Brittains Subjects, not being in any of the Seas appertaining to his Majesties Dominions may send on board one single boat, with but two Sitters, besides the ordinary Crew of Rowers, and no more but the two Sitters to enter any of the said Mer∣chants Ships or any other Vessels; with∣out the Express from the Commander of every such Ship or Vessel; And then upon pro∣ducing them a Pass under the hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral of 
England,
 the said Boat shall presently Depart; And if the Merchant, Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels produce no Pass from the Lord High Ad∣miral of 
England,
 yet if the Major part of the said Ships or Vessels Company, be Subjects to the said King of Great Britain, The said Boat shall presently Depart, And the Merchants Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, shall proceed freely on her, or their Voyage, And if any of the said Ships of War, or other Vessels of his said Majesties meeting with any Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels be∣longing unto 
Tripoly;
 if the Commander or Commanders, of any such Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, shall produce a Pass, Signed by the chief Governor of 
Tripoly
 and a Cer∣tificate from the 
English
 Consul, living there, Or if they have no such Pass or Certificate yet if the Major part of their Ships Company or Companies, be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to 
Tripoly,
 Then the said 
Tripoly
 Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels shall proceed freely.


V.
 That no Commander, or other Person, of any Ship, or other Vessel of 
Tripoly,
 shall take out of any Ship or Vessel of his said Majesties Subjects, any Person or Persons whatsoever to carry them any where, to be examined, or upon any other pretence, nor shall use any Torture or Violence to any Person of what Nation or quality whatsoever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel, of his Majesties Subjects upon any pretence what∣soever.


VI.
 That no Ship-wrack belonging to the King of Great Brittain or any of his Ma∣jesties Subjects, upon any part of the coast belonging unto 
Tripoly
 shall be made or be∣come a Prize. And that neither the goods thereof shall be seized, nor the Men made Slaves; But that all the People of 
Tripoly,
 shall do their best endeavours to save the said Men and their Goods.


VII.
 That no Ship or any other Vessel of 
Tripoly
 shall have permission to be Delivered up, or to go to any place in 
Enmity
 with the said King of Great Brittain, to be made use of as Cosairs or Sea Rovers against his said Majesties Subjects.


VIII.
 That none of the Ships or other smaler Vessels of 
Tripoly
 shall remain Cruis∣ing, near his Majesties City and Garrison of 
Tangier
 or in sight of it, nor any other way Disturb the Peace and Commerce of that place.


IX.
 That if any Ship or Vessel of 
Tunis, Argier, Tittuan,
 or 
Salli,
 or any other place being in War with the said King of Great Brittain, bring any Ships or Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of his said Majesties Subjects to 
Tripoly,
 or to any Port or Place within that Kingdom; The Governors there shall not permit them

to be sold within the Territories of 
Tri∣poly.


X.
 That if any of the Ships of War, of the said King of Great Brittain do come to 
Tripoly
 or to any other Port or Place of that Kingdom, with any Prize, they may freely sell it, or otherwise dispose of it, at their own pleasure, without being molested by any; And that his Majesties said Ships of War, shall not be obliged to pay Cu∣stome in any sort; And that if they want Provisions, Victuals, or any other things they may freely buy them at the rate in the Market.


XI.
 That when any of his said Majesties Ships of War shall appear before 
Tripoly,
 upon Notice thereof given to the 
English
 Consul, or by the Commander of the said Ships, to the chief Governors of 
Tripoly;
 Publick Proclamation shall be immediately made, to secure the Christian Captives, And if after that any Christians whatsoever make their escape, on board any of the Ships of War; They shall not be required back again, Nor shall the said Consul, or Commander, or any other his Majesties Subjects, be obliged to pay any thing for the said Christians.


XII.
 That if any Subject of the King of Great Brittain, happen to dye in 
Tripoly,
 or its Territories, his Goods or Monys, shall not be seized by the Governors or any Ministers of 
Tripoly,
 but shall all re∣main with the 
English
 Consul.


XIII.
 That neither the 
English
 Consul, nor any other Subject of the said King of Great Brittains shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of his Majesties Subjects; Except that they become surety for the same by a Publick Act.


XIV.
 That the Subjects of his said Ma∣jesty in 
Tripoly,
 or its Territories in matter of Controversie, shall be lyable to no other Jurisdictions but that of the 
Dai,
 or 
Divan,
 except they happen to be at Difference be∣tween themselves; In which case they shall be lyable to no other Determination, but that of the Consul only.


XV.
 That in case any Subject of his Ma∣jesty, being in any part of the Kingdom of 
Tripoly,
 happen to strike, wound or kill, a 
Turk
 or a 
Moor
 (if he be taken) he is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater Severity, than a 
Turk
 ought to be (being guilty) of the same offence; But if he escape, Neither the said 
English
 Consul, nor any other of his said Majesties Subjects, shall be in any sort questioned or troubled therefore.


XVI.
 That the 
English
 Consul, now or at any time hereafter living in 
Tripoly
 shall be there at all times, with entire freedom, and safety of his Person and Estate, and shall be permitted to chuse his own Drugger∣man, and Broaker, And freely to go on board any Ship in the Road, as often, and when he pleases; And to have the Liberty of the Country; and that he shall be allowed a place to pray in; And that no Man shall do him any Injury in Word or Deed.


XVII.
 That not only during the Continu∣ance of this Peace and Friendship, but like∣wise (if any Breach or War) happen to be hereafter between the said King of Great Brittain, and the City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly,
 The said Consul and all other his said Majesties Subjects, shall always and at all times, both of Peace and War, have full and absolute Liberty to Depart and go to their own, or any other Country, upon any Ship or Vessel of what Nation soever, they shall think fit, and to Carry with them, all their Estates, Goods, Families, and Servants, (although born in the Country,) without any Interruption or hindrance.


XVIII.
 That no Subject of his said Ma∣jesty being a Passenger, from, or to any Port shall be any way molested or medled with, al∣though he be on Board, any Ship or Vessel in Enmity with 
Tripoly.


XIX.
 That whereas a War hath lately happened, between the most Serene King of Great Brittain, and the most Illustrious Lords 
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dai,
 The 
Aga Divan,
 and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary;
 by reason of the Injuries done unto the King of Great Brittain and his Subjects, by the Go∣vernment and People of 
Tripoly
 contrary to the Articles of Peace; We 
Halil Basla, Ibraim Dai, Aga Divan,
 and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary,
 do acknowledge the Injuries done; And that the Breach of the Peace, between his most Excellent Majesty of Great Brittain, and Us of 
Tripoly
 was committed by our Subjects, for which some are banished and some fled from our Justice; And for further Satisfaction to his most Excellent Majesty for the Breach of Articles we are sorry for the same, and do by these engage to set at Liberty and Deliver unto the Right Honourable Sir 
John Narbrough
 Knight, Admiral of his Majesties Fleet, in the Mediterranian Sea; All English Captives, Residing in the City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly,
 and Dominions thereunto belonging, without paying any Ransom for them; And likewise by setting at Liberty and delivering unto the said Sir 
John Narbrough
 Knight,

all other Persons taken under 
English
 Colours without paying any Ransom for them, And by paying eighty thousand Dollars in Mony, Goods, and Slaves, to the aforesaid Sir 
John Narbrough
 Knight: And moreover we do engage our selves and successors, That if any Injuries for the future be done, contrary to these Articles, by the Government and People of 
Tripoly,
 to the King of Great Bri∣tain and his Subjects, if upon demand of satisfaction from the Government, and people of 
Tripoly;
 We, or they refuse, or deny to give satisfaction therefore, so that a War be occasioned thereby, between the King of Great Britain, and the Government and people of 
Tripoly;
 We do engage our selves and successors to make restitution for the Injuries done, and likewise to make satis∣faction to the King of Great Britain for the full charge and damage of that War.


XX.
 That no Subject of the King of Great Britain, 
&c.
 shall be permitted to turn Turk or Moor in the City and King∣dom of 
Tripoly,
 being induced thereunto by any surprizal whatsoever, unless he volun∣tarily appear before the 
Dei,
 or Governor with the 
English
 Consuls Druggerman three times in twenty four hours space, and every time Declare his Resolution, to turn Turk or Moor.


XXI.
 That at all times, when any Ship of War of the King of Great Britain, 
&c.
 carry∣ing his said Majesties Flag at the main-top-mast-head, appear before the City of 
Tripoly,
 and come to Anchor in the Road, That im∣mediately after notice thereof given, by his said Majesties Consul or Officer from the Ship, unto the 
Dei
 and Government of 
Tripoly;
 They shall in honour to his Ma∣jesty cause a Salute of one and twenty Can∣nons to be shot off, from the Castles and Forts of the City, and that the said Ship shall return an Answer by shooting of the same Number of Cannons.


XXII.
 That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles, by us 
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dei, Aga Divan,
 and Go∣vernors of the Noble Kingdoms and City of 
Tripoly,
 all Injuries, and Damages sustain∣ed on either part, shall be quiet taken away and forgotten, and this Peace shall be in full force and vertue, and continue for ever, And for all Depredations, and Damages, that shall hereafter be Committed, or done by either side, before Notice can be given of this Peace, full satisfaction be immediately made, And whatsoever remains in kind shall instantly be restored.


XXIII.
 That whatsoever shall happen here∣after, that any thing is done or committed, by the Ships or Subjects of either side con∣trary to any of these Articles (Satisfaction being Demanded therefore) shall be made to the full, and without any manner of Delay, and that it shall not be Lawful to break this Peace, unless such satisfaction be denyed, and our Faith shall be our Faith, and our word, our word, and whosoever shall be the Cause of the breaking of this Peace shall assuredly be punished with present Death.


Confirmed and Sealed in the Presents of Almighty God,
 
the fifth day of
 March 
Old Stile, and in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ, one thousand six hun∣dred seventy five, Being the last day of the Moon
 Zelheldga, 
and the year of the
 Hegeira 
on thousand and eighty six.






WHereas there were several Articles of Peace and Commerce, between the most Serene and Mighty Prince 
Charles
 the Second, by the Grace of God King of 
Great-Britain, France
 and 
Ireland,
 Defender of the Christian Faith, 
&c.
 And the most Illustrious Lords 
Halil Bassa, Ibraim Dei, Aga Divan,
 and Governors of the Noble City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary,
 lately made and concluded by the said Lords, on the one part; And by Sir 
John Narbrough
 Knight, Admiral of his said Serene Ma∣jesties Fleet in the Mediterranean Seas, on the other part, and by them confirmed and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, the fifth day of 
March,
 Old Stile, And in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 
1675/6
 being the last day of the Moon 
Zelhedga,
 And the year of the 
Hegeira 1086.


Since which time of Confirming and Seal∣ing the aforesaid Articles of Peace, and Com∣merce, The aforesaid Lord 
Ibraim Dei,
 being fled away from the Government, of the City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary.


Now we 
Halil Bassa, Aga Divan
 Go∣vernors, Souldiers and People of the aforesaid City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly,
 have Choosen and Elected Vice Admiral 
Mustapha Grande
 to be 
Dei
 of the aforesaid City and King∣dom of 
Tripoly
 to succeed 
Ibraim Dei,
 in the aforesaid Government.


And now we 
Halil Bassa, Aga Divan,
 and Governors, Souldiers and People of 
Tripoly
 aforesaid, having seen the aforesaid

Articles of Peace and Commerce which were lately made and concluded as aforesaid; And having seriously perus'd and fully considered all particulars therein mentioned, Do fully approve of all and every the aforesaid Articles of Peace, and we and every one of us do now by these presents, consent and agree to and with Sir 
John Narbrough
 Knight aforesaid, for the just and exact keeping and performing of the said Articles; And do accept, approve, ratifie, and confirm all and every of them in the same manner and form as they are incerted and repeated in the preceding Articles aforesaid; hereby firmly engaging our selves, and successors, assuring on our faith sacredly to maintain and strictly to observe, perform, and keep inviolably all and every the aforesaid Article and Articles of Peace and Agreements for ever. And to cause and require all our Subjects and people of what degree or quality whatsoever, within the City or Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary;
 or Dominions thereunto belonging, both by Sea and Land punctually, inviolably, carefully and duly to observe, keep, and per∣form all and every the aforesaid Article, and Articles, thereof for ever: And our Faith shall be our Faith, and our word our word, and whosoever shall at any time violate and break any part of the said Article, or Ar∣ticles of Peace, they shall be assuredly punish∣ed, with greatest severity, and his or their heads shall be immediately cut off; and forth∣with be presented unto any Officer whom the most Serene King of Great Britain, 
&c.
 shall Authorize, to make Demand thereof.


It is further agreed that the Subjects be∣longing unto the most serene King of 
Great Britain
 &c. Trading unto the Port of the City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary
 aforesaid, or to any Port or Place of the Dominions thereunto belonging; in any Merchants Ship or other Vessel belonging to the said Serene Kings Subjects shall not pay so much Custom by one 
per Cent.
 for what∣soever Goods or Merchandize they sell or buy; as other Nations do for the Customs of the like Goods, or Merchandize, notwithstanding whatsoever is Specified in the Second Article aforesaid to the contrary.


And that the most Serene King of Great Britains Consul residing in 
Tripoly
 afore∣said, shall have Liberty at all times, when he pleaseth to put up his said Serene Majesties Flag, on the Flag-staff on the Top of his House, and thereto continue it spread as long time as he pleaseth; likewise the said Consul to have the same Liberty of putting up and spreading the said Flag in his Boat, when he passeth on the Water, and no Man whatsoever to Oppose, Molest, Disturb, or Injury him therein either by Word or Deed.


These and all other preceding Articles are to remain firm for ever, without any altera∣tion; and in all other particulars not men∣tioned in any of these Articles, the Regula∣tion shall be according to the Capitulation general with the Grand Signior.


Confirmed likewise and Sealed in the Presence of Almighty God, at our Castle in the noble City and Kingdom of 
Tripoly
 in 
Barbary,
 
the first day of 
May
 Old Stile, and in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 
1676,
 being the twenty sixth day of the Moon 
Zaphire,
 and the year of the 
Hegeira 1080.


Halil Bassa's Seal, Mustapha Dei's Seal, Aga's Seal, Ally Admiral's Seal.




A True Coppy Examined out of Sir 
John Narbroughs.


Thomas Fowler.












HAving thus related the original cause, proceedings, and conclusion of our War with 
Tripoly.
 Let us Travel to 
Tunis;
 which though since the year 1655 hath ever main∣tained Peace with 
England,
 yet the civil dis∣sentions among themselves have administred unto us Subject of discourse, and more espe∣cially, since it hath some relation to 
Hoffse-bey,
 whom formerly we named, as Mediator of the Peace between Us, and 
Tripoly.


On the sixth of 
September
 1675.
 
Morat Bei
 General of all the Land Forces in the Kingdom of 
Tunis
 dyed, the most Politick, and Popular Person, that ever mannaged that Office, his Sons 
Ciddi Mehmet
 and 
Ciddi Ali
 by the gene∣ral approbation, and consent of the Souldiery joyntly succeeding him in that charge. But the ambition of these two young Gallants would admit no union in the Government; the Elder would know no equal, and the younger no superior, so that it was necessary for one to govern, or both to be laid aside: the decision of which was referred to a full Assembly of the 
Turks.
 In the mean time 
Hoffsey-bey
 Brother to 
Morat
 deceased, and Uncle to the two Com∣petitors, taking advantage of these divisions, offered himself a Candidate for the place; and so operated with the force of mony, and with assistance of the younger Nephew who would rather yield to an Uncle, then to a brother, that he clearly carried the election by the common suffrages of the people. The Elder Son 
Ciddi Mehmet
 not enduring the indignity to be thus degraded took the field and set up his standard; After him followed all his Fathers Old 
Spahees
 and the 
Moors
 abroad came into him, so that in a few days he became so formidable as to give Laws to the 
Dei
 and People of 
Tunis;
 obliging them immediately to banish his Uncle, and to re∣ceive him as sole, and absolute General of all the Land Souldiery in those Dominions 
Hoffse-bey
 not being able to resist this force,

posted away with such expedition that he ad∣ventured to embark himself, retinue and trea∣sure (which as was reported being modestly calculated, amounted to three millions of Dollars) on no better a Vessel, then a 
French Satte
 for 
Tripoli;
 where he was honourably received by that Government, and Letters sent from them to the young 
Bei
 at 
Tunis,
 mediating for the return of his Uncle, with promise, that he should live quietly, and give no inter∣ruption to the course of his Government; but 
Ciddi Mehmet
 resolving not to trust him, posi∣tively declared against his readmission, as not consistent with his Government, and Safety.


It happened at this time that the 
English
 had War with 
Tripoly,
 and blocked up the Port; and that afterwards a Peace ensuing; 
(Hoffse-bey)
 (as we said before,) showed himself very forward, and zealous in the Mediation; which taking effect; he was afterwards to∣gether with his retinue transported on the 
Bristol Fregat
 Commanded by Sir 
John Berry
 to 
Modon
 in the 
Morea,
 from whence he went by Land to carry his Complaints to 
Constanti∣nople;
 whilst the 
Bristol Fregat
 proceeded to 
Smyrna,
 to receive the 
Turky
 Companies Ships under Convoy for 
England.


Hoffs-bey
 being arrived at the Grand Signiors Court prepared an easie and ready access to the Grandees, by the great Presents, he sent them; which being the only means to mollify and make tender the hearts of 
Turks;
 he found upon all his addresses such resentments, and compassionate feelings of his aggreivances that if assurances in words, and promises would do his work, he might be ascertained of engaging the entire power, and puissance of the Empire for his re-establishment. The news of 
Hoffse-bey;
 being gone to address himself to the Turkish Court for relief much perplexed the Government at 
Tunis;
 and at the same time the plague desperately raging there, made them sick, and infirm both in body, and mind: wherefore after serious considerations and de∣bates hereupon; it was concluded necessary, to Fight 
Hoffse
 with his own Weapons; and im∣mediately to dispatch away four Ships for 
Con∣stantinople
 with Messengers, and Presents to the Grand Signior and his Officers being the only means to open the reasons and understandings of the 
Turks,
 and make them as well capable to comprehend the justice of their cause, as to reconcile their affections. The four Ships arriving at 
Constantinople,
 were seized on, at the instance of 
Hoffse-bey;
 and he declaring, that those Ships were belonging to him, and his own proper Estate, easily procured a judg∣ment in his favour; and the Captains of them being called to the 
Divan,
 were Commanded to own 
Hoffse-bey
 for their Master, and to obey him as their Pasha, and absolute Lord under the Grand Signior. It was too late, when at 
Tunis
 they apprehended the Error, they had Committed, in sending these four Ships to 
Con∣stantinople;
 which now upon more serious consideration then the former they expected to return freighted with armed Men, and Im∣perial Commands to re-establish 
Hoffse-bey
 in the Government of which, and of what was farther preparting at the Ottoman Court, that they might have good advice; they dispatched two Messengers for 
Constantinople
 on a French 
Satee,
 which they had freighted for that pur∣pose, to Land them at 
Smyrna;
 where being arrived they addressed themselves to me, then Consul there, bringing me Letters of recom∣mendation from friends at 
Tunis
 to assist and help them in all their occurences. I was well informed in all particulars concerning the suc∣cess, and motions of 
Hoffse-bey
 at 
Constanti∣nople,
 and I did not omit to relate all matters distinctly to them; for not long before, I had occasion to be acquainted with 
Hoffse-bey
 him∣self having at his earnest request found means to furnish him with the Sum of three thousand Dollars, upon a good Pawn of Gold, and Jewels; amongst which there was a Fetlock of Gold enameled, and set with Diamonds, just in the form and fashion of those, which we put on our horses, when they go to grass; and this, I understood, was one of the Ornaments, which they put on the Ancle of the Bride on the marriage day; I know not whether it were to grace her legs, as bracelets do our wrists, or to put her in mind of her servitude, so soon as she submits to Wedlock. I acquainted them, as I said, with all matters: That the Grand Signior, and his Officers, had greatly resent∣ed the sufferings of 
Hoffse-bey
 and that they own∣ed his cause, having stopt the four Ships of 
Tunis
 at 
Constantinople;
 and had promised to furnish him with a whole Chamber of Janisaries, with a Licence to raise such Voluntiers on the Sea∣coast of 
Asia,
 as would willingly, and of their own accord follow his Colours. I had not many days given them this intelligence, which others confirmed in like manner; before 
Hoffse-bey
 himself with his four men of War and two other hired Ships arrived in the Port of 
Smyrna:
 where having stayed some days to taken in provisions, and embark those who had listed themselves for his service in those Parts; they departed for 
Tunis,
 touching at 
Scio, Navarine,
 and 
Tripoly,
 in their Way, reinfor∣cing themselves with such, as voluntarily fol∣lowed their Standard. The Messengers posted back with all speed, on a Vessel hired at 
Smyrna;
 and arriving some time before 
Hoffse-bey;
 ren∣dered an account of the treatment which he had found at 
Constantinople,
 with the particulars of the forces he brought with him. The 
Tunesines
 being prepared with this intelligence, took courage to oppose a handful of men, to whom they refused License so much as to one man of them to land; only out of respect to the Grand Signior's Commands, they were willing to admit 
Hoffse-bey
 to a treaty; and to receive him ashoar with three or four Servants and COmpanions; They sleightly perused his Papers, rather to discover his strength, and the porgress of his negotiations, then with inten∣tions to condescend in the least to his desires; which having done, and given permission to see his house, and visit his wife, and children; they hastned him again aboard; and all the Country being in Arms, they threatned to treat him and his People, as Enemies, if they ad∣ventured to make a descent. 
Hoffse-bey
 being discouraged with this rude Treatment, and with the Union, and general Confederacy of the people against him contrary to his expecta∣tions; returned to 
Navarine;
 where he landed, discharged his Ships, and Souldiers, which lay too heavy upon a Private Purse, and retired himself for some time with much melancholy and discontent; at length he travelled again to 
Constantinople,
 where the Turkish Officers at∣tended

his coming with open mouths, expecting to share once more in the recruits he had brought with him from 
Tunis.
 But his stock being low, he was not able to dispense his mony, and presents so generously, and plentifully as before; which the 
Turks
 perceiving fell much in their respects for him, and strangly on a suddain lost wholly the zeal and compassion for his cause; suffering him to live at 
Constanti∣nople
 in the Condition of a private Aga. In the mean time the disturbances, and civil dis∣sentions ran high at 
Tunis:
 the two Brothers waging War with various and interchangeable success, caused such agitions in the State, that in three months time four 
Deys
 were cut off. At length the younger Brother 
Ciddi Ali
 gain∣ing the Victory, and always inclining towards his Uncle, consented that he should be recalled from 
Constantinople;
 whereupon four Ships were fitted at 
Porto Farina,
 to carry presents of atonement to 
Constantinople,
 and to bring 
Hoffse-bey
 from thence with Title of Pasha; whom the people now, expected with great impatience, as the only Person, whose Presence and Authority was able to settle, and restore them to their former quietness and union. This happened in the year 1677; when the Country was so harrassed with Civil Wars, that a miserable Famine ensued; so that a Cafficé of Wheat which was ten Bushels, was sold for twenty eight Dollars, and of Barly for fourteen: and the scarcity of this Country which is commonly the Granary of 
Italy,
 had such influence on those parts and 
Spain,
 in the years 1677 and 1678 that the Sate of the Grand Duke of 
Tuscany
 suffered much thereby; and had more, had not the State of 
Luca
 out of Friendship, and on the score of Neighbour∣hood relieved their necessities.






Anno 
1675.
 Hegeira 
1086.


PRopositions of peace not being so earnestly pressed, nor so advantageously proffered by the Poles, as the pride of the Turks did expect, the War still continued, but not prosecuted either on the one side or on the other with the same violence with which it began. For the Sultan designing this year to circumcise his Son, the young Prince, now about twelve years of Age, and to marry his Daughter of seven to his Mosayp, or Favourite, Pasha of 
Magnasia,
 commonly called by the Name of 
Kul-ogli,
 which signifies the Son of a Slave, he resolved todedicate this whole Year to quiet repose, mirth, and jollity at home, only two thousand Janisaries were sent to 
Ibrahim
 Pasha to recruit the Souldiers on the Frontiers of 
Poland,
 and the Tartars were reinforced with some Turkish Troops under 
Ʋsuff
 Pasha to assist 
Dorosensko
 a∣gainst the Poles, who were with a considerable Army fallen into 
Ʋkrania;
 And the Captain Pasha, with twenty eight Sail of Gallies, was dispeeded into the Black Sea for carrying of such Provisions and Ammunition for War as was necessary for supply of the Army: Besides which, no preparations of War were designed, these being judged sufficient, though not to conquer, yet at least to repress the Incursions, and amuse or keep the Armes of the Enemy em∣ployed.


For at the Cttoman Court the sace of all things was become serene and calm, no Sediti∣nos of great men, nor discontents of the people, nor balck and cruel designs of State disturbed, or clouded the splendour of the Solemnities,
 or the brows of the great Statists, but all matters ran in an uninterrupted course of Joy and Fe∣stivity. The Sultan, who in his action shewed himself a most benign Prince, sparing and com∣passionate of the blood and misery of his Sub∣jects, hath, since his arrival to a mature Age, exercised a wise manner of Government, se∣vere and just, and yet void of the cruelty and tyranny of his Ancestors; under whom the tra∣ding Christian enjoyed the privilege of their Capitulations with more justice, and less fre∣quent Avanias. The Vizier also, and other great Officers, being sensible of the benefit which Trade begat, treated Merchants with more gentleness and respect than in former times, their Ships not being forced on every occasion into the Grand Signior's service, but rather per∣swaded to it by rewards and fair promises, otherwise than in the times of former Viziers, and it is to be wished also that the like might be said under the Government of those which are to succeed; though if we look forward to the years 1678 and 1679 we shall find the Scene of things altered, and not only Merchants, but even Ambassadors, and the Representatives themselves, remain under sad discouragements, Amongst these joys and gentle ways of Govern∣ment; the manner of this Court was much al∣tered; the Divan had not for two months space been opened for business, to the great prejudice and interruption of Justice; Wine, that great abomination to the Turkish Law, which four years past was by the Imperial Decree forbid∣den under pain of Death and a thousand Ex∣ecrations and Curses, was now the common Drink, and divertisement in fashion, used im∣moderately by all, excepting the Grand Sig∣nior, the Mufti, and Reis Effendi; the Vizier himself having been excessively intemperate therein, had extinguished the natural heat of his stomach, which could be warmed by no less heat than what proceeds from 
Aqua Vitae;
 by which debauchery and indisposition all Busi∣nesses were slowly and negligently dispatched, and according to his example the Officer and Ministers acted in their Affairs, which in former times being always, dispatched by nine a Clock in the Morning, that became now the time and hour of rising.


The Grand Signior himself, though not taught by his Attendants to drink Wine, lest it should perhaps betray him to some actions dangerous to them, gave himself to Amours; for falling in love with a Polish Woman, lately captivated at 
Kemenitz,
 he made her his Second Hasakee or Sultaness; for having had the good fortune to bring him a Son, that honour was the re∣ward of her fruitfulness; and that he might give other testimonies of his favour, he cast his eyes on a poor Chinganee, or Gipsy Boy, who with singing and dancing so pleased him, that he gave him six purses of money containing three thousand Dollars, with Horses and Ser∣vants, and took him into the Seraglio. Amidst these Delights the Grand Signior gave order to the Vizier not to speak to him of three things: Neither of returning to 
Constantinople,
 nor against his Favourite, nor against his Hunt∣ing; in other matters he might use free∣dom.




Another alteration of a better nature, with reference to Learning and Knowledge, seems also remarkable in this Court; for the Grand Signior having been some years past presented by the Dutch Resident, with twelves large Volumes of the new 
Atlas,
 upon an accidental sight thereof was so pleased, that he commanded it should speedily be translated into Turkish; to which Work Dr. 
Alexandro Mauro Cordato,
 the Viziers Interpreter, who succeeded in the place of 
Panaioti
 deceased, was nominated; but he finding it too unweildy for him, desired the assistance of a French Jesuit, then at 
Scio,
 skil∣ful in the Turkish and Arabick Languages, who was immediately sent for, and therein employ∣ed; and though it is thought, that this business is above their Element, and that it will soon cool and be neglected, yet it seems to be the first step which the Turks have made unto Learning, and therefore is the more observable.


And now the Festivals beginning on the 
16th.
 of 
May,
 we must for some days lay aside all business, and observe with what order and form these Solemnities were performed. In the first place. On this day the Grand Signior, with the young Prince his Son, went to their Tents, which were pitched very sumptuously in the Plain near the City, and indeed were truly stately and magnificent; all the great men, as the Vizier, Mufti, and others, having their Pa∣vilions erected; amongst which was raised a very stately Throne, with a Canopy of Cloth of Gold, extended under the shady leaviness of two tall Elms, which, set off with many Lamps, in the Night represented a very pleasant and glorious Scene. On this Seat of State the Sultan placed himself in the morning, being ac∣companied thither by all the Pashaws then pre∣sent, and by the Rrepresentatives of those who were absent; who according to their Degree, in order kissing his Vest, delivered in a Silk Purse, a Note or Schedule of their Presents, which were afterwards put into the Tefterdar's or Lord Treasurers hands to see and compare them with the particulars received; which were so great and considerable, that they far surpassed the Charges and Disbursments of the Solemnity. Opposite to the Tents were several poles fixed, between which at Night were hung Lamps of several shapes, which be∣ing varied every Night made a very pleasing and magnificent Object; by light of which in the Evening were exercised several tricks of Acti∣vity, as Wrestlings, Dancing, and Singing, and sometimes were acted Turkish Comedies, which consist only of Farces, and some ridi∣culous Dialogues, and at last the divertisements of the night concluded with Fire-works, which were so many, that (as reported) 240 men were employed for four months time in the ma∣in Christendom; only one seemed to excel the rest, being a sort of Rocket, which went up very high, without any tail of fire, like the common ones, carrying only a small com∣pacted Globe of red fire like a Star, and mak∣ing to noise in mounting, but raised to its height, breaks. These were the pastimes of the Night; in the day time all the several Arts and Trades, some one day, and some another, passed before the Tents, every one offering their Presents, as they passed, representing by some kind of Pa∣geant and Procession their diversities of Trade: this continued for fifteen days. On the 
25th.
 of this instant 
May,
 was a solemn Cavalcade, in which marched the Janisaries with all their chief Officers, Chiauses, and Mutafaracas, 
&c.
 And of the Great Men, the Vizier, Mufti, and 
Kul-ogli
 the Favourite, the first on the right hand, and the second in the middle; after them followed the young Prince who was to be cir∣cumcised, extraodinary rich in the Furniture of his Horse, and the number and largeness of the Diamonds, which were on his Tulbant and Breast. In this Cavalcade were carried twenty four small Nachils, and two large ones, as high as the Mast of a Ship, which were carried by a hundred Slaves, and set before the Seraglio, which are in form of triumphant Pyramids, adorned with Tinsils in thirteen Divisions, according to this following Form or Des∣cription.






A Turkish Pageant


High 27 Menar Pikes Each Almost as Long as a yard. & 32 Spanns about att The Bottome


The forme of a Nachil


Vests of Cloth & Silke








On the 
27th.
 being the day of 
Mahomet
's Birth, the Grand Signior rode publickly to the Mosch of Sultan 
Selim,
 having no other atten∣dance than the Retinue of his own Court; his Pages were very rich in Cloth of Gold, each carrying a Feather studded with a rich Jewel on his Head; after the Grand Signior rode the young Prince, who that Night was circumcised. During this Festival, a vast number of people was fed at the charge of the Grand Signior, and about two thousand circumcised, every one of which had a Quilt given him, with a small pay of three Asper a day for his Life.


This Solemnity for the Circumcision being ended, on the 
10th.
 of 
June
 began the Feast for the Marriage. The Kuzlir Aga, who is the black Eunuch of the Women, was Bridegroom or Comparé to the young Princess, and the Tef∣terdar or Lord Treasurer to 
Kul-ogli,
 both which in the name of the Bride and Bridegroom went before the Lord Chief Justice called the Kadeles∣cher, and by him had the Articles of Marri∣age wrote, and passed into publick Act; which being done, the Presents were sent, and first those from the Bridegoom to the Bride, which were these, a great number of Beasts and Birds ill-favouredly made in Sugar, thirty Mules la∣den with two Chests of Sweet-meats a piece, and about their necks each carried a Vest of Sattin for the Muletiers, then were carried a great many Pots of Sherbet, then an hundred and twelve men carrying Vests of Silk, Cloth, Vel∣vet, and Cloth of Gold, some had three, some five or six at least wrapt up in Linen; then went five Horses, one with rich Furniture; then fol∣lowed a noble Vest of Cloth of Gold lined with Sables and nine Buttons and Loops on a side embroidered with large Pearl, on the top of which on the one side was a very large Dia∣mond, and on the other a Saphire, with Shoes, Boots, and Pattents for the Bagno, all covered with Pearl; likewise two Dressing-boxes, with Looking-glasses, and a Cap in form of a Crown, a little Cabinet embroidered all over with Pearl, eight Girdles set with Emeralds, Rubies, and Diamonds, a large Diamond-ring, a pair of Pendants of two great Emeralds, with many other particulars, which in passage were im∣possible to be remembred.


These Presents being thus performed on the part of the Bridegroom to his Bride, the next Presents concerned the Grand Signior to his Daughter, which were in place of her Dowry according to the custom of the Eastern Countries: wherefore the 
19th.
 of this month the Presents were ushered with a most solemn Cavalcade of all the Grandees of the Court to the House of the Bridegroom, which were two Gardens made of Sugar, forty little Na∣chils, eighty six Mules laden with Houshold∣stusf, ten men with her Dressings, as Boots, Shoes, &c. embroidered with Pearl as the for∣mer; then were carried her Jewels set in Gir∣dles, Bracelets, &c. promiscuously together, not in that rule as those were which were sent her by the Bridegroom. The Houshold-stuff was made up with coverts, yet howsoever some parts were left open on the sides, to shew that the Cushions were embroidered with Pearl, and others were of Velvet embroiderded with Gold. At last came twelve Coaches with Slaves and thirty six black Eunuchs. The 
23d.
 the Bride was conducted to her Bridegrooms Palace with a solemn Cavalcade, with two great Nachils of the same form and bigness as those carried at the Cavalcade of the Prince, with two smaller ones of Silver. The Bride was seated in a hand∣som Coach drawn with six Horses, and cover∣ed with Plates of Silver, and the sides adorned with long Streamers of Tinsel: before which went the Kuzlit Aga or chief black Eunuch of of the Women: after followed four Coaches, with Six Horses apiece, and twenty one more with four Horses, each carry∣ing two Eunuchs: than at some distance off came the Hasakee or Queen-Mother to the Bride in a Coach all covered with Plates of Silver, and attended with ten other Coaches more: the night following the Bride was con∣ducted to the Nuptial Chamber in ceremony only, she not being yet ripe for consummation of Marriage: all which Solemnity was attended at the Bridegrooms Court, with the same Sports and Fire-works which were made at the Tents, with an addition of dancing on the Ropes, and sliding down a Rope fastned to the top of the Steeple of the Mosch of Sultan 
Selim,
 which had like to have proved fatal to one who came down with a Boy at his back; for when he was about twenty yards from the ground, the Rope broke, but falling on a tree first, and then on a man, he was taken up with little hurt. The most re∣markable of all these Shows was a man that walked up a Rope as high asthe second Balcony of the Menareh or Steeple of Sultan 
Selion,
 which is as high as commonly our Spire-Steeples are in 
England:
 And another hanging on a Rope with his hands, with his body extended, turned himself twelve times round with his hands: at all which Sight the Grand Signior was a constant Spectator. In this manner these So∣lemities ended, the Mosayp or Favourite rich in the esteem of his Prince, and in high honour with all, had yet some allay to attemper and moderate his joy; for the Princess not yet fit for consummation, in case she dyed before that time, all her Jewels and Goods must return to the Grand Signior, notwithstanding which he would be obliged to pay her Dowry, which was said to be the Sum. of two years Revenue of Grand 
Cairo,
 but let it be what it will, he will be in∣solvent, being, as reported, three hundred Pur∣ses already in debt. And now to demonstrate the uncertainty of the Courts of Princes, as well as of all other places and conditions of the World, the Great Tefterdar or Treasurer, who had for the space of thirteen years managed this Office with singular industry and advan∣tage, was now removed from thence, and un∣der a specious shew of Preferment, was ad∣vanced to the Dignity of Pasha of Grand 
Cairo:
 this change was the more wondered at, because he was a Person so acute and so proper for the Office,
 that no man that held the place did ever manage it with greater reputation, nor with greater benefit to the Interest of his Prince; for besides his good husbandry in other mat∣ters, he was so skilful in knowing the price of Commodities, and so near in making his Bar∣gains, that the Merchant could scarce live by him, which in that consumption of Goods made in the Seraglio, will produce a considerable abatement when all things are bought at the best hand; considering which, many reasons were alledged, and conjectures made of his re∣moval: some said, That the Grand Signior having a liking to a young Man of his, to prevent his being taken into the Seraglio, the Tefter∣dar

gave him a Wife, and thereby greatly dis∣pleased the Grand Signior, as if he had purpose∣ly contrived it, to defeat his desires: others said, That the Grand Signior would have bor∣rowed money of him to pay the Arrears of the Spahees, which he refused to lend: but others talked, and that with best reason, That 
Kara Mustapha
 the old Chimacam, who is always with the Grand Signior, had found an oppor∣tunity to represent him amiss, suggesting, that the Tefterdar should say, That want of money in the Treasury was caused by the vast Sums consumed in the fooleries of the late Feasts:
 and the Vizier, though he entertained no per∣sonal animosity against him, yet was willing to sacrifice him to the friendship of 
Kara Mustapha.
 And so being dispossessed of his Office, there∣unto succeeded the Janisary 
Efendi
 or Judge-Advocate of the Janisaries, a great Drinker of Wine, and one not to hold any comparison with the parts and abilities of his Predecessour. Money now wanting greatly in the Treasury, several ways were sought to bring it in, and to save expences. The first of which was, that a review be made of all Otoraks, such as 
Milites emeriti,
 who are excused from the War, and yet receive their pay; from which number those were excluded who had bought it, or were not come legally by it, which would save the Grand Signior a vast Sum of Money yearly: and to help at this time of need, the late Treasurer must refund and ease himself of mo∣ney, before he enters on that rich and impor∣tant Office of Grand 
Cairo.
 And 
Chusaein
 Aga the chief Customer, who was a man that had inriched himself by many bad ways and arts, was displaced from his Office, and caused to disgorge great Sums of Money to add unto the Supplies of the Treasury. He was a Person of a subtle disposition, raised from the mean degree of a Shoemaker, and being well acquaint∣ed both with good and bad ways of gaining money, was a proper Instrument for the Tur∣kish Government, it being his fortune to fish riches rather for others than himself. And now being deprived of his Office and the best part of his Wealth, he resolved, like all other discon∣tented Ministers, to take a Pilgrimage to 
Mecha,
 and to that end made a solemn Visit to the Pasha of 
Cairo,
 then in his Tents near 
Scutari,
 acquainting him of his intentions to wait on him, and perform his Respects in his passage to the Holy 
Keblech
 or 
Mecha.


The Turks have not of late years been very prodigal of the blood of their Subjects, nor have those Executions been done of late on any Offi∣cer, unless his Tyranny and Oppression of the people did justly draw due punishment upon himself. And such was the case of the Kahya or Secretary of the Chimacam or Governour in the Viziers absence of 
Constantinople,
 who taking on himself the management of all the Affairs of his Master, acted every thing according to his own pleasure; for finding that whatsoever he did or propounded, was always confirmed and assented unto by his easie Lord, he assum∣ed a boldness to undertake any thing upon the proffers of mony, so the Sum was in any manner agreeable to the greatness of the matter required,
 or to the danger he incurred; by which means he involved his careless and unwary Master in such intrigues, as could have no excuse besides his own supineness, and the corruptness of his Servant. At this manner of administring Justice, the people being discontented, hastened the removal of the Chi∣macam: and now another entring on the Office, the Kahya remained exposed to the malice and complaints of all his Enemies, amongst which none was of greater force than an accusation laid against him, for having granted leave to the Armenian Christians at 
Constantinople
 for a Sum of Money to erect a Church; for which, though a Command was granted by the Great Vizier, obtained at a good price, to build one there of Timber, but of a low and mean Fabrick; yet the Kahya for a greater Sum of twenty Pur∣ses of Money, or ten thousand Dollars, im∣proved this Command, and changed their Materials from Timber to Stone and Mor∣tar: the which Building beginning to rise with some magnificence, offended the neighbouring Turks with so much scandal, that great num∣bers of them carried the Complaints thereof to the Grand Signior; who calling the Vizier, and examining the Case, the Vizier would own no other Command, than for repairing of an old Church, but not building one new. Where∣upon Sentence of Death being passed on the Kahya, an Officer was sent to execute it. And in his way to 
Constantinople,
 at a place called 
Selebrea,
 meeting with the Offender, he caused him to return again with him to 
Constantinople,
 where haveing strangled him, his Body was thrown into the Sea.


We have thus far discoursed of the Affairs at home, which consisted for the most part in jollities and divertisements; let us now look on the enterprizes and attempts abroad, and we shall find no great matter of action this year per∣formed against 
Poland,
 more than some incur∣sions made into 
Ʋkrania
 by the Turks and Tar∣tars under the Conduct of 
Ibrahim
 Pasha, in which we have no Battels, nor great Skirmishes to recount, only a seizure or surprize of those Cosacks, which were not under the jurisdiction of 
Dorosensko,
 who like sheep were driven from their pastures, and Men, Women, and Chil∣dren carried away into Captivity, and trans∣planted into Countries, where they might bet∣ter serve the purposes and designs of the Tur∣kish Empire; to which ends also vast numbers of Tartars with their Families, were called to in∣habit the circumjacent parts of 
Kemenitz,
 for better security of the Conquest, to which the Tartars most willingly concurred, esteeming it a happy Bargain to exchange the Soil of 
Tar∣tary
 for the fruitful Plains, and more gentle Air of 
Poland.
 And thus we may consider what the intestine Discord of the Poles hath brought upon themselves; that they, who in former days maintained their honour and reputation with the Turks, beyond any of the bordering Nations; not having every suffered them to con∣tinue in their Country, much less to sojourn or possess one palm of Ground therein; can now more easily see them before the Walls of 
Leo∣polis
 or 
Cracovia,
 and planted in the very Bow∣els of their Countrey, rather than a King of their own Countrey set over them not agree∣able to their own humour and fancy; or perhaps rather than behold the envied exaltation of some persons to dignity, or some little disorders in their Government; of which the Turk knows well to make use, it being no new Lesson for him, to profit himself of the Discord and Ani∣mosities of the Christians.




In like manner the Marine Affairs of the Turks this year afforded little worthy of obser∣vation, unless it were, That the Captain Pasha was employed with about thirty Sail of Gallies into the Black Sea, for transporting of Ammu∣nition and Provisions to those Forces in 
Ʋkra∣nia;
 but he returned not with an equal num∣ber of Gallies, with which he departed, hav∣ing lost five of them by storm, and then ar∣rived at 
Constantinople
 on the 
26th.
 of 
October,
 called by the Greeks the Feast of St. 
Demetrius,
 and by the Turks 
Cassin-gheun,
 a day which is commonly remarkable for Storms at Sea; of which the Turks and Greeks are so aprehensive or superstitious, that on that day or near that time, either before or after, until the storm hath vented its fury, and taken its course, they will not adventure themselves unto the Sea, up∣on the most pressing occasion, or hopeful in∣ducement whatsoever.


And here I judge it requisite to conclude this Year with two matters very observable relating unto Trade: The first is with reference unto the Genoueses, who in the Year 1666. first sent their Ambassador Signior 
Durazzo,
 with many Presents and great Magnificence to conclude a Peace with the Ottoman Empire, with the sole de∣sign and intention of Trade; which having been established on no other foundation at the begin∣ning, than that of their Temins,
 and the Fabrick of their own Cloth, when the first failed, as it did in two years after, and that their Cloth turned not to account, but was out-sold by the English and Dutch, then their Trade began to decay, or rather never came to perfection, like the fruit of a young tree, which buds fairly, and produ∣ces fruit, but hath not strength to digest or bring it to maturity: Even so it was with the Genou∣eses, who having been at the charge of an Am∣bassadour Extraordinary, and setled a Resident at 
Constantinople,
 and a Consul at 
Smyrna,
 and all the other Formalities of Trade, wanted that nourishment thereof from their own soil, which produces the true and natural fruit of Commerce, which is gain and profit; and be∣ing out-done by other Nations in shipping, there could little or no benefit be expected from their own Navigation in the Levant. For these rea∣sons, their Trade failing, the Duties of Con∣sulage on Goods appointed to maintain the Officers, and defray the publick Expences, were consequently wanting; so that the Count 
Fieschi
 Resident for that Republick at 
Constan∣tinople,
 finding himself in great distresses and necessities, and unable to maintain himself and his Attendants agreeable to his Character and Quality, often advised his Prince and the Senate of the unhappy state of their Affairs, desiring from them either to provide a Supply agreeable to the occasions, or to recal him from that Office, where he could no longer live in that Honour required. This importunity produced the exchange of Officers, and the Mission of Signior 
Giustiniano
 to reside at 
Constantinople,
 and Signior 
Gentile
 at 
Smyrna;
 the first of which, some few days after his arrival, being unfor∣tunately killed with a Carabine in his Chamber at 
Constantinople,
 as before related, the Office of Resident came to be still continued in the person of 
Fieschi,
 who remaining without pro∣visions necessary to maintain his degree, and the annual Presents expected by the Turks, which they esteem as due as their Income, and as part of their Revenues, was forced to take up money on Pawns, and his own Credit at the Interest of 20, 25, or 30 
per cent.
 according as his ne∣cessities increased; and the apprehensions men conceived of an insufficiency and hazard in their security, was the cause that the debt, which in the beginning was inconsiderable, in∣creasing with Interest upon Interest, came at length to the Sum of sixty or seventy thousand Dollars, which the Republick of 
Genoua,
 at∣tributing in a great measure to the ill Conduct of 
Fieschi,
 and judging the greatest part of this debt to be feigned, sent another Resident called Signior 
Spinola
 to succeed him in his Office, who arriving at 
Smyrna
 in the month of 
May
 of this present year, on a stout Ship hired of the Venetians, and under the notion of a Man of War accompanied with a Merchant Ship, and a new Consul (the old one dying the year before) setled there such Orders, as were judged necessary for the government of their Affairs. But before these Genoueses arrived, a report had fore-ran them from 
Ligorne
 and other parts, that their Ships brought great quantities of false Gold and false Pieces of Eight: the which com∣ing to the ears of the Turks, Commands were provided against their arrival to search their Ships, and try their Monies; to which the Genoueses not condescending, Arz or testimony was made thereof by the Kadi unto the Grand Signiors Court. In the interim whilst this Arz went up, and the answer expected, the Ge∣nouese Resident designing to proceed forward on his Voyage to 
Constantinople,
 demanded the Kadi's Moraselau or Ticket of Licence for the Man of War on which he came, to pass the Castle, (for that Ship had entred within the Port.) The Kadi judging it necessary, that both the Resident and Ship should attend the arrival of the answer from above, refused to grant this Licence; whereupon the Resident all in a rage imbarked himself, and immediately set sail, and having a fair Breez out of the Port, gently slided along by the side of the Castle without any stop or interruption.


This affront being put upon the Kadi, greatly displeased him; so that calling the Lieutenant and Gunner of the Castle into question, and not admitting of their Plea, that the Ship was a Man of War, and the person thereon a Resi∣dent, both which were privileged, and both going up to the Grand Signiors Court, were to answer there for what was laid against them; but this I say, not being admitted for reason, the Kadi committed them both to Prison, from whence with some charge afterwards they relea∣sed themselves.


The new Resident being arrived at 
Constan∣tinople,
 the Creditors of Count 
Fieschi
 demand∣ed payment of the debts owing to them, which was given in, to amout to sixty thousand Dol∣lars, and so much was to be paid before 
Fies∣chi
 should be permitted to depart, or at least that part thereof being satified in hand, the new Resident 
Spinola
 should give security for payment of the remainder: the which he re∣fusing to do, as not owning the accounts which 
Fieschi
 had given in, in regard he judged them to be composed of extravagant Interests, and to arise on charges not allowable by that Re∣publick, who after the death of 
Giu
tiniano
 disowned 
Fieschi
 for their Minister; hereupon great disturbances and commotions arose a∣mongst the Creditors, some of which being in great Power, as the Janisary-Aga and others,

Sequestration was laid on their Man of War; so that she was toaed away to the Arsenal, and there laid up, and attached for payment of the debt: which arising on the account of the Pub∣lick, the Goods of the Common-wealth was justly esteemed liable to the Sequestration: dur∣ing which time the Pestilence, the Epidemical disease of that season at 
Constantinople,
 affecting with its contagion the Ships company, about eighteen or twenty of them dyed thereof, and all their affairs reduced to a strange con∣sternation.


In this interim many and various were the disputes and contests between the two Resi∣dents; sometimes they proposed to refer their differences to the decision of the English, French, and Venetian Ministers; sometimes again, find∣ing the distance so wide and spatious between them, they resolved to have their matters deter∣mined by Turkish Sentence. At length the new Resident perceiving no end of this business, and that the Ship lay ingaged at a great charge, and as it were captivated to the great dishonour of the Republick, came to an agreement to pay thirty three thousand Dollars, one third where∣of was to be paid in hand, and the other two thirds by equal portions in the space of one year; the first payment to be made after six months, and the other six months after; to which not only the Resident, but their Mer∣chants also entred personally into obligation. In this manner the Ship being cleared, and taking such Lading as offered for 
Genoua
 at 
Constantinople
 sailed for 
Smyrna;
 where taking another Ship of the same Country into her company, departed with the Dutch Convoy for Christendom. But hav∣ing remained six months in Port, subjected to much charge and trouble, and not finding a Freight equal to the time and expence, was no great incouragement to the Genoueses to con∣tinue this Trade, which by good experience appears in no manner agreeable to their Coun∣try, nor yielding success answerable to the long expectation of ten years past.


In this Year it was, that the Grand Signior and Great Vizier at the instigation of 
Chusaein
 Aga the chief Customer (whom we have be∣fore mentioned) casting their eyes on 
Smyrna,
 and finding it a place of a great Trade, and a convenient Port, for which in ancient times it was always famous, and for the same cause was frequented by Merchants both from the Eastern and Western parts of the World; so that it was become the only great and considerable Mart or Scale within the Precincts of the Tur∣kish Empire: considering it (I say) in this manner with a benign eye, as bring∣ing great profit and advantage, they began to think it worthy the Ornament of some pub∣lick Edifices, founded with that Magnificence as might endure long, and renew the ancient Ho∣nour and Reputation of 
Smyrna:
 Hereupon they erected in the first place a Besasteen, which is in the nature of our Exchange, where several Shops are made, and variety of Goods sold; and to make the better Front towards the Sea, it was founded therein on vast Stones and Piles, fit to support a weighty Building.


The next Edifice erected was a Custom-house built into the Sea only on Piles of Timber, with a handsom Front towards the Sea; and this the Great Vizier judged to be a work not only necessary, but also agreeable to the Majesty of his Master; for until this time the Customer lived in a hired House not unlike the others which Merchants inhabit. And now this House being com∣pleated, a Hattesheriff or Royal decree came down from the Court, commanding that all Ships that came into that Port either to lade or unlade, should lay their sides to that Custom-house Scale, and thereon discharge their Goods, and receive others.


And now whereas the Merchants injoyed at all times in former days the convenience of ha∣ving their Goods landed on, and laden from their own Keys or Scales, they greatly resented this innovation; and as they unwillingly quit any Priviledge, so they judged this not un∣worthy to be contended for with singular con∣stancy and resolution: the commodiousness of which was thought so considerable, that it not only caused this place in former days to flou∣rish, and to be distinguished from all the Marts in the World; but also the injoyment thereof invited the Inhabitants from the more elevated parts of 
Smyrna
 (where was health and pleasure) to the lower Bogs and Marishes, exchang∣ing health and chearful air for profit and convenience of Commerce. Hereupon ap∣plications were made by all the Consuls of the Frank Nations to their Ambassadours and Ministers at the Grand Signiors Court. In the mean time Trade by common agreement was in∣terdicted, at least as to the lading or unlading of Ships, which continued for several days, and touched somewhat grievously the English and Dutch Nations: the first having two Ships, and the latter six Merchants-ships in Port. The English Ambassadour being then personally at 
Adrianople,
 was the first who without the assi∣stance of any other Minister, moved in this affair, but found great opposition in it from the Turkish Officers; who with some resent∣ment of the present reluctancy of the Mer∣chants, declared not without passion, the re∣solution the Grand Signior had to conform the honour of the Custom-house in some sem∣blance with those of Christian Princes; and therefore did wonder that the Christian Mer∣chants could so easily condescend to the rules of those Custom houses in their own Countries, where they were Natives, and yet could not support the same in these parts where they were Aliens and Strangers. And as a farther evidence of the Turks resolution to maintain this point, it was said by the Vizier's Kahya, that the Grand Signior was resolved to blow up both Port and Town, rather than not be obey∣ed in his own Dominions; with this Answer, Merchants despairing of the success, began to unlade their ships at the Custom house, or to give an account there of the Goods in their Boats; for the Customer was become sensible, there was not sufficient Water for ships to ride at the Key of the Custom house, and did also indulge unto the Merchants several other particulars herein, that so the innovation might sit the more lightly on them, which he per∣ceived was so ill resented and taken to heart. And this was the first beginning in the Months of 
August
 and 
September,
 when this priviledge was taken from the Merchants. And in this Year also the Great Chan next to the Besasteen was in Building, and the first Foundation thereof laid, and the great Aqua∣duct brought from the Plains of 
Bogiaw,
 and lit∣tle 
Harchi-bonar.


At the end of the year 1674, we have re∣lated the beginning proceedings, and conclusion

of the War, which our Gracious King was pleased in defence of his Subjects, and Com∣merce to make on 
Tripoly;
 which we brought down to this year 1676; when Sir 
John Narbrough
 Sailing home for 
England,
 touched in his way at 
Algiers,
 for better understanding of the State of all matters with that Govern∣ment. Things had for some time remained in a doubtful condition between 
England,
 and that people; who having lately proved the smart effects of War with us, were not very forward to make a breach. Howsoever it being that time, when by means of a General Peace, which we enjoyed with all the World, and of a War in which the rest of Christendom was involved, that our navigation flourish'd, and that few other Ships besides 
English
 passed the Seas; the 
Algerines
 grew weary of a Peace with us. And herein they seemed to have some more reason then usual, because that when it was their fortune to meet with strangers, they were so disguised with 
English
 Colours, and Passports surreptitiously, and fraudulently procured, that they could not distinguish their Friends from Enemies, whereof they made frequent Complaints, and addresses to his Ma∣jesty. The King out of a sence of Justice, and a tender care of his Subjects welfare, knowing that such indirect practises must necessarily pro∣duce a War was pleased by a Letter to that Peo∣ple, to signify his care in that particular, and re∣calling all Passports formerly given, promised a better regulation of them for the future; as appears by the Proclamation here following, which was inclosed, and sent in the Letter to 
Algiers.




By the King. A PROCLAMATION.


Relating to the Articles concluded between His MAJESTY, and the Government of 
Algiers.


CHARLES R.


W
Hereas by the late Articles of Peace concluded between His Majesty, and the Government of
 Algiers, 
His Majesty out of His Royal Care of the Persons and Estates of His Subjects, did agree and pro∣vide, That none of His Subjects employed or trading in any
 English 
Ship or Vessel, should for the future be taken and sold as Slaves, or his or their Goods made Prize by any of the Subjects of the said Govern∣ment of
 Algiers; 
And also, that any of His Majesties Subjects going in Foreign Ships, as Passengers only, and having Authentick Pass∣ports testifying the same, should have the like freedom for their Per∣sons and Goods aboard such Foreign Ships: And whereas His Majesty is informed, that divers of His Sub∣jects, contrary to the effect and true meaning of the said Treaty, do take upon them to colour and conceal the Ships of Foreigners, with whom the said Government of
 Algiers 
is in War, and to that end do either wholly Navigate the Ships of such Foreigners, or otherwise serve in the same as Mariners or Souldiers: Which way of proceeding, as it doth for the present administer just cause of Complaint from the said Govern∣ment of
 Algiers, 
so will it in a short time (if not prevented) indanger the Security intended by the said Ar∣ticles for the Ships, Persons and Estates of His Majesties Subjects: His Majesty doth therefore by this His Royal Proclamation, strictly forbid all His Subjects, that they do not for the future Navigate the Ships or Vessels of any foreigners in War with the said Government, nor presume to serve in the same either as Mariners or Souldiers. And His Majesty doth hereby further Declare, That if any Offenders contrary to this His Royal Procla∣mation, shall be taken, His Majesty will not require any release of their Persons or Estates from the said Government of
 Algiers; 
but that they must expect to be excluded (as they were intended) out of the bene∣fit of the said Articles; His Majesty also strictly charging such persons as shall hereafter go as Passengers in foreign Ships or Vessels, to take care that they have Passports with them signed by His Majesties proper Ministers in
 England, 
or His Mini∣sters or Consuls abroad, expressing the Names of their Persons, and the Contents and Qualities of their Goods, at their perils.


Given at our Court at 
Whitehall,
 
this Two and twentieth day of 
December
 1675. in the Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.


God save the King.






This Care and just Expedient of his Maje∣sty to prevent Fraud and Abuses in this business, was otherwise construed by the 
Algerines,
 and made use of, in a contrary sence, then was in∣tended by his Majesty. For now whatsoever Ships they met with, without these new Passes, they began to send to 
Algier,
 and make prize of their goods; not considering that the mean∣ing of the King was by these Passes to deter∣mine doubtful cases about Ships; and not to make a snare to entrap Ships 
English
 built, manned with 
English
 Men, and freighted with the goods of his Subjects. But these Pyrates, and ungracious Villains would find a knot in a Bull-rush, and a scruple where none was; for now they seized most 
English
 Ships they met with; for few had been so cautious, as to procure the new Passport; so that by this pre∣tence having made themselves Masters of a considerable Estate belonging to 
English
 Mer∣chants; and denying to restore the same, a War was the necessary consequence of their refusal, which broak out in the year 1676, the success of which we may perchance have occasion to relate in the following years.






Anno Christi 
1676.
 Hegeirae 
1087.


THis Year began with joyful News to the whole Turkish Empire, all Places and Cities of less renown rejoycing to hear the intentions of the Sultan to refresh and adorn again his Capital Throne of 
Constantinople
 with the Imperial Presence; for that City (which is the most proper Scituation of the World, to be made the head of a great Empire) ha∣ving now almost for sixteen years wanted the Rays of Majesty, and the Countenance of the Sultan, became almost abandoned and for∣saken of its Inhabitants, so that the spacious Sera∣glios or Palaces of the chief Ministers and Offi∣cers of the Empire began to decay and run to ruine, and the Artisans and Shop-keepers to leave their dwellings, and to follow their Trade at 
Adrianople,
 or in the Camp. But now the News of the designed return of the Grand Sig∣nior to his ancient Seat, filled all places with joy and triumph, especialy at 
Constantinople,
 which was not more satisfied with the consideration of the benefit and advantage it was likely to re∣ceive by the Royal Presence, than that those suspicions and jealousies which formerly posses∣ed the mind of the Sultan with a prejudice a∣gainst this place, did seem now to vanish, and that he reassumed a confidence of his Roy∣al City equal to that love and esteem which his Ancestors had of it; so that the humour which then possessed 
Constantinople
 ap∣peared like that of 
London
 at our Kings Re∣stauration, all joy, even to transport, for this unexpected Return; the people in the streets congratulating their mutual happiness, thanked God, that they had lived to see that happy day and blessed hour.


The occasion of this unexpected and sudden resolution caused many roving guesses and opi∣nations of the reasons of it. Some said a Dream which the Grand Signior had, and which gave great disturbance to his thoughts, until he resol∣ved for 
Constantinople.
 Others said, the revolt and troubles at 
Cairo,
 of which we shall pre∣sently have occasion to discourse, and some added certain Commotions at 
Bagdat,
 or 
Baby∣lon;
 some reported, that 
Xeriff
 of 
Mecha
 wrote him a Letter, that he could not acknowledge him the Head and Protector of the Mussulmin Faith,
 so long as he had abandoned his Imperi∣al City, and lived in the mountains and un∣known places. Others said, that the Janisaries and Militia murmured, and that his Coming to 
Constantinople
 was forced and not to be avoid∣ed; and that the Sultan being now out of love with 
Adrianople,
 had cursed it, and sworn never more to set foot in it, having ordered the ma∣terials sent for the building of the Great Sera∣glio at 
Adrianople,
 to be stopped on the way, and returned back again. At this rate all the World talked and discoursed, joy and hopes made the people fancy every thing according to their wishes. The Grand Signior being approach∣ed near to 
Constantinople,
 fixed himself in his Camp in the Fields, near a small Seraglio of his own, called 
Daout Basha,
 from whence the people for many days expected, that he should, according to the Custom of his Ancestors, make a solemn Entry; instead whereof he made some Salies with a small Company through the Streets, as it were 
incognito,
 taking his pastime on the Water, and on the sides of the 
Bosphorus
 in his Gallies and Boats, but most commonly frequented his Place of 
Scutari
 on the Asian side, where with much delight and confidence he lodged and reposed his Court, but made no solemn Entry through the City, not frequented his great Seraglio; where though he might perhaps dine, and pass certain hours, yet he slept not one Night there; of which the people took especial notice, and thereby received con∣firmation of the jealousie their Soveraign had of them, to their extraordinary grief and dis∣satisfaction; however it was some contentment to the people, and renown unto the City to have their Emperour so near, though it was rumoured as if the Court towards the approach of Winter intended again to return unto 
Adri∣anople.
 In the mean time the Grand Signior took his chief delight and divertisement on the Water, passing in his Gallies and Pleasure-Boats up the 
Bosphorus
 to the mouth of the Black Sea; and thence returning, much frequented the Gar∣dens, and Houses of Delight upon the Banks of the River; and visiting all places, a Country House called 
Therapea,
 belonging to the Dutch Resident, received the honour of his Presence, which he liked so well, that he took it from the Proprietor, and conferred it without any consideration of money onone of his Courtiers, giving out a Proclamation, That no Christian Minister should possess any Seat or Habitation on the side of the 
Bosphorus,
 A strange thing, and what is not to be paralleled in any part of the World.


About the beginning of this Year the Captain Pasha died, and 
Zaid Ahmet
 Pash-ogli, then at the Camp, succeeded him; his Father was a famous Man, and in the same Charge, but cut off by old 
Kuperlee.
 Soon after 
Ibrahim
 Pasha, General of the Army at 
Keminitz,
 likewise died, and his Office was conferred on 
Ibrahim Pasha,
 that was Pasha of 
Candia,
 of whom we have had often occasion to speak, being a great friend to the English Nation. The Great Vizier also was not far remote from the Confines of Death, being now fallen, by reason of immoderate drinking of Wine, and chiefly of hot Cina∣mon Waters, into a formed Dropsie and Jaundice.




In the preceding year we touched on the re∣moval of the Tefterdar or Treasurer from his Office to the Government of Grand 
Cairo,
 and the reasons for it, which though it might be a preferment (being the richest and most im∣portant Charge of the Empire) to which the esteem the Sultan had of his parts and abilites, might probably advance him; yet the imploy∣ing of him at a distance so remote, was certain∣ly an effect of some displeasure, whereby he or his Favourites judged him a Person not fit to remain longer near the Royal Presence. Where∣fore having commenced his Journey (as before mentioned) he arrived at Grand 
Cairo,
 where he had not long continued before he began, ac∣cording to the natural acuteness of his mind and hugstering manner, to pierce with a narrow inspection into all Affairs of that Government, and particularly into the Revenue and Treasure of the Country, contriving with himself by what means the disorders might be corrected, and the Revenue and Tribute improved; for he had an excellent Genius or Spirit in the matters of Money, nothing in advantage of In∣terest could ever escape him; so that he began to lay a new foundation in all proceedings; he would not be contented with the old Taxes and Impositions, and where he found Lands im∣proved, or the Customs augmented, he would put in for a share of the Benefits, and would reform every thing wherein he judged his Ma∣ster to have been abused. But though he was acute and sharp-sighted in such matters as these, yet he wanted experience in the Government of 
Egypt;
 for these great Beghs of this Country being alarmed with the innovations, began to stand upon their Guard, and to enter into pri∣vate Consultations, in what manner to oppose themselves to this new way of Government, which looked like slavery, and designs of bringing them into servitude, and a subjection unknown to them and their Fore-fathers. For indeed the Government of 
Egypt,
 if well con∣sidered, is rather Aristocratical than Monar∣chical; for though they acknowledge the Sul∣tan to be their Head, and accept his Pasha for Ruler, and pay a yearly Tribute, yet the Beghs which are great Lords in their respective Coun∣tries, carry the sway and Dominion in all other matters, and will endure nothing with favours of oppression or innovation; so that these per∣sons grown jealous by the proceedings of the new Pasha, flew into open Sedition, and im∣mediately to Arms, with force of which they assaulted the Pasha's Palace, took him and threw him into Prison. The News whereof flying with all haste to the Ottoman Court, ap∣peared at the first apprehension or surprise as if all 
Egypt
 had revolted, and gave the World occasion to discourse, That the Wars were to be carried Eastward, and that the sudden reso∣lution of removing the Court to 
Constantinople,
 was in order to a farther March into those parts. But frequent Messages with time making the business to be better understood, caused the Grand Signior to dispeed with all haste another Pasha, with Commission to remove the former, and to continue all the ancient Customs and Priviledges from the beginning indulged to the Beghs of 
Egypt:
 with which Message and gentle words of grace and favour from the Sultan, all discontents being pacified, the former Pasha was released from his Imprisonment, and suf∣fered to depart, and thence proce
ed to the Island of 
Candia,
 where he entred on that Pa∣shaluck, succeeding 
Ibrahim
 Pasha in Charge, who (as before related) was sent to 
Kemenitz
 to be General of the Army, in place of the Pasha lately deceased.


But here I must not forget a story which hap∣pened during the time of this Summer, whilst the Grand Signior had his abode and injoyed his Recreations in the circumjacent parts of 
Con∣stantinople;
 there was a certain Sultana which had been a cast Wench of Sultan 
Ibrahim,
 who after his death, having been married to some Pasha, obtained her release from the old Serag∣lio, and being also a Widow by the death of this Husband, had liberty to take her habitation on the Banks of the 
Bosphorus,
 or where she thought fit. This Lady was called 
Soltana Sporcha,
 in Turkish 
Modar:
 how she came to be so nominated I cannot tell, perhaps some Italian Pages of the Court might in respect to her way of living impose this Name upon her, for she was no other than a Bawd, or something worse, making it her Profession to buy young Girls, and to educate them in singing, dancing and in all the ways which best accomplish Courtisans. Amongst this Train of Scholars, she had one more brisk and aery than the o∣thers, which could sing, and dance, and prate in∣comparably, and was so quick in her Repar∣ties, that she greatly delighted the Pasha's and Lords, whose pleasures she atended, bringing from them considerable Gifts and Presents to the enriching of her self and Mistress; and be∣came so much the talk of the Court, that at length the report of her arrived the cars of the Grand Signior, who being also desirous to injoy some divertisements by the pranks of this witty Girl, sent to the Sultana one of the black Eu∣nuchs for her: which Imperial Command she not daring to disobey, consigned her with great submission into the hands of the Messenger; but with this caution, that she humbly desired the Sultan not to make any attempt on her Chastity, in regard she was both a Virgin and Free-wo∣man. The grand Signior having pleased him∣self with the wantonness of this Wench, began to take a fancy to her, and resolved to take her into the Seraglio; but she shewing a kind of nicety and coiness, the Grand Signior, who per∣haps was better accommodated, sent her back a∣gain to her Mistress, reflecting (as was supposed) with some disgust on the caution which accom∣panied her. It happened not long after, that this Girl exercising her Art in the presence of some great Persons, one 
Chesmé
 Aga, a Bosnian by Nation, Captain of the Great Visiers Guard, a stout and valiant man, happening to be a Spectator one night, became unfortunately en∣amoured of her, and from that time not being able to remove the impression she had made in his heart, resolved, if possible, to make her his Wife, and to that end made his affections known and his intentions of Marriage, both to her and to her Mistress. The Girl was well enough pleased to become the Wife of so honourable a Person; but the Sultana unwilling to lose the profit and benefit she daily brought her in, re∣fused the Match, declaring, That she was a Slave, and not at her own disposal, and there∣fore in no capacity of bestowing her self any way without her consent. This impediment giving a stop to the Marriage, put the two Lovers on plots and contrivances in what manner to injoy each other, and Love being ingenious, quickly

found out a means to bring them together; for the Girl escaping from her Mistress, lodged her self in those Chambers which her Lover had found for her. And being now missed, none but 
Chesmé
 Aga was charged with her, of whom she complained to the Grand Signior, and cited him before his Master the Great Vizier to an∣swer for her; but he denying to know any thing of her, and no witness appearing against him, all farther proceedings were superseded for the present: But 
Soltana Sporcha
 keeping watchful spies upon all the motions of 
Chesmé
 Aga, at length found him and his Mistress to∣gether, and by the Authority of Officers brought them both before the Vizier: to whom the Sultana sent a rude message, That 
Chesme
 Aga should be punished, and that her Slave should be returned. The Visier hereof acquainted the Grand Signior, and gave him to understand the message which the Sultana had sent him, desi∣ring to know what punishment he was pleased should be inflicted on them. In which interrim 
Chesmé
 Aga told the Visier, That he ex∣pected no other than a sentence of death from the Grand Signior, only he desired that his be∣loved Mistress might be spared, for he was sure he should live in her. It was not long before the fatal Decree came for putting 
Chesmé
 Aga to death, and sending the Woman to the Seraglio, which was immediately executed; which act might seem to denote a natural cruelty in the Sultan, being in reality very severe, though the whole course of his Reign hath been more gentle and mild than of any of the Ottoman Emperours; only this fact proceeded rather from disdain than thirst of blood, being angry that this Girl should prefer the Love of one of his Vassals before the Ho∣nours of the Seraglio, and that her Mistress the Sultana should charm him with a lye of her being free, when she was no other than a slave, and not long before bought for an inconsiderable price.


Not long after this, and towards the 
11th,
 or 
12th,
 of 
September,
 when the Sun was come to the Equinoctial, the Grand Signior prepared to depart.
 The rumour of which displeasing and making sad the people hearts, as much as his presence before comforted them, it was given out, That the Grand Signior intended to return with the Spring, and divide the consolation, which his residence produced, between the two Regal Cities, and for an evidence thereof, he ordered a Platform to be laid for erecting a new Seraglio at 
Scutari,
 and the Visier designed a∣nother at 
Bezick-rash,
 and the Palaces of the Pasha's and great Men were all putting into a way of Reparation, which for some time amu∣sed and contented the minds of the Common∣alty.


About the beginning of 
October
 the Grand Signior set forward towards 
Adrianople,
 being accompanied with the Mosayp, which is his Favourite, and 
Kara Mustapha
 who was his Chimacam, taking his recreation by the way in Hunting; but the Great Vizier 
Achmet
 Pasha continuing still sick of his Dropsie and Jaundice, took his Journey by Water as far as 
Selebra
 for his better ease, and thence proceed∣ing in a Horse litter to 
Churlu,
 which is the half-way to 
Adrianople,
 on the twenty third of 
October
 expired his last; his Discase, though heightned by Wine and hot Spirits, yet was in some part hereditary, his father dying of the Dropsie. His Body was on the twenty fifth brought back again in a Coach to 
Con∣stantinople
 with a small Attendance, and buried in the same Sepulchre with his Father. He was a Person (for I have seen him often,
 and knew him well) of a midle stature, of a black beard, and brown complexion, something short-sighted, which caused him to knit his brows and pore very intently when any strange person entred to his presence: he was inclining to be fat, and grew corpulent towards his latter days. If we consider his age when he first took upon him this important Charge, the Enemies his Father had created him, the contentions he had with the 
Valede Sultana
 or the Queen-Mother, and the Arts he had used to reconcile the affections of these great Perso∣nages, and conserve himself in the unalterable esteem of his Soveraign to the last hour of his death, there is none but must judge him to have deserved the Character of a prudent and politick Person. If we consider how few were put to death, and what inconsiderable Muti∣nies or Rebellions happened in any part of the Empire during his Government, it will afford us a clear evidence and proof of his gentleness and moderation beyond the example of former times; for certainly he was not a Person who delighted in bloud, and in that respect of an humor far different from the temper of his Father; He was generous, and free from A∣varice, a rare Vertue in a Turk! He was educated in the Law, and therefore greatly ad∣dicted to all the Formalities of it, and in the Administration of that sort of Justice very pun∣ctual and severe; He was very observant of the Capitulations between our King and the Grand Signior, being ready to do Justice upon any corrupt Minister, who pertinaciously viola∣ted and transgressed them, of which I could give several instances, but these being improper for this place, are only in general to be men∣tioned with due gratitude in honour to his Me∣mory. As to his behaviour towards the neighbouring Princes, there may, I believe, be fewer examples of his breach of Faith, than what his Predecessors have given in a shorter time of Rule. In his Wars abroad he was successful, having upon every expedition enlarged the Bounds of the Empire; He over∣came 
Newhawsel
 or 
Oywar,
 and laid thereunto a considerable part of 
Hungary,
 which to this day continues subject, and pays contribution to the Turk.


He concluded the War with 
Venice
 after twenty seven years continuance, by an intire and total subjection of the Island of 
Candia,
 having subdued that impregnable Fortress, which by the rest of the World was esteemed invincible.


He won 
Kemenitz,
 the Key of 
Poland,
 where the Turks had been frequently baffled, and laid 
Ʋkrania
 to the Empire; reducing the Cosacks, those mortal Enemies, to subjection, and to a desire of taking on them the Otto∣man Yoke: and finally, he imposed a new Tribute on all 
Poland.
 After all which Glories he dyed in the 
47th
 year of his Age, and 
15th
 year and 
8th
 day of his Government; a short time, if we consider it, for such great actions; howsoever, if we measure his triumphs, rather than count his years though he might seem to have lived but little to his Prince and People, yet certainly to himself he could not dye more seasonable, nor in a greater height and emi∣nency

of Glory. 
Ʋtcunque Principi, & Rei∣publicae parum, sibi certè satis suae{que} Gloriae vixisse videbitur.


The Great Vizier having in this manner ex∣pired his last breath, the Seal was immediately carried by his Brother to the Grand Signior, who upon Receipt thereof, according to com∣mon expectation, conferred the same on 
Kara Mustapha
 Pasha, who had for so many years formerly exercised the Office of Chimacam,
 which is as much as Deputy to the Great Vizier, of whom in other places we gave a Character of being a wise and experienced Person, of a smooth behaviour, and a great Courtier; agreeable to which temper of mind, so soon as he attained this promotion, he sent an obliging and courteous Message to the Ser∣vants of the deceased Vizier, condoling with them the death of their Master, promising to take them and their Concernments into his Care and Protection; according whereunto he advanced 
Solyman
 Kahya (who was the late Vizier's Substitute,) and for some years had managed all Affairs to the Office of Embra∣hore, which is chief Master of the Grand Sig∣niors horse, and is a place not only of honour, but of great security. He that was his own Kahya he made a Vizier of the Bench, and Chimacam in the same manner as he was to 
Achmet
 Vizier; by which point of policy he seemed to have strengthened himself against all Enemies, for having two Creatures of his own so well disposed; one near the Person of his Prince, who would be able to do him all good Offices; and the other (whensoever the Wars or other occasions should cause him to be absent from the Royal Presence) might supply his place without attempting to supplant him. The Kapisler-Kahyasee, or Master of the Ceremonies to the late Vizier, he made his own Kahya, and all the other Agas which de∣pended on that Court, he received into his own service; so that in effect there seemed, by this great chance of Mortality, to be little other al∣teration in the Court, than of the single person of the deceased Vizier; of whose Memory, that the Grand Signior might evidence the love and esteem that he retained, he did not inter∣meddle or appropriate unto himself any part of his Estate, or disanulled his Testament; but resigned all into the hands of his Relations, challenging no share or proportion thereof: And whereas the Vizier lest no Children, the Estate fell to his Brother and Sisters, who to evidence their Devotion to Religion, and good will to the Publick, and to please the eyes of the envious World, conferred on 
Mecha
 the Rent of the new Custom house, the Besasteen, and new Chan built at 
Smyrna,
 and finished in the year 1677.


At this first change there were rumors that the new Vizier had begun his Government in blood, having cut off several heads lately in Au∣thority; but all was false, and only grounded on a displeasure which he was known to have con∣ceived against certain persons. Only one act he performed rather of justice than severity, having cut off one of the Pay-masters of the Exchequer for false Money. The occasion was this: Certain Muletiers having received mony from the Exchequer in Venetian Ze∣chins, and finding several of them false, re∣turned them again, but could not previal to have them changed; whereupon having made their Memorial thereof, they carried them to the Vizier, and upon examination, the Pay∣master declared, That he received them from the Great 
Ibrahim
 Han-ogli, who being for that Cause sent for and accused, was put into a fear, which proved as dangerous to him as a Disease, the apprehensions of Death being worse than the reality; but the Great Tefterdar soon cleared him of this Accusation, having attested, That to his knowledge the mony re∣ceived from him was good, and disposed on other occasions; so that the whole blame ly∣ing now on the Pay-master, and upon farther search more of the same stamp being found in his hands, he deservedly suffered the punish∣ment of Death, the which had likewise been inflicted on another Officer of the same rank, but not being found so culpable as the other, he was permitted to redeem his life with forty Purses of Mony, or twenty thousand Dollars.


Thus far we have seen the gentle and smooth behaviour of the present Vizier towards the Friends, Relations, and Servants of the De∣ceased,
 and with what Acts of Justice he began his Government. But, behold, on a sudden the face of the whole Court was changed, every Officer thereof putting on a Countenance of fierceness, pride, and arrogance, beyond the manner and custom lately practised. For the Great Visier took on himself the State and Grandeur of the Sultan, (the access being as difficult to him as to his Master) his Kahya that of the Visier, and so every inferior Officer advanced himself into a fancy of possessing the next and immediate Degree above him. This haughty behaviour had a more particular in∣fluence on the Ministers and Representatives of Foreign Princes, whose Interpreters were not admitted, as formerly, to private Audiences or Conferences about their Affairs, but only at the Publick Divan, where their Arzes or Memorials were to be preferred in the same manner as was practised by the Subjects of the Country, and those of conquered Nations, who petition for Justice. The which abase∣ment was not only cast on the Interpreters, but on the Persons of the Representatives them∣selves: an example of which we have in the French Ambassador; who coming at the time appointed to receive his Audience of the Visier, was forced to expect a long time before he could have admittance, and then entering into the Chamber of Audience, was rudely crouded, and rushed upon by a Crew of unmannerly Chaouses, who no otherwise regarded the Per∣son of the Ambassador, than if he had been one of the Grooms or Lacquies. Being come to the Seat of Audience, the Ambaslador ob∣served, That the Stool for the Great Visier was set upon the Soffrá, and that for Him be∣low, or at the foot of it; the which being an unusual and unpractised diminution of the ancient honour given formerly to Ambassadors, he ordered one of his Servants, To set it again on the Soffrá equal with that of the Visier's; the which being done, was again brought down by one of the Visiers Pa∣ges, and placed as before; whereupon, the Ambassador seizing the Stool with his own hand, carried it on the Sofftá, and sate upon it; which being reported to the Visier, then in his retiring Chamber, he sent twice to him to re∣move, letting him know, That unless the Stool were returned into the Place appointed by him,

he would not appear in the Chamber of Au∣dience. Whereunto his Excellency returned this prudent Answer, That the Visier might dispose of his Chair as he pleased, but not of his Person. In which Interim the Chaous-Bashee came in, roaring out, 
Calder, Calder,
 which is, Take it away, Take it away, (mean∣ing the Stool) at which noise the Ambassador arising to see what the matter was, had the Stool taken from under him; whereat being greatly enraged, he threw out of the Room in a high passion, and causing the Presents which he brought to be again returned with him, he mounted his Horse, and de∣parted.


Afterwards it was intimated unto the Eng∣lish Ambassador, That he might, if he pleased, receive Audience of the Great Vifier; But his Excellency, uuderstanding in what manner the French Ambassador had been treated, ex∣cused his going, on pretence of an Indisposition of health. Howsoever, the 
Venetian
 Bailo, and the Residents of 
Holland
 and 
Genoua
 were con∣tented to be admitted unto Audience on those terms which the Visier was pleased to allow. And though during the time that he was Chi∣macam, and bore other inferior Offices, and Charges of Trust, his behaviour was gentle, affable, and civil; yet I fear, that now having changed his Office, he will have altered his humour, and that his Greatness will have en-creased his Pride, Avarice, and Fierceness: thus, no man knows what another will be, when he shall enter into power.


Dic mihi si fueris tu Leo, qualis eris.


And as 
Magistratus indicat Virum,
 so in the actions of his management the temper and con∣stitution of this great Person will be discovered. And thus having given a short Account and Character of this present Visier, his future Acts and Monuments must be the Subject of other Pens.




FINIS.
















THE HISTORY OF THE TURKISH EMPIRE CONTINUED, From the Year One thousand Six hundred Seventy six, to the Year One thousand Six hundred Eighty six.


By Sir 
ROGER MANLEY,
 Knight.














THE HISTORY OF THE TURKISH EMPIRE CONTINUED, From the Year of Our Lord, 1676, to the Year 1686.


By Sir 
Roger Manley,
 Knight.


THE History of the Turkish Em∣pire, having been transferr'd to us by Mr. 
Knolles
 very methodi∣cally and well, and continued by the deferving Pen of Sir 
Paul Ry∣caut,
 to the Year 1676, being the Twenty eighth of 
Sultan Mahomet
 the Fourth, now reigning: We have, as well by inclinati∣on, as to satisfie the desires of some Friends, thought fit to prosecute so laudable a Design, by extending the History of that great Monarchy to our present Times. And though we may be defective in skill for so Eminent an Underta∣king, we shall notwithstanding add Industry to our Endeavours, and compensate our Failings by the candour and ingenuity of our Narra∣tive.


Achmet,
 the great 
Visier,
 being dead in his way to 
Adrianople,
 was succeeded by 
Kara Mustapha,
 his Brother-in-Law, aged about fifty, and who had exercised the office of 
Caimacan
 for many years. The Grand Seignior, to indear him the more to him, married him to one of his Daugh∣ters, though very young, not exceeding five years of age, according to the custom practised by the 
Sultans,
 to be rid of their Daughters be∣times, which are always numerous, by reason of the multiplicity of their Concubines, and by this means to ease themselves of the Expence which they are obliged to be at in maintaining them according to their Quality.


In the same Month of 
January,
 the strong Ga∣rison of 
Canisia,
 having drawn out a Party to attack the Isle of 
Sexin,
 allarmed all 
Croatia,
 by their Military Executions exacting Contributi∣ons, and pillaging and burning such places as did not submit to their tyranny. The Turks of 
Newhausel
 did also ravage the Countrey on their side as far as 
Frystat.
 But before we enter upon their stage of War, it may be requisite to say somewhat of the Troubles of 
Hungary
 which preceded, and their causes, and how the Infidels came to be Principals in a War of Religion be∣tween Christians.


The Kingdom of 
Hungary,
 being subdivided into Counties, as in 
England,
 or Communities, have right to send their Deputies to the Dyets or Conventions of the Estates, which ought to be summoned every three years, according to the Laws of the Kingdom. This Assembly is composed of the Clergy, the principal Lords, the Gentry, and the said Deputies of the Coun∣ties. It hath the right of choosing a Palatine, who ought to be an 
Hungarian
 according to the priviledges of the Nation, and to have the in∣tire direction of War and Justice. The great Lords have so great Authority over their Vas∣sals, that they are look'd upon as so many lesser Sovereigns in their several Territories. They have also great Revenues, which inables them upon occasion to raise considerable Bodies of Men, the People in general being strong, active, and valiant, but covetous, vindicative, and in∣constant.


The great Employments of the Kingdom were also invested in the Natives, and no Stran∣gers were to be imposed upon them, or Foreign∣ers enquartered amongst them; all which the Emperour, upon his Election to the Crown, was obliged to observe by the solemnity of an Oath. But on the other side, there being very many 
Arrians, Calvinists,
 and 
Lutherans
 in the Countrey, they added to the aversion the Natives have to the 
Germans,
 having been, as they thought, too severely used by them; complaining, that they were hindred in the free Exercise of their Reli∣gion, their Churches violently taken away from them, and their Ministers forced from their Duty. It was farther complained, that the Grandees of the Kingdom were not permitted to injoy their Priviledges, of which one was, 
That none of them should for any Crime whatsoever be con∣vened before any Judges but those of their own Nation.


Notwithstanding all this, as the Emperour had sworn to maintain their Priviledges, he had likewise promised to derend their Country, which could not be done against the Insults of so powerful an Enemy as the Turk, without an Army; and those strangers living ill with the Inhabitants, and they again shutting their Towns against them, occasioned infinite Violences and Disorders on both sides, which Repugnancy was the source of all the Troubles in 
Hungary.


The Emperour, beginning to suspect the fide∣lity of the 
Hungarians,
 by reason of the obstinacy wherewith they refused to lodge his Troops, began seriously to think of securing the King∣dom to himself, which being perceived, he aug∣mented

by that Precaution the hatred which the Nation had conceived against him; which was re-doubled by the refusal of his Generals to withdraw their Troops out of their Fortresses. These Grievances did so far agitate these Spi∣rits, already jealous and diffident, that they at length resolved to shake off a Yoke that seem∣ed so insupportable. Many great Lords by their particular Interest were glad to entertain this aversion, which might serve for the Execu∣tion of the Designs they had already formed. And thus the Spirit of revolting did insensibly diffuse it self through the whole Kingdom, and the general aversion grew to that height, that they of the Religion said openly, that they would rather live under the Domination of the 
Turks
 than the Tyranny of the 
Germans,
 whilst one of their Preachers did dare maliciously to insinuate, 
That these Infidels would at least grant them the liberty of their Religion; whilst the
 Dutch 
would rack their Consciences, under pretence of reform∣ing them.


The Emperour being informed of these mur∣murings, thought it expedient to secure the 
Lower Hungary,
 and so strangle the Rebellion in its birth. Their reiterated pressing to have the German Troops removed out of the Kingdom, gave him just cause of jealousie: and besides, he would not lose the expence of all his toyls, and those vast charges he had been at in forti∣fying the Frontier places, and entertaining Ar∣mies capable to oppose the Invasions of the Turks. Finally, he judged it absolutely necessa∣ry, to reduce a Nation to their duty, that glo∣ried in their disobedience to his Orders: being a King is no farther a Sovereign, than whilst he obliges his Subjects to pay obedience to the Laws, and his Commands.


And thus in short we have shewed the cause of this Revolt (which yet last) on both sides, and though perhaps this digression may seem foreign to some, yet, being the Turks have been so mainly concerned as to become Parties in it, we thought it reasonable to subjoyn it to their History.


And now to come nearer to the matter in hand, we will say somewhat of the Maxims of these Infidels, which will give us some light in∣to their Policies; And first, it is a fundamental one to keep their Men perpetually imployed; for Idleness ingenders indigested Humours in the Politick, as well as the Natural Body, which renders it infirm. Another Maxim is, that they do never imploy their Forces more than in one War at one time, unless against weak Princes; Nor do they desire to continue long in Arms against the same Enemy, unless constrained by their constancy, to the end they may not grow too warlike and expert; but leaving them by Treaties and Pacifications to their ease, keep themselves still employed, and consequently disciplined, and their Sables from rusting, by continual managing of them. They moreover never break out into a distant War, before they have compos'd Affairs with their Neighbours. Thus when they transport their Armies toward the Frontiers of 
Persia,
 they make Peace with the Princes of 
Europe,
 and so on the contrary. But the unhappy 
Europeans,
 giving them more opportunities by their diffention to inlarge their Empire than any other, they, as well out of Ambition, as an irreconcileable Enmity to the Name of Christ, pursue the same with equal violence and hate. Hence it was, that though they had a Peace with the Emperour, they did not cease to countenance and assist his Rebels in 
Hungary
 underhand with their Forces and Pro∣tections, receiving them, when closely pursu'd, into their own Quarters, where, being follow∣ed by the Imperial Troops, several Hostilities were committed by them, which produced in some time an open rupture between the two Nations. The Emperour, to hinder this Com∣merce betwixt them, dispatch'd 
Meninsky,
 his Interpreter for the Oriental Languages, to the 
Port;
 with instructions to discover whether the Hostilities which were committed upon his Subjects, were done by command of the Mini∣sters at that Court? But he could effect nothing. He had indeed had Audience of the Visier at 
Adrianople,
 who only told him, That the Grand Seignior would send a Chiaux of his own to his Imperial Majesty, who should inform him of his Intentions.


The Emperour hereupon dispatched an Ex∣press to Count 
Schaffgots,
 his Envoy in 
Poland,
 with orders to endeavour to break the Nego∣tiation of Peace betwixt that Crown and the Sultan, though this Precaution proved of no effect, the Treaty betwixt those Potentates be∣ing signed presently after, and very seasonably on the 
Poles
 side, who, having an Army scarce of 15000 Men, were surrounded near 
Zorawno,
 by well night 200000 Turks, who yet gave them Peace when they least expected it, tho' upon Conditions then not ungrateful, tho' af∣terwards quarrell'd at. The 
Transilvanians
 did also joyn with the Malecontents, for Prince 
Abaffi,
 having discovered a Conspiracy against his Life, in 
April,
 and suspecting the 
Germans
 to have designed it, it contributed much to engage him against them. About the end of this Month the Bassa of 
Buda
 was strangled by order of the Grand Seignior, perhaps by rea∣son of his immense Riches; for they found two Millions of Money, which was brought into the Sultan's Treasury.


In the beginning of 
August,
 there happened an Encounter betwixt the 
Malecontents
 and the 
Croats,
 where the first were worsted; but the Turks at the same time pillaged a Town near 
Raab,
 putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword; and 4000 of these Infidels, having gained the Passage of the River 
Hydrousk,
 upon the Fron∣tiers of 
Croatia
 and 
Styria,
 ravaged the Country even to the Gates of 
Papa,
 of 
Vesprin
 and of 
Le∣grat,
 driving away a great number of Cattel, and burning a great many Houses.


Prince 
Abaffi,
 finding that the Grand Seigni∣or did approve of the assistance he gave the 
Hun∣garians
 sent them fresh Troops, with twenty pieces of Cannon. Their Army being com∣manded by Count 
Wesselini,
 their Palatine, a∣mounting to 16000 Men, designed to besiege 
Zatmar
 and 
Kalo,
 which Major General 
Smith,
 who commanded the 
Germans,
 perceiving, he sent a Convoy with Artillery and Ammunition to the first of these places, which was defeated and taken by the 
Malecontents.
 But my design not being to describe this War, I shall only men∣tion it, as far forth as I find the Turks, whose History we write, concerned in it. Upon con∣clusion of the Peace in 
Poland,
 the 
Hungarians
 had sent thither to engage part of the Troops which that King had disbanded, to their Ser∣vice, and obtained 6000 of them, commanded by the Count of 
Boham,
 who joyning with the 
Hungarian
 Horse, defeated 
Smith,
 with part of the Imperial Army, who designed to obstruct their Conjunction with 
Wesselini;
 which how∣ever being effected, they could scarce suffice to withstand General 
Kops,
 in so much that being assured that the Peace was not only concluded betwixt the 
Poles
 and the 
Turks,
 but that the

Palatine of Culm
 was sent to 
Constantinople
 to see it ratified, they also deputed one of their princi∣pal Officers to endeavour to oblige the 
Grand Seignior
 to turn his Arms against the 
German Em∣pire.
 But being the Turks were in actual War with the Great Duke of 
Muscovy,
 they would not (being already engaged against so power∣ful an Enemy) intangle themselves in a new War: And yet this 
Envoy
 obtained so much, that Orders were sent to the Bassaes of 
Buda,
 of 
Belgrade, Waradin,
 and other Places in 
Hun∣gary,
 to assist them with all their Power. And they were assisted by them, for these Infidels, not content to send Troops to joyn with them, they themselves made several Incursions in their favour. Four hundred Men of the Garrison of 
Nieuhausel
 took several Prisoners by 
Neutra,
 and beat the 
Hussars
 of 
Comorra
 who would have opposed them; two thousand Turks entred in∣to 
Croatia,
 and having spoiled the Country a∣bout 
Zaklholm,
 they defeated a party of Impe∣rialists near 
Carlstat.
 And thus these Infidels made War without declaring it, pretending they did not violate the Peace by these parti∣cular Encounters. But the Emperour being of another opinion, dispatch'd 
Hoffman,
 his Secre∣tary of State and War, to complain to the 
Grand Seignior,
 how his Bassaes did daily assist his Rebels, against the purport of the Peace be∣twixt the two Empires. Being admitted to au∣dience by the Grand Visier, that Minister made him some propositions for the renewing of the Peace, but so disadvantageous to his Master, that it seemed apparent, that the Turks sought for nothing more than a pretence to break. And yet the Secretary effected so much for the pre∣sent, that the Bassa of 
Waradin
 was arrested, and afterwards strangled by order of the 
Grand Seignior,
 who yet would give that satisfaction to the Emperour upon the pressing Instances of his Secretary, who also had made rich Presents to all the Ministers of the Port.


Whilst 
Hoffman
 negotiated with so little suc∣cess at 
Constantinople,
 the States of 
Hungary
 as∣sembled at 
Altemburg,
 where it was resolved, that the Churches which had been taken from the Protestants, should be restored to them, and many other points remitted in their Favour, in hopes these concessions might oblige them to re∣turn to their Duty, and break those Engage∣ments they had entred into with the Infidels. But this passed no farther, for the Ministers endeavoured to elude the said Article, though the most important of all, and therefore the more insisted upon by the 
Malecontents.
 This gave the Deputies of the Diet subject to believe that though the Ministers of the Emperour seemed to desire an Accommodation, yet they did not search the means to affect it. And now the 
Malecontents,
 instead of conforming to the Emperour's Intentions, resolved to elect another King, and some of them proposed one of the House of 
Frangipani;
 though it did not take, being they could not agree upon the choice of their Sovereign.


The Truth is, the Palatines and great Men of the Kingdom, being weary to see the Crown as it were Hereditary in the House of 
Austria,
 made use of the pretence of Religion to stir up the People, and oblige them to take Arms for defence of their Liberty, both Spiritual and Civil. And this aversion was the true Cause of the War.


The Emperour was no less dissatisfied with the Turks; for General 
Kops,
 having sent com∣plaints to the Bassa of 
Waradin,
 for that he had given Quarters to the 
Hungarians
 in Places which depended on his government; the Bas∣sa told him, That he look'd upon them as Pas∣sengers, who paid for what they took for their subsistance, and that consequently he could not look upon their Reception into his Territories as any violation of the Peace.


The Hostilities betwixt the Imperialists and the Turks did still continue notwithstanding their Negotiations. Five hundred Christian Horse, commanded by 
Azos Benas,
 advancing towards 
Erlaw,
 were cut in pieces by the Infi∣dels. Another Party, commanded by Collonel 
Wolping,
 was likewise defeated by a Detach∣ment from the Garrison of 
Newhausel,
 with the loss of above 200, the Commander being also much hurt. A few days after this Encounter the Bassa of that City dyed, which occasioned an Accident which did well-nigh make a rup∣ture betwixt the Emperour and the Port. The Imperialists had unadvisedly attack'd the new Bassa which the 
Grand Seignior
 did send to 
New∣hausel,
 and defeated his Convoy consisting of 200 Horse, by way of Reprisal, as they gave out, for the Damages which had been done them by the Garrison of the Place, without considering that this new Governour had had no share in these Violences. The Bassa of 
Bu∣da
 sent his complaints of this Affront to the Im∣perial General, with threats that he would ac∣quaint his Master with it, and exact satisfaction by all the ways imaginable. And they did so, for, drawing out strong Parties from the Gar∣rison of 
Erlam
 and 
Waradin,
 they resolved to revenge the Insult done to the Bassa of 
Newhau∣sel,
 and marching towards 
Sando
 near 
Butrac,
 which they pillaged, they returned with above 200 Prisoners. Count 
Wourmb,
 the Emperour's General, demanded Justice for this Violence from the Bassa of 
Buda,
 but received no other answer, but that what was done was by way of Reprisal.


During these Traverses Count 
Paul Wesse∣lini
 dyed, who had Commanded the Army of the 
Malecontents
 with great success, but is suc∣ceeded by Count 
Tekeley,
 young, yet wary and brave; who, to this day heads the however broken discontented Party. The Emperour, who knew that the greatest force of 
Tekeley
's Army came from 
Transilvania,
 would divert 
Abaffi
 by re-establishing the Party of 
Pedipold,
 who had formerly contested for the Sovereign∣ty of that Principality. To this end he obliged that Prince to send four Deputies to 
Constantino∣ple,
 to implore the protection of the Grand Seig∣nior, but the Visier caused them to be put into the Castle of the seven Towers, which extreme∣ly surprised the Emperour's Resident, who had orders to Negotiate that Affair joyntly with them. The Emperour being informed hereof, sent 
Monsieur Jullies
 with secret Instructions to the Port, but he dyed by the way, which did not a little trouble his Imperial Majesty, being all this Envoy's Papers fell into Count 
Teke∣ley
's Hands, who drew no small advantage from the lights he received by them. 
Hoffman,
 Se∣cretary of State, returning from 
Constantinople,
 was stopped at 
Belgrade,
 being the Bassa of that Place refused to furnish him with necessaries for the continuation of his Journey. But the Emperour, having dispatch'd an Express to the Bassa of 
Buda
 to complain of this incivility, he obtained what he desired. Being upon his de∣parture from 
Belgrade,
 he was informed that the Great Visier was arrived upon the Banks of the 
Danube
 with a great Army, and design to enter into the Province of 
Ʋkraine
 to fight the 
Muscovites;
 he sent to demand Audience of him, but this Minister returned him for answer, That

he should have it at 
Constantinople,
 when the Campaign was ended. Many and great were the Encounters betwixt the Imperialists and Malecontents, the latter being for the most part successful, who also ravaged 
Moravia,
 being as∣sisted by 2000 
Tartars,
 and 
Austria
 it self, under the Command of Collonel 
Josua,
 sometimes a Priest, known by the Name of Father 
Joseph,
 who turning Protestant, raised 6000 Men at his own Charges, and joyning with the Male∣contents, grew formidable even to the Gates of 
Vienna.
 But the Imperialists had also their turn, and Count 
Esterhasi,
 Governour of 
Papa,
 at∣tacked 2000 Janizaries and 500 Spahies, near 
Vespren:
 He took several Prisoners, and a∣mongst them some Agas. As this Action might cause a Rupture, if mis-represented be∣twixt the two Empires; his Imperial Majesty dispatch'd a Courier to the Port, to inform the Grand Seignior with the particulars of this Combat.


The constancy of the Malecontents, and their Intelligence with the Turks did not a little dis∣quiet the Emperour, but he was more troubled when he heard that these Infidels were upon the point of agreeing with the 
Muscovites,
 which would put them into a Condition to turn all their power against him. He thought he could not do better than to divert them by obliging the King of 
Persia
 to break with them, and therefore sent the Baron of 
Meierburg
 to 
Hispahan
 to negotiate that Affair.


The Diet of 
Transilvania
 being held at 
Clau∣senburg,
 the Grand Seignior, as well to secure his own Interest, as being dissatisfied with Prince 
Abaffi
's Conduct, sent the Bassa of 
Waradin
 with a strong Army to preside at that Assembly. But things being accommodated betwixt them, to the satisfaction of the strongest; the 
Transil∣vanian
 and the Bassa's bordering upon his Prin∣cipality, who had been at the Diet, had no other thoughts but of deliberating with the Depu∣ties of the 
Hungarians,
 of the means how to assist them. The Emperour being advertised hereof, sent Doctor 
Ferling
 to 
Constantinople,
 to endeavour to penetrate into the Intentions of that Monarch, and hinder that the Bassaes should not succour the Rebels. There was also some under-hand dealing with the great ones or the Party, to make their particular Peace with the Court. Amongst others, the Proposition being made to 
Palaffi Imbre,
 he found so little security in it, that to shew his Companions he would never accommode himself with the Em∣perour, he treated with the Bassa of 
Buda,
 to deliver all the Places that were in his power, in∣to his hand and possession, the which also he put in Execution, tho' his Castle of 
Devin
 was in the mean time invested by Count 
Strasoldo,
 before the Turks could enter it, and together with the City forced by him, 500 of the Gar∣rison being made Prisoners.


The Grand Seignior, to shew the esteem and satisfaction he had of the Person of 
Abaffi,
 sent him a Sable as a token of his Favour; and gave Orders at the same time to all the Bassaes of 
Hungary,
 to send Troops and Forces as oft as he should require them, being absolutely resolved to assist the Malecontents, which he also effe∣ctively did.


There had happened a great Battel between the 
Turks
 and 
Muscovites
 near 
Czecherin,
 which the first had besieged. The Turks had been worsted at first, but rallying their Forces, they came before 
Czecherin
 again, where, after play∣ing eight or nine Mines, they so furiously as∣saulted the Place, that they carried it, with the slaughter of the Garrison, which was great; for all that, after many Skirmishes, they were forced to retire for want of Provisions. Here∣upon the Great Duke of 
Muscovy,
 knowing that the Emperour, not without reason, apprehen∣ded that the Turks would declare War against him, sent him a solemn Embassie, with offer of making a League Offensive and Defensive with him against the Infidels; but the Empe∣rour, contrary to the advice of 
Montecuculi,
 who offered to Command the Army in Per∣son, tho' his great Age might justly dispence with the Fatigues of War; did not think it advisable to break with the Port. The Bassa of 
Buda,
 being informed of the arrival of the Ambassadour, sent a Chaoux to 
Vienna,
 under colour of complaining of some Inroads which the Imperialists had made into the Grand Seignior's Territories, but indeed to observe the motions of the 
Muscovites.
 Nor were they the onely motives that exhorted the Empe∣rour to Arm against the Turks. The King of 
Poland
 sent Prince 
Radzivil
 to assure his Impe∣rial Majesty, that he would willingly enter in∣to a League against the Infidels, if he could re∣solve to declare War against them: And how∣ever, two Nuntios of the Pope's, who were then at Court, did press this Prince to deter∣mine to prevent the Enemy, who would not fail to attack him, when a favourable Occasion presented it self; they could not perswade him to embrace a Proposition so favourable for the repose of 
Hungary.


The Emperour, not finding himself in a Condition to reduce the Malecontents by force, resolved to grant what they demanded, pro∣vided they would permit him to levy in 
Hungary
 the same Contributions and Taxes which were exacted in the Hereditary Coun∣trey. Count 
Lesley
 had several Conterences with Collonel 
Josua
 thereupon; and having discussed this Affair, the principal points were agreed upon, which being communicated to 
Keski
 and 
Tekeley,
 they promised to procure the consents of the other Chiefs to agree to them. Upon this favourable disposition, 
Lesley
 had orders to send his Troops into Winter Quarters; but the precipitate departure of the Emperour to 
Mazianzel,
 and thence to 
Prague,
 by reason of the Plague at 
Vienna,
 this Affair was interrup∣ted, and all the measures taken in it changed.


The Plague spread also into the Turkish Countries, and constrained 500 Families to quit 
Newhausel.
 These were scarce got a League from the Town, but they were surprised by five hundred 
Husars
 or 
Haiducs,
 who took from them all they had, of which the Turks made great complaints, which seemed the more rea∣sonable, being they were so civil to Count 
Les∣ley
's Troops; for he being obliged by the Conta∣gion to change Quarters, encamped betwixt 
Chem∣nitz
 and 
Strigonium,
 for the better subsistance of his Army. The Bassa of this last place, to shew the Count that the Grand Seignior did not ap∣prove of his Subjects joyning with the Malecon∣tents; permitted him to buy such Provisions as he wanted in the Territories of his Jurisdicti∣on, and also presented him with several refresh∣ments himself.


The 
Muscovites
 pressed the King of 
Poland
 to conclude a League Offensive and Defensive with them against the Grand Seignior; this Prince being not averse to the proposition, com∣manded his Resident to represent to the Empe∣rour, that being he would not engage in this Union, he ought at least to keep a standing Ar∣my in 
Hungary
 of 30000 Men, to oppose the

Malecontents, and keep the Turks in suspence on that side, and his Majesty promised to do it; but the want of Monies hindered him to exe∣cute a Design so honourable for himself, and so adventageous for Christendom.


However, he endeavoured by the Baron of 
Kaunitz,
 his Resident at the Port, to negotiate a Continuation of the 
Trevis;
 but the Grand Seignior would not consent to it but upon con∣dition, that he should be at liberty to assist the Malecontents at pleasure; which indeed had been to augment the Evil, not heal it. This Prince was at the same time advertised, that the Port had concluded a Peace with the 
Poles
 and the 
Muscovites;
 which gave him occasion to judge that he had a Design to turn his Arms a∣gainst him.


Many were the Treaties betwixt he Empe∣rour and the Malecontents, and his Majesty's concessions such, that the Grand Seignior began to apprehend, that 
Tekeley
 had some inclinations to return to his Obedience to his Sovereign; to prevent which, he sent a Bassa to divert him, by offering him the Principality of 
Transilvania,
 after the decease of 
Abaffi.
 This Bassa had se∣veral Conferences with him and with the other Chiefs of the Faction, and did so well manage them, with the pretended advantages that they would find by putting themselves under the Pro∣tection of the Port, that eighty of them did promise, in the name of all the Kingdom, to pay to his 
Ottoman
 Highness a Tribute of eighty thousand Crowns, provided he would power∣fully assist them. This Intrigue being made known to the Emperour, he received it with much Indignation, commanding, that none of the contrivers of it should appear at the Diet. In the mean time he ordered the Marquess of 
Baden,
 and the Count of 
Staremburg,
 to cause 
Raab
 and 
Vienna,
 whereof they were Governours, to be fortified, to prevent any Designs of the Turks upon those Places. And now his Imperial Ma∣jesty did no more question but that the Infidels would transport the War into 
Hungary,
 especi∣ally, being informed by his Resident 
Kaunitz
 at 
Constantinople,
 that the Port, after many and long Disputes, had at length concluded a Ces∣sation with the 
Muscovites
 for twenty years, up∣on Condition, that besides 
Kiovia,
 they should enjoy 
Tripol, Staiki
 and 
Vasikow,
 which had al∣ways been dependants upon 
Kiovia.
 The Grand Visier received these Propositions with joy, and writ to the 
Czar
 thereupon, with very extraordi∣nary Praises and Titles, assuring him in the name of the Grand Seignior, that he would ratifie the Conditions agreed upon, and that he might send his Ambassadour to finish the Treaty. In the mean time, the Visier, to prevent the 
Czar
's refusal of sending another Minister before his, which resided at the Port, (who had been kept under restraint for some time) was returned into 
Muscovy,
 he forthwith dismissed him, with magnificent Presents for his Master. The Grand Seignior, who seemed resolved to invade 
Hun∣gary,
 staying his removal to 
Adrianople
 but till the return of this Ambassadour, did emit a Ma∣nifest or Mandate directed to Prince 
Abaffi,
 in these following terms.


Forasmuch as those of
 Hungary, 
who have received the Emperour of the
 Nazarien 
Nation to be their Lord, have been spoiled of their Country and Castles by the
 Germans, 
and have therefore had recourse to our Clemency for Protection; it is Our pleasure, in re∣gard of their long and piteous miseries, and being there∣unto moved by their reiterated Prayers and Supplica∣tions, graciously to affranchise them from the Yoke of that Nation. 'Tis therefore that We communicate this Design to you, as Our faithful Minister, by the Bassa
 Caput, 
and the Aga
 Starra, 
with express Com∣mand, that you make your self forthwith ready to deli∣ver the
 Hungarians 
from the Oppression of their Ene∣mies, with all the Forces of
 Transilvania, 
which shall be immediately reinforced with those of
 Valachia, 
and of the Bassa of
 Silistria, 13003 
Janizaries, and
 2000 
Horse; for We have promised them Our Impe∣rial Protection in consideration of the Fidelity which they have manifested to Ʋs, which We have since had experience of. And therefore We Command you yet again to neglect nothing that may tend to the Execu∣tion of Our Pleasure and good Will, to the end, that by the Assistance of the most High and most Mighty God, this People, so cruelly oppressed, may be forthwith delivered from the Bondage of the unmerciful
 Ger∣mans. 
In the mean time, you shall from time to time inform Our great
 Ottoman 
Mightiness with what shall happen, and what you shall have done pursuant here∣unto. And you are farther enjoyned to take heed that you do nothing that may be disadvantageous to Our In∣comparable Greatness.


Abaffi,
 animated with this Mandate, and ha∣ving received the Orders that were necessary, drew his Troops together, and joyned with 
Te∣keley,
 with the 
Turks,
 the 
Valachians
 and the 
Mol∣davians,
 emitting withal a Declaration, That he did not Arm against the Interest of Christen∣dom, but only to deliver the Protestants of 
Hungary
 from the Oppression they laboured un∣der, by restoring them in their Possessions and their Churches, and re-establishing them in their ancient Priviledges. He added, that the Grand Seignior had expresly commissioned him for this Expedition, which he also undertook with the consent of all the States of 
Transilvania.
 He had besieged 
Zatmar,
 and pressed the place vi∣gorously, to shew the Defendants that he was in a Condition to force them if they would not voluntarily Surrender. A few days after, he received a recruit of 8000 Men, which the Bassa of 
Buda
 sent him, who had already assembled an Army of 40000 Men, which he incamped near the place of his Government.


Whilst 
Abaffi
 was engaged in the aforesaid Siege, 3000 Turks made an Inroad into 
Styria
 near 
Gratz,
 where they took a 1000 Prisoners, which they made Slaves, and very much Pil∣lage. And now the Grand Seignior resolves not only to assist the Malecontents, but joyntly with them to force the Places of 
Hungary,
 until they were in a condition to pay him the Tri∣bute they were engaged to do. In the mean time, 
Abaffi,
 having made his Circumvallation about 
Zatmar,
 divided his Army into four Bo∣dies: The first was composed of the 
Transilvani∣ans,
 the second of the 
Moldavians,
 the third of 
Turks,
 and the fourth of the 
Malecontents,
 and he forced the City, but could not take the Citadel, which obliged him to raise his Siege. Many were the Discourses of this Action, and some gave out, that 
Abaffi
 had no mind to take the Place, upon a Surmise, that the Grand Seignior pretended it should be delivered into his Hands upon Surrender. However it was, it is certain that the Bassa which commanded the 
Ottomans
 at this Siege, sent great Complaints to 
Constanti∣nople
 against this Prince, which obliged him to return into his own Countrey, lest his Enemies should take advantage by his absence. Thus this great Army vanished, as well by the misin∣telligence of the Chiefs, and the rigour of the Season, the Winter approaching; as by the Vi∣gilancy of Count 
Caprara,
 the Imperial General; who, tho' he was not able to fight the Enemy,

did notwithstanding perpetually incommode them with Parties and Detachments. 
Tekely
 hereupon having pillaged and burnt 
Kalo,
 ex∣cept the Citadel, which he garrisoned, put his Troops into their Winter quarters. But the Turks, to finish their Campania would surprise the Castle of 
Pettinia,
 upon the Borders of 
Croa∣tia,
 but their design being discovered, the 
Militia
 of the Country drawing into a body, forced them to retire.


On the side of the Christians, the Winter was spent in fruitless Treaties and Contestations be∣twixt the Ecclesiasticks and Seculars; save that the Empress was crowned Queen of 
Hungary,
 which was effected with great Magnificence and Pomp. On the other side, the Turks having agreed with the 
Muscovites,
 the Grand Seignior resolved by the Council of his great Visier, to carry his Arms into 
Hungary;
 in order to which, vast Magazins were made at 
Belgrade
 and other places of his Obedience. He sent such Bodies of Men thither, that the Souldiers were forced to lye in Tents and Baracks. 
Hali Bassa,
 being sent thither in the Spring with Monies to pay these Forces, behaved himself with so little Pru∣dence, that he had well nigh occasioned a great Mutiny amongst them. In his review of them he caused the 
Spahies
 to pass before the 
Janizaries,
 who being extream jealous of their rank, mu∣tinied, and threatned to kill him. To repair this fault, he would restore them to their Prece∣dence, but the Spahies took also their turn to mutiny; nor did he appease them but by a con∣siderable gratuity above their pay. Besides these, the preparations for War through all the extent of the 
Otthoman
 Empire wer so vast, that they did not suffice only to protect the 
Malecontents,
 but to attack that of 
Germany,
 and now they lay a Bridge over the 
Danube,
 and another at 
Zol∣nock,
 over the 
Teys
 or 
Tibiscus,
 capable of bearing their great Cannon.


Tekely,
 however well informed of the Designs of the Port, did notwithstanding agree to a pro∣longation of the 
Trevis
 with Count 
Caprara,
 which was ended the last of 
March,
 to the first of 
July;
 but the 
Malecontents
 slighting the Treaty, did in the beginning of 
May
 seize upon all the Corn which the Emperour had bought upon the Fron∣tiers of 
Poland
 to furnish his 
Magazins
 withal. The Turks also attacked and forced a Commis∣sary who conducted many Wagons loaden with Cloths for the Imperial Army.


Tekely,
 being to act as soon as the Treaty was ended joyntly with the Turks, judged it pro∣per for him to take his measures from the Bassa of 
Buda,
 in order to which he went to wait up∣on him with a Convoy of 3000 Horse; the Bas∣sa being advertised of his arrival, gave his Son orders to go and receive him at the Gate of the City, at the Head of the 
Spahies,
 or Horse, to com∣plement him in his Name, and to regale him with refreshments according to the Custom of that Nation. Being enter'd the City, he was received by the Bassa at the head of all his Ja∣nizaries, and after reciprocal Civilities, he assu∣red him of the Protection of the Grand Seignior when ever he had need of it. His Troops in the mean time were lodged near 
Pesth
 along the Ri∣ver side in Tents. The Bassa, causing 
Tekely
's Bonnet to be taken off, put another after the Turkish fashion upon his Head, enrich'd 'with pretious Stones and a Heron's Feather. He fur∣ther made him a Present from his 
Otthoman
 High∣ness, of a Sable, a Pole-ax, and a Colours. He gave him also upon his own account, some Hor∣ses richly harnessed; some affirmed that his Ci∣vilities passed further, and that 
Tekely
 was de∣clared King of 
Hungary
 by the Bassa, who put the Crown upon his Head, and cloathed him in Royal Habiliments, in presence of all the Officers of the Garrison, and several Bassaes, who had been expresly commanded thither to assist at the Ceremony.


Tekely
 having satisfied his Ambition, would now content his Love. He had sent his Secreta∣ry to 
Vienna
 to obtain the Emperours Permissi∣on to espouse the Princess 
Rogotski.
 His Imperial Majesty, thinking he ought to manage this Count in a time wherein he endeavoured to make him break his Engagements with the Port; and fur∣ther perceiving that it was but a Civility done him, and that if he did not consent, they would effect it without him, granted his Envoy what ever his Master had desired. 
Tekely
 gave imme∣diately advice hereof to the Princess, and pray∣ed she would not defer his Happiness any longer. She, who as she had not desired to see him a King, but to prevent her descent into a lower rank then that wherein Prince 
Rogotsky
 had placed her, sent him word that he might come to 
Montcatz,
 where, after his return from 
Buda,
 their Marriage was celebrated with great Pomp. This Lady was Sister to Count 
Serin,
 a Roman Catholick, but in some few Weeks after her espousals with Count 
Tekely,
 she turn'd Prote∣stant, and thereupon discharged all her Catho∣lick Servants. This gave so much suspition to the Imperial Court, that no more good was ex∣pected from that Alliance; nor were they decei∣ved, his Attachments to the Port being too strict, and his jealousie of the 
Germans
 too great. He for all that treated still with Count 
Saponara
 the Emperours Envoy, but it was to amuze him, in expectation of the Turks taking the field to second his Designs. The Emperour did also employ Count 
Serin
 to his new Brother-in-Law, but he, instead of serving his Sovereign, enter'd into new Engagements, as shall be declared hereafter.


In the beginning of 
July,
 the 
Tartars
 made inrodes as far as 
Trinchein,
 from whence they brought more than 18000 Slaves, killing all the old men, from whom they could expect no Ser∣vice. The Palatine would have raised the 
Mi∣litia
 of the Country to oppose them, but the Protestants refused to obey his Orders, until the Emperour would give them Satisfaction upon all the points that had been proposed in their Name the last Diet. About the end of the same Month his Imperial Majesty received Letters from Count 
Albret Caprara,
 which signified to him that he had received Audience from the Great Visier, and that he could not obtain a prolongation of the 
Trevis,
 but upon the follow∣ing Terms, 
viz.


That
 Hungary 
should be put into the same state that it was in the year
 1655;


That this Kingdom should pay his
 Ottho∣man 
Highness a Tribute of
 50000 
Florins yearly;


That the Fortresses of
 Leopolstat 
and
 Gratz 
should be demolished;


That
 Neutra, Schults, Eckof, 
and the Isle of
 Schults 
near
 Presburg, 
with the Fort of
 Mu∣ran, 
should by a formal cession be delivered to Count
 Tekely;


That a general
 Amnesty 
or Act of Oblivion should be granted to the
 Malecontents, 
and that they should be re-established in all their Goods and Priviledges.




These Conditions seemed so harsh to the Em∣perour, that he rejected them, preferring a War before such a sordid accommodation.


The Cessation betwixt 
Tekely
 and the 
Germans
 being ended, he joyned Forces with the Turks near 
Pest,
 consisting of 40000 Men. He passed near 
Caschaw
 or 
Cassovia,
 and turning suddenly, surprised the Castle of 
Zatmar,
 and in a few days after took the City. 
Cassovia
 and other con∣siderable Places ran the same fate. And now the Turks act by themselves, 
Tokai
 rendring it self to them as soon as they appeared before it. The Emperour sent to complain to the Bassa of 
Buda
 of these Acts of Hostility; but he answer∣ed, that he did not pretend to break the Cessati∣on in attacking these little places, which were but receptacles of Robbers, the Inhabitants there∣of daily pillaging his Highnesses quarters. Thus the strongest seldom fail of pretences to oppress the weakest.


On the other side, the Bassa of 
Waradin
 having besieged 
Fileck,
 pressed it hard. He had alrea∣dy assaulted the place thrice, and though 
Stra∣zoldo, Caprara, Staremberg,
 and the 
Palatine
 ad∣vanced with design to relieve it; yet all these Generals, however brave, durst not attempt the Enemies Lines; and it might be said, that they were come so far but to be witnesses of the Vi∣ctory, by the loss of the place which surrendred it self. The sixteenth of 
September,
 the 
Hungarians
 entred into the Turkish Service, but the 
Ger∣mans
 and all the Officers were made Prisoners, because they refused to sign the Capitulation, and the Women were made slaves, the Turks lost 2000 Janizaries in this siege, which obliged them to treat the Officers with so much Rigour, and perhaps the place which they demolished was therefore razed, or rather to prevent the Malecontents (who demanded the possession of it) from enjoying it.


The said Bassa, after the forcing of 
Filek,
 went with 40000 Men and invested 
Lewentz
 and 
Neutra,
 which surrendred to him upon de∣mand: And 
Tekeley,
 taking advantage of the absence of 
Strasoldo,
 rendred himself Master of the High-land Cities. The Bassa of 
Buda
 ad∣vanced also towards 
Gran,
 with design to make a Bridge there over the 
Danube,
 to the end he might open a passage into upper 
Hungary.


Tekeley,
 seeing himself Master of the upper 
Hungary,
 especially of the Cities thereof, which by their Mines of Gold made up a great part of the Revenues of the Crown, and now having refreshed himself in these rich Quarters, he cau∣sed Moneys to be coined, representing on one side his Effiges with this Inscription: 
Emericus Comes
 Tekeley 
Princeps
 Hongariae; and on the reverse these words: 
Pro Deo, pro Patria & pro Libertate.
 The Winter being now advanced, he sent his Secretary to 
Vienna
 to offer a Cessati∣on of Arms. This proposal was not disagree∣able to the Imperial Court, but they could not resolve to leave the said upper Cities in his pos∣session; his Deputies represented thereupon, That their Master could not part with them without the consent of the Bassa of 
Buda,
 but that he would favour the Imperial Work-men, and suffer them to labour for his Majesties pro∣fit, provided he might be allowed a Compensa∣tion for his Protection, if not, he threatned to destroy the said Cities, worth 200000 Crowns yearly to his Imperial Majesty; after some 
∣tercation the Cessation was again agreed upon, and the Directors of the Mines were obliged to pay 
Tekeley
 six hundred Crowns every Week; this 
Trevis
 did not hinder several Encounters betwixt the Christians and Turks. A Party of 
Hussars
 in 
November
 defeated a Detatchment of the Infidels, commanded by an Aga, who was kill'd there. There were found in his Pockets nineteen Letters of the Bassa of 
Buda
's, writ to Officers of that Nation, ordering them to cause the Grand Seignior's Subjects to pay the Extra∣ordinary Tribute, which his Highness was not accustomed to exact, but when he undertook some great War. Thus the Emperour was as∣certained that the Turks design was to draw to∣gether all their Forces to attack him the next Summer. He was confirmed in this Opinion by Letters from his Ambassadour at the Port, who writ to him, that the Grand Seignior was gone from 
Constantinople
 on the twenty eighth of 
October
 to 
Adrianople;
 that the great Visier fol∣lowed him the next day; that Count 
Tekeley
 had complained at the Port of the Bassa of 
Bu∣da,
 accusing him for having separated his Troops too far from his, and so hindered him from making such considerable progresses in 
Hungary
 as he might otherwise have done; and finally, that the said Bassa was summoned up by the Grand Seignior to answer this Accusation.


The great Visier, being expected at 
Belgrade,
 the Emperour sent 
Satonara
 to meet him, to ob∣tain more favourable Conditions than those proposed to Count 
Albret Caprara.
 He sent also Count 
Martinitz
 to the 
Pope,
 and to the other Princes of 
Italy
 to sollicite for Succours in this extremity. Count 
Kaunitz
 was likewise sent to 
Bavaria,
 and many other principal Men to the other Electors and Princes of the Empire, to in∣vite their assistance in so pressing an Exigence. To these Count 
Wallestein,
 a Knight of the Or∣der of the Golden Fleece, was deputed into 
Po∣land,
 to be present at the Diet of 
Warsaw,
 to ne∣gotiate a League with that Crown; and the Emperour commanded all his Regiments to be compleated and augmented, his Garrisons to be fortified, and his Magazins to be filled for the better opposing so powerful an Enemy.


Whilst both parties are preparing for a War with great Vigour, it will be conducible enough to the design of our History, to subjoyn an Ac∣cident which had like to have made an abso∣lute breach betwixt the 
French
 and the 
Ottoman
 Port. 
Monsieur du Quesne,
 having given chace to seven 
Corsairs
 of 
Tripoly,
 forced them into the Ha∣ven of 
Chio,
 placing themselves under the Can∣non of the Fortress, to cover themselves from the Enemy, but to no purpose, although the Governour of the Place sent the 
French
 Admi∣ral word, that they were under the Protection of the Grand Seignior; for 
Monsieur du Quesne,
 in prosecution of his Design, when he was come up with them, fired upon them, the Governour did the same upon the 
French,
 but to no great purpose, being they were so ill treated, that three of their Vessels were disabled, and all of them forced under the very Walls of the For∣tress, one of the Bastions of the same being like∣wise almost ruined. 
Du Quesne
 not yet satisfied, blocked them up there, until the News thereof was come to 
Constantinople.
 The Alarm was great there, and they were upon the point of falling upon them of the 
French
 Nation, untill their Ambassadour there declared, that what was done, was in no wise acted against the 
Otto∣man
 Port, but only against the aforesaid 
Corsairs,
 who took the Vessels belonging to his Masters Subjects, and therefore ought not to be received into the Grand Seigniors Ports. Though this did for the present in some sort appease them, yet the 
Capitain Bassa
 was sent to 
Chio
 with eight and forty Gallies, to make a Peace betwixt the 
French
 and the 
Tripolins;
 much time was spent

before it could be effected, which being conclu∣ded, they of 
Tripoli
 had liberty to repair their Vessels.


For all this the 
Ottomans
 were highly offend∣ed with the dammage 
Du Quesne
 had done at 
Scio,
 and demanded reparation from the Am∣bassador of 
France
 at 
Constantinople,
 who at first would give no hearing to such frivolous Com∣plaints, but fearing the 
French
 Merchants in 
Turkey
 might be incommoded by it, he since offered to make them a Present of his own ac∣cord, not by any order from the King his Ma∣ster. The Turks judging the said Present too small, were in no wise satisfied with it; so that the Ambassador thought fit to make some addi∣tion to it, which did as little satisfie them. In the mean time 
Du Quesne
 being sailed out of the 
Archipelague,
 there came an Officer to the Am∣bassador, telling him, that the Grand Seignior was in no wise satisfied with his Offer, as being in no wise proportionable to the dammage com∣mitted at 
Scio,
 adding, that the whole Empire was offended at it: But yet in consideration of the ancient Amity betwixt the two Nations, they would pass it by, provided the dammage were repaired, alledging by way of similitude, that if our party sued a Thief into a Friends House, and that sorhething were broke in it, the Pur∣suer would be obliged to pay it. The Ambassa∣dor replyed, that the harm which was done at 
Scio
 might be repaired with less than what he had already offered of his own, which was more than he could well bear, and that the Grand Seignior and Great Visier ought to be satisfied, that he ruined himself to conserve the Peace be∣twixt the two Empires, because he much fear∣ed, lest the Present he had offered might not please the King his Master, to whom he never, had made any mention of it. The Turkish Of∣ficer hereupon being angry, told him in the Name of the Grand Seignior and Great Visier, that they were resolved to put him into the 
se∣ven Towers,
 and the 
French
 Merchants in Prison; the 
Port
 knew very well that the 
French
 King did never disapprove of what his Ambassadors did. The Grand Seignior and his Visier were not to be mocked by a present of a few Clocks, Watches, Stuffs, and Diamonds of small value, in compensation of dammages of seven hundred 
Purses,
 arising for the murther of 400 Turks, the ruine of a whole City, the destruction of many 
Mosques,
 and the Castle. The Ambassa∣dor replyed, that he was not at all surprised at his Choler, but that he should have been afraid if he had spoke in these Terms to the Chiaux, whose substitute he was; that the lives of Turks had never been valued so high; that the num∣ber of the slain at 
Scio
 was not so great, and that there had not been one man killed, if they had not received the Pyrats there with the French Prises; and finally, if they would put him into the seven Towers, he would not come out of it but by express order from the King his Master, and that he was ready to follow him thither. The Officer being moved with the Resolution of the Ambassador, assured him, he should not fail to be conducted thither the next Morning, whereupon he replyed, he could not believe it, because he knew the Sultan was just, the Visier prudent, and his King a powerful Prince. The Turk interrupting him here, told him, that he talk'd as if he had 100000 men with him, to whom the other added, that his Master had 400000 men, and always victorious, and as for him, he spoke like one that would be as good as his Word. The Visier, highly offended with the Ambassadors Discourse, caused him to be told by a 
Kiaia,
 that he must add to his Present, or that he should be obliged for his Reputation to send him to the seven Towers: but the Am∣bassador continued positive. Sometime after, it was signified to him, that the Visier had obtain∣ed a considerable abatement of the 700 Purses, and that he would be content, if besides the Clocks and rarities, he would yet give 40000 Livers in Diamonds; but the Ambassador returned an∣swer, that in complizance to the Great Visier, he would yet add 1200 Crowns, and no more. Some time after, the Visier let him know that he would speak with him himself, which the Ambassador denied, because he had already re∣fused him the 
Sofa.
 However he did so far com∣ply as to go to him about the end of 
May,
 where after many Contestations about increasing the Present, the Turks descended to 350000, and af∣terwards to 100000 Crowns, to 10000, and fi∣nally agreed upon 15000 Livers. The Turkish Officers having had the most trouble in the World so to content the Grand Visier that the 
French
 Ambassador should not be displeased. A few days after, the Moneys, together with the Presents, consisting of a small thread of Dia∣monds, two — a 
Venice
 Looking-glass,
 five Chamber Clocks, one Carpet, ten embroi∣dered Habits, some pieces of Cloth, Satins, and other Stuffs were exhibited, whereby this affair of 
Scio
 was accommodated, but not the difference about the 
Sopha,
 which continues still.


The Emperour being sufficiently satisfied of the Designs of the Mahometans upon 
Hungary
 and 
Austria,
 order'd all his Collonels to compleat their Regiments by the first of 
May,
 and gave out new Commissions for six Regiments of Horse, and several of Foot to be raised with all imaginable speed. These Levies were not only designed to reinforce the Army of 
Hungary,
 but also to incamp near 
Vienna,
 to cover that City and the Neighbouring Countries from the In∣vasion of the Turks. He further commanded the Peasants of all the Neighbouring Villages to cut down Oaks to make Pallizadoes, and to carry them to 
Vienna
 for the repairing of the Fortifications of that City. The Inhabitants of the Suburbs had likewise order to empty their Cellars, that they might be filled with Earth, but deferred the pulling down of the Houses un∣til they were assured that the City should be besieged. Ambassadors being also sent to the Electors, the Circles, and Princes of the Empire, to invite them to joyn with his Imperial Maje∣sty for the Preservation of 
Hungary. Conte Albret Caprara
 received likewise order to return from his Embassie, unless he could obtain a Prolonga∣tion of the Trevis; but the Grand Seignior would not suffer him to depart, but obliged him to follow him to 
Adrianople,
 and thence to 
Bel∣grade,
 causing him to be observed with much exactness. In the mean time, as also the whole Winter, the Citizens of 
Vienna
 had been trained and exercised with great diligence, the better to enable them to resist, in case of a Siege, which their fears and the Enemies braggings gave them just occasion to apprehend. They also were commanded to lay up Provisions for twelve Months; and not only they, but all the frontier Places were stored with Magazins, the Isle of 
Schut
 was also fortified, where it was exposed to the Enemies Surprises, and a Regiment of Foot added to defend the entry against the Infi∣dels. There was also a great Redoubt made on the further side the 
Danube
 to cover the Bridge lately made, and to favour a retreat in case of necessity. At the same time there happened a Skirmish betwixt the 
Hussars
 of the Garison of

Comorra, Papa, Vesprin,
 and 
Raab,
 against a De∣tachment of the Army of the Turks, who lost 1200 men in the Encounter.
 But if the Wars caused great ruines in 
Hungary,
 the Plague laid it well nigh desolate; it raged in 
Cassovia
 about 
Papa,
 and in many places possessed by the Turks; insomuch that 
Tekely
 was obliged to retire to 
Montcats
 to his Wife, and to chuse another Place than 
Cassovia
 to convene the Diet which he had summoned. He had by Cessations and Treaties kept the Imperial Court in suspense, proposing his Mediation at the Port for a Prolongation of the twenty years 
Trevis,
 for which end he sent 
Schirmay
 his Secretary with others thither. Nay, the Propositions he made were thought so rea∣sonable, that the Baron 
Zaponara
 was sent with new instructions to carry on this Peace as well with 
Tekely,
 as with the Visier of 
Buda;
 but whether 
Tekely,
 instead of advancing this Affair, did not retard it, or that the Turks would not consent to any further Prolongation of peace with the Emperour, this commerce vanished. This last Obstacle was sooner believed than the other, by reason of the detention of 
Caprara
 in 
Turky,
 and the vast Preparations of the 
Ottomans,
 who would listen to no Cessation but upon Terms so disadvantageous that his Imperial Majesty could in no ways assent to.


Zaponara,
 who had spent much time with 
Te∣kely,
 being returned the beginning of 
January
 to 
Vienna,
 reported, that the Count 
Tekely
 having been sick at 
Montcatz,
 he had entertained many fruitless Conferences with him, and now he was well, and seeing no hopes of an accommo∣dation with a man who was entirely engaged with the Turks, as was visible by all this advan∣ces, he could continue there no longer. And this gained credit by the appearing of a certain project granted by the Grand Seignior to the 
Hungarians,
 which we will also insert, to satisfie the curious, though we dare not assure them that it was exactly such:



1. 
That the Count
 Emmeric Tekely 
of
 Rits∣mark, 
of the Illustrious House of
 Gabriel Bethelem, 
shall be installed King of
 Hungary, 
and in case he come to dye, the Grand Seignior will take the Queen his Wife, as well for her Person as Goods, into his Prote∣ction.


2. 
That after the Death of Count
 Tekely 
and his Children, the
 Hungarians 
shall choose such a King as shall seem good to them, provided they acquaint the
 Ottoman 
Port with it.


3. 
That the Present, which the
 Hungarians 
have promised to give to the
 Ottoman 
Port, shall never be raised in any manner whatsoever.


4. 
That they shall entirely enjoy their Priviledges, Liberties, Immunities, and Franchises for ever, with∣out any diminution.


5. 
That they shall be protected by the
 Turks 
from all their Enemies, who, or whatsoever.


6. 
That the Turks will religiously observe the Con∣ditions of Peace made with the
 Germans 
at St.
 Go∣thard, 
so far as they concern
 Hungary.


7. 
That the Jesuits, as disturbers of the publick Repose, shall be driven out of
 Hungary, 
and never received there again.


8. 
That the Tributes of the surrendred Places shall never be raised; but that what they have contributed to the
 Turks 
and to the
 Hungarians 
hitherto, shall continue to perpetuity in the same state.


9. 
That the Treasurers of
 Hungary 
shall have free passage through all the parts of the
 Ottoman 
Domi∣nion.


10. 
And when they carry to the Port the Present of Honour which they have promised, or shall come there upon any other occasion, they shall be received magnifi∣cently.


11. 
And finally, the Present of
 40000 
Crowns, shall, as is already mentioned, never be augmented.




These and several other Passages fill'd the Imperial Court with diffidence, notwithstand∣ing 
Tekely
's fair words, and yet the Negotiati∣ons were still continued, the Emperour having proposed to an 
Officer
 that 
Tekely
 had sent him, to grant to his Master the Soveraignty of all he possessed in upper 
Hungary,
 with several other Demeanes, so willing they were to have de∣tached this subtile and brave Enemy from his intelligence with the Turks, who at length de∣clared, that he could not separate his Interests from the Port, which obliged 
Hoffman
 and 
Sa∣ponara
 to retire.


The 18 of 
January,
 6000 Turks entred into 
Canisia,
 most Janizaries, and the Garisons of 
Bel∣grade
 and 
Newhausel
 were also augmented with great numbers of this Militia. The 
25th
 of 
Ja∣nuary,
 5000 
Tartars
 arrived at 
Buda,
 who were sent to 
Newhausel,
 and 12000 Foot came in their place, who by reason they could not lodge in the City, encamped at the foot of the Walls.


Upon this News order was given to break the Ice round the Isle of 
Schults
 to keep the Ri∣ver open, the better to oppose their irruptions of the 
Turks
 and 
Malecontents.
 The Ice, which was of an extraordinary thickness, broke the wooden Bridge at 
Vienna,
 with the loss of three Charets loaden with Wine and Oates, which fell in. The Inhabitants of the aforesaid Isle of 
Schults
 were by reason of the oppression of the Inpe∣rialists forc'd mostly to abandon it; the noise whereof being spread through the Kingdom, had like to have caused a general Insurrection.


The beginning of 
February,
 the Turks entred into the Isle of 
Serin
 in 
Croatia,
 where they com∣mitted great disorders. One of their parties de∣feated a Convoy with Munitions of War, and other provisions designed for 
Zendra, Lossenhilts
 who commanded the same, being slain.


The Turks, who provided all things necessa∣ry to attempt the siege of 
Vienna,
 laid in at 
Buda
 vast stores of Ammunition and Materials to make Bridges of; nor were they less vigilant on the other side, the Suburbs were demolished round within a hundred paces of the City, and the great Island was fortified and put into a Con∣dition to lodge a whole Army. Redoubts were built at both ends of the wooden Bridge, which is on the side nearest the City, and the Bridge which traversed the great Arm of the 
Danube
 was taken down to build another on the other side of the Favorites, with several other small Forts for its security: Two hundred thousand pallizadoes were sent from 
Newburg
 to serve for the Fortifi∣cations of 
Vienna,
 whereof every Citizen under∣took to maintain a Souldier well armed in case the City should be besieged. All Boats were al∣so stopped at 
Vienna,
 being designed to transport Provisions and Ammunition into 
Hungary.


However 
Tekely
 continued to block up the Pla∣ces which remained in the Emperours Obedi∣ence in upper 
Hungary,
 and to shut up the Passages that no relief might be sent to them; he did not cease howsoever to testifie to the Deputies of the Loyal Countries, that he did desire with Passion that his Imperial Majesty would grant him rea∣sonable Conditions, that might restore him to the obedience which he owed him; and to make it appear to all the World, that he had not ta∣ken Armns against him out of any animosity, he released an hundred 
German
 Prisoners without Ransom, and sent to assure the Emperour, that he had dispatched 
Fagou
 and 
Sirmay,
 his two chief Ministers, to the Port to endeavour to ob∣tain

a prolongation of the Trevis. He spake to the same purpose at the Diet he had convened, and released yet again eighty Prisoners which he had taken at 
Tokay,
 and gave Count 
Herber∣stein
 his Liberty upon his parole.


The Turks, about the later end of 
February,
 made a new attempt upon the Isle of 
Schults
 with 1000 men of the Garrison of 
Newhausel,
 conduct∣ed by an 
Hungarian
 Renegade; but the Ice, which was not strong enough, breaking, a great number of them were drowned: the Imperialists took many Prisoners, and amongst others the Sub-governour of 
Newhawsel's
 Son. A Turkish Officer that offered ten thousand Dollars for his Life had his Head chopt off. At the same time several new Troops of the Infidels arrived, who lodged at 
Essek,
 and along the Rivers 
Savus
 and 
Dravus.
 They armed several 
Brigantines,
 which vogued upon the 
Danube,
 to hinder the Imperi∣alists to send any Succours or Ammunition to their Garrisons. The Baffa of 
Belgrade
 recei∣ved orders to repair an ancient Palace seated upon a Hill near the Town, to lodge the Grand Seignior there, who designed to stay there during the Campania.


In 
March, Tekely,
 with a considerable body of the Turkish and his own Troops, endeavoured to Surprise 
Tirnaw,
 to cut off the Communica∣tion of the Fortress of 
Leopolstat,
 with the River 
Waagh.
 But this Enterprise failing, this Count summoned a second Diet in upper 
Hungary,
 though those of the Loyal Counties were admo∣nished not to appear there. At the same time Collonel 
Albert Caprara
 advertised the Emperour, that the Grand Seignior offered to prolong the Cessation if he would surrender to him the Isles of 
Schults,
 of 
Serin,
 and of 
Raab,
 with the For∣tresses of 
Raab
 and 
Comorra;
 but his Imperial Ma∣jesty did not think it expedient to accept of such disadvantageous Terms, which rendered the Turks entire Masters of 
Hungary,
 and gave them an open passage to the very Walls of 
Vienna.
 After that, it was impossible for this Minister to write any more to his Master, for the Turks kept so strict a Guard about him, that he was suffered to have no Communication with any, for fear of informing the Emperour with the vast preparations of War which were made in all the extent of the 
Ottoman
 Empire.


The Turks at the same time surprised a Quar∣ter of the Dragoons, kill'd forty, and took ma∣ny Prisoners; they lodged 15000 men in the Neighbourhood of 
Essek,
 to hinder the Imperi∣alists from burning the Bridge, and by that means hinder their Passage into the lower 
Hun∣gary.
 The Emperour on the other side caused all his Forces on the side of the 
Rhine,
 except four Regiments which he left for the Frontiers, to march towards 
Vienna
 and 
Hungary.
 His Troops also that were in 
Bohemia
 under the com∣mand of Count 
Taff,
 were commanded that way.


In the beginning of 
April,
 the Grand Seigni∣or sent the Bassa 
Zanko,
 who, though he had but one hand, was one of the best Officers in the Turkish Army, to 
Cassovia,
 to command under Count 
Tekeley.
 At the same time the Emperour made a great Detachment of all the Regiments that were in 
Hungary,
 to march toward 
Trein∣schin,
 under the Command of the Count of 
Schults,
 to go meet a great Body of Succours which came out of 
Poland
 under the Conduct of 
Lubomirski.
 The Count 
Herberstein
 had Orders to pass into 
Croatia
 with all the Troops of the low∣er 
Austria,
 to oppose the Enemy, who pretended to make an Irruption into that Province.


The Grand Seignior shewed so much passion for the War of 
Hungary,
 that to complement him, all the Ministers of the Court would par∣ticularly contribute to it. Every one offered to entertain a certain number of Souldiers at their proper charge, and did.
 The Great — himself raised 400 men. And the Ladies no less forward, raised great sums for the Expedition, especially the 
Asseki
 or Sultan Queen. His High∣ness being resolved to march in the beginning of the Spring to 
Belgrade,
 sent the Emperour according to the Practise of the Sultans,
 a — to mark that he declared War against him. The Great Visier being ready to move, sent 1200 Camels loaden with Powder to 
Belgrade
 before him, together with Orders to the Bassa of the said place, to build a Bridge upon the 
Savus,
 which was immediately put in Execu∣tion.


The Emperour Received at the same time an express from Count 
Wallestin,
 his Ambassador in 
Poland,
 which informed him that he had con∣cluded with that King a League Offensive and Defensive against the Turks. This News did most sensibly affect the Imperial Court with Joy, because they had doubted much of the Success of this Negotiation, the King of 
Poland
 having shewed some Dissatisfaction, in that the Emperour would never assist him, nor enter in∣to any concert with him, whilst he alone sup∣ported a War against the Turks; but Interest took place of Passion. The King of 
Poland,
 like a prudent Prince, foresaw, that if the Turks con∣quered 
Hungary
 and the 
German
 Neighbouring States, he should be scarce able to resist so power∣ful a Neighbour; which made him resolve to op∣pose his Designs, and to joyn his Arms with the Emperours. The Conditions of this mutual al∣liance briefly were, that the Alliance should be not only defensive, but also offensive against the Turks, and last till both found their assured re∣pose; neither should make Peace without con∣sent of the other; his Imperial Majesty should entertain 6000 Men, whereof 40000 should keep the Field, and the rest be put in Garisons; the King of 
Poland
 will lead 40000 under his own Conduct: he shall be also obliged to recover his Places in 
Podolia, Wallachia,
 and 
Ʋkrania,
 whilst the Imperialists shall do the same by those Places they left in 
Hungary;
 The 
Poles
 shall fur∣nish 6000 men to act against 
Tekely.
 Other Ar∣ticles not immediately regarding the present War, are purposely omitted.


There had been ill observed Treaties and Cessations continued betwixt the 
Tekelists
 and 
Germans,
 and now the first besiege the Castle of 
Do∣navisth
 in the County of 
Sepusa
 in upper 
Hungary, C. Caprara
 having by message represented to 
Te∣kely,
 that it was a violation of the Trevis; He answered, that he only did it because 
C. Joanelli,
 to whom the Place belonged, had refused to come to the Diet of 
Cassovia,
 so frivolous an ex∣cuse made it apparent to the Emperours Mini∣sters, that they were not too much to confide in the Promises of this Count, and that he would take his advantages as often as occasions present∣ed themselves. Some few days after, he had News that his Princess was brought to bed of a Son at 
Montcats,
 whereupon he sent one of his chief Officers to Prince 
Abaffi,
 to invite him to Christen the Babe, which he accepted of, and sent one of the principal Lords in 
Transilvania
 to supply his Place.


In the beginning of 
May,
 the great Visier came to 
Belgrade
 with the Van of the 
Ottoman
 Army, and more than 300 pieces of Cannon, besides Mortars to throw Granadoes of a prodi∣gious bigness. At the same time the Troops that were to compass the Imperial Army, began

to draw towards 
Presburg,
 where Count 
Rabata
 encamped them as they came, according to the orders he had received from his Imperial Ma∣jesty, who had chosen the great Plain of 
Kirtzer,
 joyning to that City to take the general review of his Army, which being drawn into Batalia in two Lines, extended four Miles in length; seventy two pieces of Cannon, with the Gene∣ral of the Artillery, Count 
Starenberg,
 were placed at the head of the Infantry, which was ranged in Batalions, and in such order that they might be perceived on both sides; they were numbered 20000, and the Horse in two Wings amounted to 12000, besides 5000 
Hussars
 drawn up on the Right of the 
German
 Horse with four∣teen field pieces.


The Emperour arrived in the Camp about Ten of the Clock, preceded by his Guards, and riding between the Dukes of 
Bavaria
 and 
Lorrain,
 being followed by many other Princes and Lords, and saluted with three Vollies of all the Cannon and Musqueteers of the Army. After Mass, the Archbishop of 
Strigonium
 read with a loud Voice the Bull of Indulgence, accorded to such who should fight against Infidels, and ha∣ving given his Benediction to their Imperial Majesties, who received it on their Knees, and consequently to all the Army, this Prince cau∣sed 500000 Livers to be distributed amongst the Souldiery, which was no less acceptable to them. The Command of the Forces being given to the Duke of 
Lorrain
 as Generalissimo, the Right wing was conducted by the Duke of 
Sax-Lawenburg,
 the Left by General 
Caprara,
 and the Infantry and Cannon by the Count of 
Starenberg.
 With this Army thus composed most of the Empe∣rour's old and best Souldiery, and under so ex∣pert a General as the Duke of 
Lorrain;
 the Court hoped for somewhat extraordinary, though as it will appear they were disappointed in their Ex∣pectation. In the mean time a Council of War was held to see what might be done before the arrival of the Turks, and after what manner they should act upon the Defensive when the Enemy did appear. All agreed that for the Offensive there was nothing to be attempted but 
Gran
 or 
Newhausel,
 and that, as they ought to avoid those Enterprises which would cost much Blood, and weaken the Army, so they seemed to point at 
Gran
 as most easie, though others were for 
Newhausel
 for several Reasons. For the De∣fensive, it was concluded they must endeavour to defend the Passages of the Rivers 
Raab
 and 
Waagh.
 The result of this Council being refer∣red to the Emperour, he judged, that for the Reputation of his Arms, and other important Reasons, not to suffer his Army to lye idle the space of two Months time, which they had before the Enemy could take the field, but left the choice to the Duke, whether he would at∣tempt 
Gran
 or 
Newhausel?
 He only recommen∣ded to him, that when the Turks advanced he should take care for the security of the Garri∣sons, and oppose as much as in him lay the Ene∣mies ravaging of the Hereditary Countries.


The Army being advanced near 
Comorra,
 the Duke having no certain Intelligence of the con∣dition of 
Gran,
 resolved in person to take a view of the Place, which he did, but being upon the point to resolve its Siege, he was advertised that the Turks were forming a Camp at 
Buda,
 and judging that they might from thence relieve 
Gran
 by Water, (as the Bassa of 
Newhausel
 had already done upon the news of the Christians Design to attempt the place) and perhaps cut off the Communication betwixt him and 
Comor∣ra,
 by posting themselves betwixt this Place and 
Gran,
 he quitted the thoughts of that Enterprise, resolving upon the Siege of 
Newhausel
 as the on∣ly choice left him.


This Resolution being taken,
 he sent some Foot towards 
Gran,
 and armed Boats down the River, as designing to burn the Bridge, to gain a belief of his intent to besiege that City, but wheeling about with his Horse, he marched all that Night and invested 
Newhausel
 the Day fol∣lowing. The Turks seeing this, set the Sub∣urbs on fire to prevent the Christians approach, who notwithstanding planted their battery, and were advanced within an hundred paces of the body of the Place, with little loss save that of Count 
Taxis,
 and might probably have given a good account of the Siege, if the Court, which disapproved the Enterprise, had not sent orders for them to retire. This command was im∣mediately obeyed, and not without some Preci∣pitation, the Army returning to their old Camp betwixt 
Raab
 and 
Comorra.
 The sudden rai∣sing of the Siege seemed strange to some, being the Turkish Army was not yet ready to appear, and that the Christians were so forward in their approaches. But the more discerning thought otherwise, because this Town, being strong and well furnished with all things, the obstinacy of the Besieged might have wearied the Imperial Troops, and have reduced them to an Inability of being able to oppose the 
Ottoman
 Army when they came into 
Hungary,
 and that therefore it was better chusing the certain, than the hazard of that which was not so, as was the taking of 
Newhausel,
 and to keep upon the Defensive, the rather being the 
Polish
 Army was not ready, nor yet raised; and therefore the Imperial Army, upon whose Valour depended the Preservation of 
Hungary
 and 
Austria,
 was in no wise to be weakned or baffled.


The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 having refreshed his Ar∣my for some time, advanced with all his For∣ces on the side of 
Raab,
 having given orders to hasten the Works at 
Leopolstat,
 and repair the Fortifications of 
Raab
 and 
Comorra.


In the mean time, the Turkish Army, com∣posed of all the Nations under their Obedience, consisting of 200000 Men, advanced into 
Hun∣gary
 on the side of 
Alba-Regalis,
 sending 4000 Pioneers before them to dig Pits and Wells in their passage to furnish all the Army with Wa∣ter; and the Grand Visier himself having passed the Bridge of 
Essek
 with the body of his Army, moved towards the Christian Camp by 
Raab,
 with a Resolution to attack it instantly, and ob∣lige them to a general Battel; his Army was so numerous that they covered the whole Country from 
Alba
 even to the Mountains of 
Raab,
 and being come within a League of the Imperialists, he detached a great number of 
Tartars
 to spoil and ravage the Country out of which the Chri∣stians could receive any Subsistence or Forage, which extremely augmented their wants, which were already but too great.


The Grand Seignior arriving at 
Belgrade
 the Third of 
June,
 the Sultan Queen would not stay behind, but accompanied his Highness in his Voyage of 
Hungary.
 At 
Belgrade
 he received an Express from the 
Caimacan,
 of a great fire at 
Constantinople,
 which had intirely consumed one of the quarters of the City, and that the Grand Visier's Seraglio had been quite burnt if the neighbouring Houses had not been pulled down to save that sumptuous Building.


Takely
 having taken his measures from the Grand Visier, upon whom he had waited, and concerted with him concerning the following Campania, being returned to 
Cassovia,
 published

a Manifest in the Grand Seignior's and his own Name, that all the 
Hungarians
 that would em∣brace his Party, should be maintained in their Priviledges, Liberties, Goods, Laws, and Re∣ligion; but that such who refused to submit, should have no quarter. This Manifest had the desired effect, for the Cities of 
Papa, Tot,
 and 
Vesprin,
 the most remote, immediately opened their Gates to the 
Tekelists.
 The Emperour, fearing that 
Neutra
 would follow the Example of these three Places, commanded Count 
Schults
 the Governour, to draw forth the great Guns, the Arms and Stores, and to quit the Place. The same Orders were given to the Hilly Cities, and to the Officers of the Silver Mines, who all obeyed; a Conduct so extraordinary alarmed all 
Hungary.
 The Cities and Counties declared to the Emperours Commissioners, that they would open their Gates to Count 
Tekely,
 to pre∣vent Fire and Pillage, being there was no hopes of Succours. To all this, the 
Hungarians,
 under their Palatine 
Esterhasi
's Command, who guard∣ed the Passages of the River 
Waagh,
 about 15000 in number deserted likewise, putting themselves under the Protection of 
Tekeley,
 and the 
Turks,
 so that this Palatine with scarce a competent Guard, was forced to retire to 
Vienna,
 because he would not violate his Faith sworn to the Emperour.


Whilst the two Armies did nothing material, but observe each other, a great Body of 
Tartars
 under the Conduct of their Cham, who was there in Person, animated with the hopes of Pil∣lage, having examined the Avenues and Fords of the River 
Raab,
 by following it towards its source, passed over by swimming their Hor∣ses, and guided by some 
Hungarians,
 they came to 
Kerment
 and St. 
Godthard,
 a place famous for the memorable Victory which the Christians gained from the Turks nineteen years past, far from finding any Obstacles to hinder them, eve∣ry thing seem'd to favour their Passage. Count 
Badiani
 abandoned his post upon the River, joyn∣ing with 
Tekely
 those 
Hungarians
 he command∣ed; so that the Enemy entered the Country like a torrent, putting all to Fire and Sword; and passing the 
Rabwitz,
 continued their Devastati∣ons. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 finding the Enemy on both sides, and fearing lest they might cut off his way to 
Vienna
 and the Hereditary Coun∣tries, having reinforced the Garisons of 
Raab
 and 
Comorra,
 resolved to retire with the rest not exceeding 24000. And to the end the march of the Horse might not be retarded by the Foot and Artillery, they were separated, the Infan∣try and Canon marching along the Isle of 
Schut,
 the way on the left side of the 
Danube,
 being ex∣posed to little Danger; from thence they came safe to 
Presburg
 and 
Thebes,
 and passing the Ri∣ver 
Mark,
 arrived happily at 
Vienna.
 The Duke, having passed the Bridge of 
Raab
 with the Ca∣valry, marched to 
Altembourg,
 where he rested some time, exposing this little Town to the Pillage of his Souldiers, as being loth to let their Cattel and Provisions fall into the Enemies Hands, which would infallibly happen. The Inhabitants however seemed very dissatisfied to be so used by their Friends, though the Cru∣elty of the Enemy, who ravaged all with Fire and Sword, effaced the other ill, as wholly dis∣proportionable: from thence having passed the Streight there, they marched towards the Plains of 
Kitz
 or 
Kitzer,
 where two Months before the general review of the Army was made.


Cara Mustapha,
 the Great Visier, attributing this retreat of the Christians to their fear, cal∣led a Council, where it was deliberated whether he should pursue them, or undertake the Siege of 
Raab?
 But judging, according to the appear∣ances, that their retreat was no better than a run∣ing away, it was resolved to pursue them; whereupon he presently raised his Camp, and followed the way the Christians were gone, leaving a body of 12000 near the said 
Raab,
 to secure his Convoys and Provisions.


The Duke perceiving their design, and not judging himself in affurance in the Plains of 
Kitz
 against so formidable a power, resolved to march towards 
Vienna.
 He sent Count 
Aeneas Caprara,
 General of his Horse, to acquaint the Emperour with it, and inform him of all things. The Duke following, had sent his Baggage be∣fore, but it happened, that a Troop of 
Tartars,
 mingled with 
Turks,
 and conducted by 
Hunga∣rians,
 to the number of 3000 in all, having swum over the River 
Leithe,
 and hid themselves in a Wood betwixt the Villages of 
Petronel
 and 
Elend,
 fell suddenly upon them, and attacking some Regiments on the left Wing, which fol∣lowed the Baggage, with dreadful cryes and howlings, did so surprize them with the terrour of so unexpected an irruption, that it brought them all into confusion, and by reason of the Dust, which was so thick that they could not distinguish Friend from Foe, not knowing which way to turn, they broke their Ranks, and communicated their Disorder to the very Regiments that followed. In the mean time these 
Barbarians,
 taking the ordinary Advanta∣ges of their impetuousness, flew some of them upon the 
Pedees,
 Carters, and Servants, which they sacrifice to their Cruelty and Fury, whilst the rest plunder the Chariots and Baggage. Ma∣ny Officers lost there their Equipages, and a∣mongst others the Duke of 
Saxon-Lawenburg,
 the Prince of 
Croy,
 and 
Aeneas Caprara,
 all General Officers, had all their Plate taken away.


This Accident put the Army into a prodigi∣ous Consternation, it could not be comprehend∣ed, that the Duke having left the Enemy be∣hind him, this same Enemy should possibly have got before them, and by ways nearer and short∣er intercept, and so boldly attack their Baggage, which was thought secure under the Convoy that guarded it. As soon as they had recollect∣ed themselves, and that the Duke had consider∣ed the disorder part of his Army was in, he sent fresh Troops to second the first, and to as∣sist them to repell the 
Barbarians;
 yet so as to avoid a general Engagement, which he great∣ly apprehended. The 
Tartars
 seeing the 
Christi∣ans
 rally, began likewise to draw to a head; but the fear to see themselves deprived of their Prey, obliged them to retire, and to run away with no less precipitation and speed than they used in their Onset. The Duke caused them to be pursued by his Light-Horse, who took some Standards, being unwilling to engage with the gross of their Troops, as well being this Detach∣ment was supported by the Avant-guard of the Army, as not to retard his march to 
Vienna,
 the which he continned afterwards without any In∣terruption. The 
Chevalier
 of 
Savoy,
 Brother to the Count of 
Soissons,
 was lost in this Confusion, for being too far advanced with his Dragoons that followed him, a 
Tartar
 knock'd him from his Horse with his Sable, and thinking him dead, did alight, and heaving him cross his Saddle, with his Breast upon the Pomel, prest him so there, that he bruised his Stomach. A little after, this Prince being relieved and con∣ducted to 
Vienna,
 and however his Wound in his Head was not mortal, his dislocated Stomach could not bere-set, so that he died in a few days.

Prince 
Thomas
 of 
Aremberg,
 and Count 
Mellini
 were slain in this scuffle, though the common loss of either side was not great.


The Emperour, being informed of the present State of Affairs by Count 
Caprara,
 was greatly ir∣resolved, not knowing what to do upon so im∣portant and pressing an Occasion. He immedi∣ately caused his chief Ministers to be summoned to know their Sentiments, and all unanimously counselled his Majesty to retire from 
Vienna.
 They now only deliberate what road or way he ought to take, some advised he should go over the Mountains without passing the 
Danube,
 and so strait to 
Campililium,
 being the shortest and easiest way to 
Lintz;
 but the Enemy being on the same side of the River, the other was pre∣ferable, as less subject to Danger, and the vio∣lent pursuits of the Enemies Cavalry, who would make more way in a day, winged with the hopes of such a purchase, than the Court could make in four. This last advice being ap∣proved, was ordered to be put in Execution, and all things, as far as was possible in such Con∣fusion, prepared for the Journey.


The Noise of this retreat was quickly made publick. The Waggons which arrived in Con∣fusion to carry the Baggage sufficiently publish∣ed it, and at the same time filled the City and Neighbourhood with so much Terror, that it might be thought no body would stay when the Emperour was gone. All the Horses and Carts that could possibly be found, were hired to fly away with, many Ladies of Quality being for∣ced to put themselves into despicable Carriages, little conformable to their Condition. Houses stored with rich moveables, and furnished with Wine, Corn, and all sort of Provisions, were abandoned, nothing but what was precious and most portative being saved. The Air was also filled with the Sighs, the Tears, the Lamenta∣tions and the Cryes of the Multitude, as if the Enemy had already rendered themselves Ma∣sters of the City.


The same day,
 being the seventh of 
July,
 about eight at Night, their Imperial Majesties with the whole Court passing through the Pal∣lace Gate, went over the 
Danube,
 and lay that Night at 
Cronenbourg,
 a pleasant Town two or three miles distant from 
Vienna,
 being guarded by 200 men, who returned to 
Vienna
 the next Morning. The next day there followed such a prodigious number of Coaches, Carts, Cha∣riots, Horsemen, Foot, 
&c.
 as if they had de∣signed to render the City a Desert. They were thought to amount to 60000, so pressing they were to avoid the danger that so eminently threatned them. And yet it was computed, that no fewer stay'd behind fit to bear Arms, besides the Garrison, the Women and the Children. This flight continued several days, but those that went last, fell for the most part into the danger they would avoid, the hands of the 
Tar∣tars.
 Many others did so overload their Cha∣riots, that they had scarce passed the Bridge over the 
Danube,
 but their Wheels or Axeltrees breaking, they were left in the way in the Night, not knowing whither to turn them∣selves.


Count 
Aversberg,
 having been dispatched by the Duke of 
Lorrain
 to the Emperour, to inform him of the success of the Battel of 
Petronel,
 found him at 
Cronenbourg,
 and greatly rejoyced the whole Court. Upon the first News of the Re∣giments that had been baffled, they had publish∣ed at 
Vienna
 that the General had been slain, the Horse defeated, and the 
Tartars
 at the Gates of the City. Thus all were greatly revived, that the Evil was less than they had believed it to be.


Whilst their Imperial Majesties continued their Journey to 
Lintz, Lorrain
 entred 
Vienna,
 where his first care was to pacifie the Disorders and Confusion there.
 Count 
Sterenberg
 arrived there the same day, and immediately fell to work with the Counterscharp, fortifying the whole Works, and to plant Palizadoes. As they had not apprehended a Siege, the Generals found the more to do. 
Lorrain
 endeavoured however to provide for all things before the ar∣rival of the Enemy,
 who began since the 
11th
 to shew their most advanced Troops near the City. The same day 
Starenberg
's Regiment arrived, as also a thousand commanded Men, who advancing swiftly before the rest of the Ar∣my, entred the City.


And now they burn the Suburbs,
 which was continued the day following, the Citizens them∣selves carrying Fire into their own Houses; and in the Evening there was a great Skirmish near the Palace called the Favorite, where the Turks advanced to discover. All the Infantry arrived the 
13th,
 and 
Lorrain
 made them all march in∣to the Counterscharp, except eight Batallions which he retained in the 
Tabor,
 the better to defend that Post where he resolved to stay until the Powder and Bullets expected from 
Lintz
 were arrived; which being effected, and the Ammunition conducted into the Arsenal,
 he caused the rest of the Foot to be removed into the Town, together with 
Dupigni
's Regiment of Horse, the whole composing a Body of twelve thousand Men.


The 
Tartars
 had committed infinite Ravages and Cruelties in that vast extent of Countries round 
Vienna
 for several Leagues. It is their cu∣stom to run before the Army, armed only with a Javelin, and to burn and sack, and spread Terror over all where they find no resistance. They kill such as fall into their Hands, or traf∣fick them away as Slaves with the Turks. No place escapes their Inhumanity, not the most retired Places of Forrests, the impenetrable Dens of wild Beasts, or the most obscure retreats of Valleys. There is nothing these 
Barbarians
 do not discover by means of their Blood-hounds, the use whereof is common amonst them.


But now the gross of the Enemies Army ap∣proaching, a great number of Waggons, some with four Horses, and others drawn with Ox∣en, and very many Camels laden with Baggage, began to range themselves in form of a Croysent or half Moon about the City, extending from the 
Danube
 behind St. 
Mark,
 along the Suburbs of 
Leopolstat,
 and the neighbouring Villages, even to 
Neudorf.
 At the same time the Turks opened their Trenches on the side of the Imperial Gate, and lodged there in spight of the Cannon of the Town that endeavoured to hinder them.


The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 having ordered Affairs at 
Vienna,
 retired with his Horse and Dragoons over the Bridges, and camp'd there; he would gladly have kept some Foot with him, but ha∣ving considered the greatness of the Enemies Strength, the Works that were to be made, the distance of Supplies, and the diminution which the continuance of a Siege would make in the Garrison, he resolved to leave all his Infantry with the Governour, who most earnestly desired it.


The Duke, before he left 
Vienna,
 had designed to continue in the 
Tabor,
 (or Isle of St. 
Leopold
) and so conserve the Communication with the City. 
Tabor
 is an Island of a League and a half long, environed with the 
Danube.
 This Isle is

full of Houses of Pleasure, Gardens, and Groves. But upon a true Survey of the Place, his High∣ness could not think it defensible, the Waters being so low, that the Arm of the River which formed this Isle was almost every where forda∣ble, so that whole squadrons might pass at once without breaking their Ranks: for this and o∣ther Reasons, the Isle being likewise exposed to the Enemies Artillery, they were obliged to re∣pass the 
Danube.


The Turks by this time had pitch'd an infinite number of Tents about the City, and making a lodgement in 
Rottenhoffs
 Garden, where they had first opened their Trenches, and raised a great Battery, they thundered without ceasing to favour their Works, which they continued winding and turning. The besieged on their side covered themselves with Gabions and sacks of Earth to hinder the effect of the Enemies Cannon; they also raised a good Battery on that side, and all the Engineers and most know∣ing Officers being distributed into the several Posts, were continually employed to render their Cannon serviceable, and fortifie the Places the most exposed to the Enemies Fire, which cost many of them their Lives,


The Turks, moved to see that the Christians were Masters of the Bridges, made an attempt to force 
Conte Schultz
 who had the guard of them. This General seeing his forlorn and advanced Guards pressed, he sent other Troops to sustain them; but the Infidels having already a great body in the Isle of 
Tabor,
 the Christians were forced to fly over the Bridge. The Enemy planted their Standards there, but the Cannon loaden with Cartrages flanking that place, and the swift firing of the Dragoons, ranged along that Arm of the 
Danube,
 constrained them to re∣tire, though themselves were exposed to the Enemies great and small shot. The Dragoons pressed them with so much violence in their re∣treat, that they took their Colours. The Turks upon this occasion lost a Bassa, and many of their Janizaries. General 
Schultz
 himself was wound∣ed here, as also the 
Conte
 of 
Salsburg,
 and a 
Po∣lish
 Major slain. In the mean time the Turks, having possessed themselves of St. 
Leopold
's Isle, shut up the City on all sides. They made Bridg∣es upon that Arm of the 
Danube
 which runs next the City, not only to communicate with their Camp, but to hinder the descent of Boats They burnt the 
Favorite,
 and reduced all the Palaces of the Grandees to Ashes. As soon as the heat of firing began to cease in the Suburbs, the Turks filled them with Janizaries, so that none could enter or go out of the City; which much troubled the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 who could no more give or receive Intelligence from the besieged, though so near and in sight of them.


The Camp of twelve thousand Men which the Grand Visier had left near 
Raab
 to favour the Convoys, continued there still under the command of the Bassa of 
Buda;
 but he was re∣lieved by Prince 
Abaffi,
 being himself obliged to go to the Siege of 
Vienna.
 There was also a Camp almost always betwixt 
Fickem
 and 
Altem∣bourg,
 upon the same account, that is, to keep open and assist the Passage of Convoys which came from 
Buda,
 and the Neighbouring Parts.


The Turks being posted in St. 
Ʋlrick
's Sub∣urbs, run their Trenches within fifty paces of the Counterscharp and Batteries. They also ad∣vanced their Cannon there, but before they dis∣charged them, they caused a little Bag of Lin∣nen, carried upon the Spur by two 
Spahies,
 to be thrown into the Counterscharp. This con∣tained a Letter from the Grand Vizier, written in the Latin and Turkish Languages, the Ex∣plication whereof follows.




TO You, Generals, Governours, and Noble Citizens of 
Vienna,
 We make known by these Presents, according to the Orders we have received from the most Serene, most Mighty, most Redoubted, and the Mightiest Emperour of the Ʋniverse, our Master, the true Image of God upon Earth, who, by the Grace of the most High, in imitation of our holy Prophet 
Ma∣homet Mustapha,
 to whom be Honour, Glory, and Benediction, hath render'd himself, by the multitude of his Miracles, the greatest of all the Sovereigns of the one and th'other World, and most August of Em∣perours, who, having caused our innumerable Armies, protected always by Divine Providence, to come hither, We are resolved to take 
Vienna,
 and establish there the Cult of our Divine Religion; 'tis therefore, that before we draw our fatal Cymetars, as our chief End is the Propagation of the 
Musselman Faith,
 and that is expresly commanded us by the Laws of our 
Holy
 Pro∣phet, first and before all things, to exhort you to em∣brace our 
Holy Religion,
 we do hereby advertise you, that if you will cause your selves to be instructed in our Mysteries, you will find the Salvation of your Souls therein: If you will deliver up your City without fighting, whether you are young, or more advanced in years, Rich or Poor, we assure you that you may all live there peaceably. If any desire to quit the place, and go live elsewhere, no harm shall be done him in his Person or Goods, and he shall be conducted with his Family and Children whither he pleases. For such as will rather stay, they shall live in the City as they did before. But if you suffer us by your Obstinacy to take the City by force, we shall then spare no Body; and we swear by the 
Creator
 of 
Heaven
 and 
Earth,
 who neither hath, nor never will have his equal, that we shall put all to the Sword, as is ordained by our Law. Your Goods will be pillaged, and your Wives and Children will be carried away Slaves. We shall pardon only such who shall obey the Divine Orders.


Given at the Emperours Camp before 
Vienna,
 
the 8th of the Moon 
Regeb,
 in the year of the trans∣migration of the 
Prophet, 1094.




The Turks continued to deepen their Tren∣ches to four foot, and shot many Bombs, but without any considerable effect, most of them bursting in the Air, except some few, which falling near the Walls, burnt an old Play-house, which being of Wood, it was feared lest the Flames should reach the Convent and Church of the 
Augustines,
 which occasion'd its sudden demolishing.


There happened also another Accident, but more dangerous. The Fire having seized upon the 
Scots
 Church, consumed that stately Build∣ing, as also the House of 
Frendorf,
 lately perfe∣ctioned by the Bishop of 
Heliopolis,
 Suffragan to the Arch-bishop of 
Vienna.
 The flame proceed∣ed to the Arsenal, full of Powder and Muniti∣ons of War, which would have proved fatally ruinous, if 
Conte Serin
 had not caused the Gate, which they had in vain attempted to unlock, to be broken open, and immediately removed the Powder, which a few moments delay would have rendred impossible. But on the other side, they could not hinder the Fire to consume the Palaces of 
Aversberg, Traun,
 and 
Palsi,
 which were reduced to Ashes. A Boy of sixteen years old, habited like a Girl, was accused as guilty of this burning, being found thereabouts, who was by the enraged People immediately pull'd in pieces, so that the truth by this precipitated death could not be made known. This Fire continued three days, which if it had feised the Powder in the Arsenal, as in the year 1629, the

Turks might easily have entred that way into the City.


Since this Accident, the Infidels shot that way that they saw the flame appear, and endeavour∣ed to ruine the Court and the Lyon Bastions, with the Ravelin betwixt both; but the Be∣sieged bravely opposed them with their Sallies and Countermines. They wanted good En∣gineers in the City, insomuch that 
Hasner,
 a Captain of the Garrison, who from a private Souldier was by his Virtue come to that de∣gree, being observed to note all the faults the Miners committed in their Works, the conduct of them was committed to him, wherein he ac∣quitted himself with good Success.


Count 
Starenberg,
 who was Governour Gene∣ral, was all this while busie in repairing the Walls, deepning and palizadoing the Ditches, and in raising the Earth which was drawn out of the Ramparts and Retreats, to cover them∣selves when the first Posts and Parapets were thrown down, which afterwards contributed much to the defence of the Place.


The Turks advanced their Works on the Court and Lebel Bastions side, carrying them on within thirty paces of the Counterscharp, notwithstanding the continued fire of the Be∣sieged. They also discharged their Cannon and Mortars without ceasing, and intirely ru∣ined the Emperour's Palace, the Houses and neighbouring Churches.


Count 
Starenberg,
 who neglecting the danger, visited every moment the Posts, to see if his or∣ders were faithfully executed; upon his going out of the Court-Bulwark was hurt in the Head with a Brick-bat, which a Cannon bullet had forced. He was immediately carried to his Lodging, and so happily cured, that in three days he found himself able to quit his Bed and his Chamber; during his hurt, the Count of 
Daun
 was also incapable of acting, being dange∣rously sick of a violent Fever, which reduced him to extremity; so that he was not out of danger before the fourteenth Day of his Mala∣dy. But the Counts 
Serin, Souches,
 and 
Schaffen∣berg,
 Brigadiers of the Garrison, applied them∣selves with so much care for the defence of the Place, that the Enemy drew no advantage from this misfortune.


In the mean time, the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 find∣ing himself obliged to remove farther from the City, his first care was to molest the Enemy. Count 
Dunewald,
 Lieut. Marshal of the Field, was sent to 
Krembs
 with his Regiment, the two Re∣ments of 
Lodron,
 and 
Keri, Cravats, Kemgsegs
 Re∣giment of 
Polish
 Dragoons, were likewise di∣spatched thither, not only to keep the Bridge, which was of great Importance, but to hinder the Enemies Forragers, and oppose the Parties of 
Tartars
 which ravaged about. And here we may wonder at the Politicks of these Mis∣creants, who burn and ruine all the Forrages, and all the Victuals, which should make them subsist, and which would have very much ac∣commoded their Army in the distresses they af∣terwards found themselves.


Lorrain
 likewise sent Orders to Count 
Her∣mestein,
 who was in 
Styria,
 to advance to the Frontiers on the side of the Mountains, to at∣tempt the Enemies. He gave also the same Orders to the Garrisons of 
Raab
 and 
Comorra,
 and to 
Castel
's Dragoons who were at 
Newstat.
 He sent likewise to survey 
Closterneubourg,
 which is an Abbey upon the 
Danube.
 The Turkish Camp was but two Leagues off, and according to the report made to him of the Place, he judged it necessary to conserve this Post, which he did, by putting Foot into it, the which might descend the 
Danube
 upon occasion, if the Enemy came to attack them with Cannon.


He dispatch'd an Officer to 
Raab,
 for the Re∣giments of 
Grana
 and 
Baden,
 which the Duke of 
Croy
 brought him with so much diligence, that parting from 
Raab
 at Mid-night, they came in 24 hours to 
Presburg,
 and the next day to the Camp.


Count 
Lesley
 was sent to 
Krembs
 to conduct the Artillery thither, and to expect the 
Bavarians
 Au∣xiliaries, those of 
Saxony
 and 
Franconia,
 and some other loose Regiments in the Empire.


After these first Dispositions, which depen∣ded on the Duke's care, his thoughts more near∣ly regarded the Court, and the relief of 
Vienna.
 He judged the safety of this Place of such Im∣portance, that he thought it not fit it should be pressed, and reduced to Extremity, to search the means of saving it. He knew that the te∣diousness of Negotiations, and the distance from whence he was to expect things necessary for this grand Enterprise, would make him lose much time, whence he concluded that he could not begin too soon. He was not of the Senti∣ment of others, who imagined that the Garri∣son of 
Vienna
 was capable of defending it self against such extraordinary Troops, and cause the Grand Visier's Army to perish, without any Succour. But he knew that the want of Neces∣saries do sometimes produce great Changes in the best Resolutions, that no body could answer for the Governour's Life; nor for the principal Officers, nor for the constancy of the People, accustomed to an easie Life, and who had ne∣ver seen the Wars but in paint. He knew that the Maladies inevitable in Sieges might occasi∣on untoward Accidents. He saw the Desolation of the Emperour's Hereditary Countries, which did daily augment. He heard no other Dis∣course but of Places sacked, and People carried into slavery. In this Continuation of Cruelties and Violences, he judged it reasonable to use all means to stop the Rapidity of this Torrent. He perswaded himself, that being at the head of the Army, he ought not to deferr representing all these Particulars to the Emperour by some Person of Merit and Trust. He gave this Com∣mission to Count 
Taff,
 whom he dispatch'd to 
Hassau,
 and he continued the same Offices during the Siege, for all the Obstacles and Oppositions which he Encountred, whether by the Difficul∣ties of Passages, or the slender success of his Ne∣gotiations.


The Besiegers, who had drawn two parallel Lines, the one on the Court Bastion, and the other on the Lebel side, joyned them with another of Communication, and placed above thirty pieces of Battery against them. And though 
Vienna
 was environed with eleven Basti∣ons, the Enemy attack'd and battered but three during the whole Siege, which obliged the Go∣vernour to use all his care for their defence.


The Grand Visier took his Post on that side that regarded the Ravelin above-mentioned, with the Aga of the Janizaries, called as he was, 
Cara Mustapha,
 his 
Kiaia,
 and the Bassa of 
Rome∣lia;
 this last was slain with a Cannon bullet. The Attack on the right side towards the Court Bulwark was committed to 
Hussan,
 the Bassa of 
Damas,
 who, though brave, had been bea∣ten by Prince 
Ragotzki
 in 
Transilvania,
 by Count 
Souches
 at 
Lewentz,
 and by the King of 
Poland
 at 
Cocczin.
 This Bassa was seconded by the Seras∣quier, Janisary Aga, or Collonel of all the Foot.


Achmet,
 Bassa of 
Temiswar,
 commanded the left Attack towards the Lebel Bulwark. He had been 
Tefterdar,
 and died the Third of 
September
 of a Dyssentery. 
Hussan
 Bassa, who had also been his Highnesses Treasurer, was put in his Place.




I shall designedly pretermit the particulars of this Siege, as to the Approaches, Trenches, Bat∣teries, Minings, Counterminings, Attacks, Sal∣lies, and Contests, though carried on with ad∣mirable Valour and Constancy on both sides, as being particularised in the Journals of that Siege in all Languages, and of little or no use to my Country-men: And yet I shall omit no great Action, nor any thing that may be required of a just Historian.


Great was the firing on both sides, and a Gra∣nado falling on the 
Spanish
 Ambassadors Palace, reversed all his Stables. It would have done yet more harm without the Governours Precauti∣on, who had commanded 250 men, under their particular Officers, to march incessantly through the Streets to quench the artificial Fires occasi∣oned from their Bombs or otherwise.


Being, as we mentioned, close shut up, 
Count, Sta∣renberg
 was the more desirous to communicate Councils with the Duke of 
Lorrain;
 for which end he offered 100 Duckets to any that would but carry him a Letter, without the hazard of a return, but no man presented himself upon this occasion; and yet a Spy sent by the Duke arrived happily in the City, having traversed the four Branches of the 
Danube
 with his Letters hanged in a Bladder about his Neck; by these the Governour was informed, that he should certainly be relieved, and that the Troops of the Circles of the Empire, and the Hereditary Countries with which the King of 
Poland,
 who was at 
Olmitz,
 was to joyn, did daily arrive. In the mean time some Deserters brought News, and it was seen from the top of St. 
Stevens
 Stee∣ple, that the Infidels were making a Bridge of Boats over the 
Danube,
 a League off, to the end they might pass when they pleased into the Isle of 
Prater.
 They knew also that this Commissi∣on was given to the Vayvods of 
Wallachia
 and 
Moldavia,
 who employed 6000 of their Nation in the Work; but being the Turks suspected them, as being Christians, and that they were forced, the Visier ordered 
Achmet,
 Bassa of 
Mag∣nesia,
 a City in Natolia, who was camped in this Isle, and 
Chider,
 Bassa of 
Bosna,
 who had been 
Kiaia
 to the Sultana 
Asseki,
 to attend their Acti∣ons, and second them with six thousand 
Egyp∣tians.


The Baron of 
Kunitz,
 who was the Empe∣rours Resident with the Port, being then in the Camp, sent one of his Domesticks with a Letter to Count Starenberg, which was not very hard to do, though the Turks kept a very strict Guard, by reason that the Officers and Servants of all the Ministers which resided with the Grand Seignior, are habited as Turks, and speak the Language of the Country. The busi∣ness was kept so little secret, that the News be∣came the next day the subject of every Conver∣sation. This Indiscretion was the cause that they could no more profit by this Advantage, the Turks being advertised of this Commerce by their Spies. 
Kunitz
's Servant being seised up∣on in his return, was brought to the Visier, and seen no more, but without his Letters, which be∣ing wrap'd in wax, he prudently let slip into a Ditch, when he saw the Turks come towards him.


An Order was published by sound of Trum∣pet,
 commanding all Proprietors of Houses, to keep every one a Man in his Cellar, to hear∣ken if they could not discern any thumping or removing of Earth, because it had been nois∣ed abroad, that some Traitors had promised to bring the Enemy through Subterranean Passa∣ges into the City. The same day the Turks passing some great Pieces into 
Leopolstat
 upon Boats and Flotes, were discovered by the be∣sieged, who play'd upon them with their Can∣non from the Ramparts so lukily, that they sunk two of their largest, with a Mortarpiece, which yet did not hinder the rest to arrive at 
Neudorf
 and 
Erdorf.


The Cannon on both sides, together with the Mortars, play'd without ceasing, and though they ruined the prime Buildings in the Town, they hurt or killed but very few. The 
24th, Ni∣tiski,
 one of the Engineers, came in great haste to the Governour, to tell him, that he had seen in one of the Shores of the City, somewhat that had the Figure of a Man, and that it was to be feared, that the Turks had found a Passage, and were entered through this Vault, which disgor∣ges it self in the 
Danube,
 and that they designed to surprise the City that way. The Governour, not being yet well recovered of his hurt, sent 
Nit∣ski
 back, with the Baron of 
Wels,
 his Son-in-Law, and Collonel 
Rumblingen,
 who was present, to examine the matter with care; but being they stayed somewhat long, the Governour, weak as he was, mounted on Horseback. Being come to the place, he alighted, and entered himself, notwithstanding the infectious smells, into the hole, having searched all about with Torches, he found that they were Carkasses that the Ex∣ecutioners men had flead. He very sharply re∣proved the Authors of this Inhumanity, having accidentally met some of them, and returned to his Palace, pleasantly rallying this Pannick fear with those that accompanied him.


The Duke of 
Lorrain
 had continued in his Camp by the Bridges of 
Vienna
 to refresh his harassed Cavalry, from the 
16th
 to the 
25th
 of 
July.
 He had there News of the defeat of 800 
Tartars
 by a party of a Detachment which Count 
Dunewald
 Commanded, which render'd these 
Barbarians
 more reserved.


The Count 
de la Tour,
 the Emperours Envoy in 
Poland,
 came to the same Post to him, to as∣sure him, that that Prince promised to come to the relief of 
Vienna,
 but that he could not be there before the beginning of 
September.


At the same time the Duke of 
Lorrain
 was ad∣vertised that 
Tekely
 having assembled his Troops near 
Tirnau,
 designed to march to 
Presburg,
 that the Governour of that Castle wavered, and that the City was much sollicited to receive a Garrison of the discontented 
Hungarians;
 which obliged him to march along the 
Marck
 to oppose this design, and in the interim he sent 200 men with Major 
Okelby,
 to endeavour to put them in∣to the said Castle with a Convoy of 300 Horse for his Security.


The Duke discamp'd from the Bridges of 
Vienna,
 having burnt them, leaving notwith∣standing the Regiments of 
Savoy
 and 
Ricardi
 to preserve the Forts. Being arrived at the 
Mark,
 he was informed that 
Okelby
 with his Convoy were beaten by a party of the 
Malecontents;
 that the City had received a Garrison; that they were by order of the Grand Visier preparing a Bridge for the Communication of both Armies; that 
Tekely
 had 20000 
Hungarians,
 and 8000 
Turks,
 commanded by the Bassa of 
Waradin
 and 
Pest;
 and that he prepared to come and besiege the Castle of 
Presburg.
 This design appeared to the Duke of that consequence, that he believed himself obliged to march thither notwithstand∣ing all the Obstacles that seemed to oppose him. This resolve was however a great while conte∣sted. He considered the difficulty of the ways, the Enemies Forces much superior to his; the danger of receiving a check, in a time when the

Emperours Forces were to be preserved for re∣lief of 
Vienna.
 On the other side, he foresaw that the Communication of the two Armies at 
Pres∣burg
 did put the Enemies in a Condition to joyn their Forces to pass where they pleased, and to hinder the Conjunction of the Arms of 
Poland,
 or oblige them to tedious Circuits. These Con∣siderations made him determine to oppose the Designs of 
Tekely.
 He traversed the 
Marck
 the 
28th
 of 
July
 with his Horse and Dragoons, be∣ing in all eight thousand Horse, and two thou∣sand 
Poles,
 commanded by 
Lubomirsky.
 A party that appeared a League from the River, was forced back, the Imperialists continuing their march to the Lanes that descended to 
Presburg.
 Night being come on, Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden,
 and the Baron 
Mercy
 were detached with all the Dragoons to force the narrow Passages, and gain the tops of the Vineyards, which they did with∣out any Opposition, having a sight of the Enemy in the plain below. The General upon no∣tice came speedily there, from whence he obser∣ved two Camps posted at some distance from each other. He caused his Horse to advance, which he had left behind the narrow Passages, to be ready upon Occasion, and in the mean time caused 
Okelby
 to enter the Castle with two hundred Men, commanded a-new for this Enter∣prise.


At break of day, the General commanded Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden
 to inspect the Suburbs, where some Malecontents did appear. Upon his advance, the Enemy retreated into the City, and abandoned the said Suburbs without resist∣ance.


This happy Success, and that in sight of the Enemy, seemed an Argument of their Weak∣ness, and occasioned the summoning of the Town, which, in the Surprise it was, seeing the Imperial Army at their Gates, and the Garri∣son of the Castle reinforced, immediately sur∣rendred, deliberating no longer than was ne∣cessary to give means to the Garrison of the Malecontents to retire to their Camp; which did not happen, for one part of them was cut in pieces when they were out, and the other made Prisoners in the Town.


After this advantage, the Duke was resolved to attack the Enemy, who were advanced in Batalia within three quarters of an hour of the City. He gave Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden
 Orders to seise with his Dragoons the Vineyards and Gar∣dens at the head of the Suburbs, and to extend on both hands from the 
Danube
 to the foot of the Mountain; whilst the Horse, commanded by Count 
Caprara,
 descended by the same Vineyards to embattel themselves.


The Enemy on their side made some moti∣ons of coming up to the Imperialists, and de∣tached some Parties to begin the Skirmish; but the Duke would not Engage them before all his Troops were in Battel-array. As soon as the se∣cond Line was formed, they began to advance; which occasioned the Malecontents to change their Countenance, for whereas they had ap∣peared, as if designing to bring the business to a Battel, much Dust appeared in the Rear of their right Wing, as also the left, and removed far∣ther off, which seemed to be occasioned by re∣tiring Troops, which also proved so; all the Line which stood opposite to the Imperialists, wheeling and separating into a perfect Re∣treat.


Those who were on the 
Lorrainers
 right, and had a Party of 
Polanders
 in opposition to them, finding themselves pressed by their A∣yantguard were intirely routed, being chased with considerable loss, until they had gained a Wood, and passed a Brook two miles off, they there rallied on the other side, and obliged the Troops that had pressed them to a stand. On the left, another detachment of 
Poles,
 second∣ed by some 
German
 Squadrons, and the Regi∣ment of 
Palfi,
 charged the Enemy with so much Vigour, that having broken them, they kill'd and took betwixt five and six hundred of them. They seised on above a thousand Waggons with Baggage, and pursued them towards 
Tirnau
 with so much heat, that they forced some of them with great Confusion into the Woods, and others in∣to the 
Danube.
 The fear was such, that they fled on all sides until they had passed the 
Waagh.


Tekely,
 upon the Advice he had of the march of the Imperialists, by the Party he had beaten the Night before, he retired in the Night with the greatest part of his Horse and all his Foot, leaving but few of his Men with the Turks, who would retire as he did, resolving to expect the 
Germans.
 This Action produced some mis∣understanding betwixt the 
Tekelists
 and the 
In∣fidels,
 who separated with little satisfaction from each other; but they re-united since by order of the Grand Visier, as was found by their in∣tercepted Letters. The Duke in the mean time caused the Timber, the Planks, and the Boats prepared for the Construction of the designed Bridge to be destroyed; and afterwards returned to the 
Marck.


The Siege, 
 in the mean time, as also the de∣fence was bravely carried on; one Day the Turks divertised themselves with a consort of Flutes, Cymbals, and other Instruments of their Fashion, and the terrible howlings of the Assi∣stants, which they account Melodious, deno∣ting, as was supposed by their joy, some extra∣ordinary Feast. The Besieged that were in the Counterscharp, but ten Paces off, could not forbear rallying these 
Barbarians,
 and ask them in scorn to give them part in the Divertise∣ment of their Ball, being they had given them that of their Musick. And the Ball did truly follow, but the Leapers were on the Christians side: For these Infidels having sprung a Mine, which they had newly dug, under the Posts and Pallizadoes of the Counterscharp, the Earth, with a good part of the Pallizado, and about ten of the Defendants were blown up, The Turks taking advantage of the Opportu∣nity, used all their might to render themselves Masters of the Counterscharp, by the breach they had made in it. The Fight was hot, and the Slaughter great. The Confusion and Dis∣order grew high, but most amongst the Chri∣stians, which being perceived by Count 
Serini,
 and St. 
Croix,
 Lieutenant Collonel to 
Dupigni,
 they ran with a hundred Men to their Aid, and employing them to throw hand Granadoes, and other artificial Fires upon the Enemy, so encouraged their Friends, that they fell with revived Courage upon the Enemy, beat them back and kill'd a great number of them, plan∣ting the Heads of the slain in rows upon their Pallizadoes, letting these 
Barbarians
 know that Christian Walls would not tumble with noise of Instruments and showting, as the Walls of 
Je∣rico
 once did.


A Messenger being sent to the Duke of 
Lor∣rain
 a second time with Letters in Cyfer, was unhappily taken by the Turk, and his Letters being tyed to an Arrow, were shot again into the Town, with Latin lines affixed to them, intimating, that they sent this Letter to the Be∣sieged, being it was to no purpose to send it to 
Lorrain;
 being assured, that in the ill Conditi∣on

the place was in, it would be taken before the Succours could arrive.


The Governour published an Ordinance, 
 whereby all Persons, of what Quality or Condi∣tion soever they were, being able to bear Arms, and had not yet listed themselves in the Compa∣nies of the University, or those of the Magi∣strates, should appear at the New-Market upon the noise of the Bells, to be inrolled, and form a fourth Body, which was done; In the mean time, many Christians taken by the 
Tartars,
 being shaved, and in Turkish habits, found means to save themselves, and escape into the City.


The Turks continued their Labours, and the Advancement of their Works; and to hin∣der the Effect of the Bombs which were continu∣ally thrown out of the City, they covered their Trenches with great Beams and Trees, upon which they threw Sacks of Earth in abundance, which not only closed the chinks, but rendred it proof against Granadoes, as also Musket shot. When this Work was finished, not only the principal Bassaes, but the Visier himself came to view the Trenches, and lodged in them, ha∣ving their separate Apartments, pav'd with Brick, and divided into Chambers, with all the conveniencies of great Houses.


There arrived an Express in the Camp,
 which informed the Duke, that the King of 
Po∣land
 would not part from 
Cracovia
 till the 
16th
 Instant; that the Troops of 
Saxony
 would have their Rendezvous at 
Dresden
 the 
4th,
 and that those of 
Frankonia,
 would not begin to march before the 
11th:
 These Succours appearing re∣mote, and the duration of the Defence of 
Vienna
 incertain, his Highness resolved to approach the Enemies Quarters. He thought that he should be able by the Twentieth of 
August,
 with his Forces, as well 
Imperialists
 as 
Bavarians,
 and the Troops of 
Polanders
 which should en∣ter into 
Silesia;
 to pass the 
Daunbe
 at 
Krembs,
 and advance with that Body towards the Heights near the Camp of the Enemies, with design to maintain himself there till the arri∣val of the Allies. During this, he might wea∣ry out the Infidels, animate the Besieged in their Defence, and hold himself in a Condition to force a Post for the relief of the Place, ac∣cording to the necessity of Affairs. He sent Count 
Palfi
 to Court, to acquaint his Imperial Majesty with the Design, and press the march of the Troops, which might be got together by that time; and some other disposal of Boats and Provisions necessary for that Expedition.


After he had dispatch'd the Count, he was informed, that Count 
Tekely
 had sent Boats to the Turks, that he had passed the 
Danube,
 and that they were seen from 
Entserdorff,
 a little Town seated upon that River where the Im∣perialists had some Magazins. The Duke marched thither with four Regiments, and thence to the Bridge of 
Vienna,
 where, having learned that the Enemy had possessed them∣selves of a small Island, and that they had taken Boats from the Peasants, who had retired into the said Isle, he ordered the Baron of 
Mercy
 to dislodge them thence, and returned to 
Entser∣dorff. Mercy
 caused his Cannon to advance up∣on the opposite shoar to the Isle, with the Dra∣goons of 
Savoy
 which guarded the Bridge, and having broken these Boats with his great Shot, he reduced the Turks to an Inability of being able to get out of the 
Tabor
 or 
Leopold
's Isle.


As soon as 
Tekely
 understood that the Impe∣rialists were returned towards 
Vienna,
 he sum∣moned 
Moravia
 to pay him Contribution. The Duke being advertised of it, returned to 
Ancren
 upon the 
Mark,
 to defend that Province against the 
Malecontents.
 He was informed upon his arrival there, that a party of them had repas∣sed that River that day, and burnt some Vil∣lages. He detached presently 500 
Polanders
 to pursue them, seconding them with some Horse and Dragoons, who encountering them two Leagues from 
Ancren,
 loaden with Spoyl, they attack'd them so briskly, though far inferior in number, that they killed 500, released the Pri∣soners, recovered all the Booty, and took ten or twelve of their Standards.


The Siege was carried on with no less brave∣ry than it was sustained; and being several who were out of Employment were necessitous, an Ordinance was published, intimating that Monies and Provisions should be given to all such who would inroll themselves, with assurance they should not be obliged to serve after the Siege. Many accepted of the Condition, received three Patacoons each advance Moneys, and were re∣galled with Bread and Wine, by the care of the Prince of 
Swartzenberg,
 and by the Liberality of the Religious and the Citizens. Wine never failed, nor indeed fresh Meat for the sick, store of Cattel having been twice brought in by sally during the Siege. The Magistrates had by the Governours Order taxed the Ecclesiasticks, the Cloysters, the Citizens, and the Peasants, who were refuged in the City, to furnish for the use of the Souldiers the hundredth Pint, which was punctually executed, there being none that re∣fused to pay this Imposition: the greatest Lords and the Emperours Officers not exempting themselves upon this Occasion.


St. 
Stephens
 Steeple, being very obnoxious to the Turks by reason of its height, and the great extent of its Discoveries, was much shot at by them, though 
Solyman,
 when he besieged 
Vienna,
 had declined ruining so noble a Fabrick, upon no other Terms, but that they should put a a Half Moon, the Arms of that Empire, upon the Spire of it, which was still up. The Cen∣tinel that was there the 
7th,
 perceived betwixt the River 
Mark
 and 
Moravia,
 on the other side the 
Danube,
 Fire and Smoke, which lasted till eight a Clock; 
C. Starenberg
 judg'd they were 
C. Tekely
's Troops, who in passing the 
Waagh,
 had skirmished with the Imperialists, and it proved so, as he found by the return of one of his Spyes, which he had sent to the Duke. The account he gave was, that the Turks having detatched 3000 Horse to discover the Succors which were arrived in the Princes Army, out of 
Saxony, Bavaria,
 and the Circles, these Infi∣dels fell into an Ambuscade which was laid for them, and where most of them were cut in pie∣ces; that an Aga, Count 
Tekely
's Secretary, and an 
Hungarian
 Count, since dead of his Wounds, were taken Prisoners; that the Imperialists had taken a great number of the Enemies Waggons with Baggage, and that since this Advantage, many of the chief of the Malecontents were come in to the Duke.


Collonel 
Heister
 having passed the 
Danube
 at 
Closternemburg,
 took four hundred of the Enemies Horse. On the other side, the Malecontents con∣tinued to send small parties into 
Moravia,
 who set fire by Night on the Houses and Villages; and as it was a hard matter to remedy these Disorders by force of Arms, the Duke judged that the best way to repress them was by that of Reprizals. He caused 
Tekely
 to be advertised, that he would send Orders to 
Zatmar,
 and to all the Emperours Garrisons, to burn the Palaces and Houses of all them of his party. This

threatning put a stop to these Incendiaries; for he thereupon sent a Person to 
Chevalier Labor∣miski,
 under pretext of an Envoy to the King of 
Poland,
 to the end he might inform the Duke of 
Lorrain
 that he had not commanded those burn∣ings, and that they should hear no more of them.


About this time, Count 
Albret Caprara,
 the Em∣perours Envoy at 
Constantinople,
 had Permission given him by the Grand Visier, to return to his Master, and having passed by 
Tuln,
 he had in charge to propose to his Imperial Majesty, that upon the Cession of 
Raab
 he would aban∣don the Siege of 
Vienna.


Kotlinski,
 a Lieutenant, upon promise of the first vacant Company, had been dispatched from 
Vienna
 to the Duke, one from the Depu∣ties of the Council of State, and the rest from the County 
Caplier
 and 
Starenberg.
 The first, for they were of several dates, marked the danger the Counterscharp was in, others gave an ac∣count of the state of the Siege, minding him of the Necessities of the place, and the Accidents that might happen, and praying him to hasten the Succours, and these were writ by the Gover∣nour. 
Caplier
's Letters particulariz'd the slain and wounded, finishing with earnestness for Relief, praying him to consider the Officers, their want of Granados, their stock being near spent, and the Disposition of the Citizens not to be relied upon. The last Letter marked, that 
C. Staren∣berg
 was sick of a bloody Flux, and could an∣swer for nothing, unless Succours were great and quick.


The Duke, who was careful in informing the Emperour, the King of 
Poland,
 and the Elector of 
Saxony,
 of all he could learn of the state of the besieged, failed not to quicken the Auxilia∣ries, to communicate his Intelligence and Let∣ters to them. He dispatch'd Count 
Caraffa
 to the King of 
Poland
 with them, and hasten'd the march of General 
Sinariski,
 who was come into 
Silesia
 six days since. This Count had also in charge, to pray his Majesty of 
Poland
 to come with the first Troops, as well for the esteem he had of his Merits, as because he believed that upon the Kings advance the gross of his Army would follow with more diligence. After he had dis∣patched 
C. Caraffa,
 he sent the Count 
Schaffen∣berg
 to the Elector of 
Saxony,
 to provide Wag∣gons and Carriages for the Auxiliary Troops by the way as they should pass. As he did not doubt but that these pressing Letters would quicken th advance of the Troops, he thought he was obliged to provide also for the passage of the 
Danube,
 and in order to it resolved to go to 
Krembs,
 whereof he advertised the Emperour by an Express. About the same time 
C. Starenberg
 had News from his Highness of the defeat of 
C. Tekely
 near 
Presburg,
 as also of the taking of a great Convoy that was going to the 
Ottoman
 Army, and that the King of 
Poland
 was upon his march to succour the Place. This good News infused Joy into the whole City, and was wel∣comed with all the Artillery, and the ringing of all their Bells. As every little Success encourages Souldiers at least to hope, so it far'd here. A Scholar having killed a Janizary, and ripped open his Stomach, found ten Duckats in Gold in it; and a Souldier having after a stiff Com∣bat disarmed a Janizary, cut off his Head with his own Sable; Searching him afterwards, he found a Girdle about him full of Moneys, which he hid so well that his Comrades did not discover it: Being returned into the City, ha∣ving unstitch'd his purchase, he found an 100 Sequins of Gold. He was so transported at the sight with Joy, that he ran like a Mad-man through the Strees, clapping his Hands, and shewing his Gold to every body, making it ap∣pear by his Extravagancies, that he thought himself happier than the Emperour. His good Fortune gave Courage to his Companions, upon hopes of the like Adventure, making them good Anatomists and diligent Waiters.


The Duke of 
Lorrain
 left 
Anneren
 encampt at 
Volgerdorp.
 He there received Letters from the Count 
Caplier
 and 
Starenberg.
 The first pressed strongly for Relief, by reason of the Diminution of the Garrison, and the Ammunitions of War. The Style of the second Letter was upon the brave, and seemed of a Person not greatly con∣cerned; but in the three last Lines, being in Cypher, he besought the Duke for speedy Suc∣cours, because the Retrenchments and cuttings off in the Lebel Bastion were very slight; that his Ammunitions and Officers failed him, and that he every day lost many of his Men. His Highness return'd him answers full of comfort, advertising him of the state of the advance of the Auxiliaries, and the certitude of his Relief. In order to it, be quits 
Volgerdorp,
 and march∣ed to 
Stokerau,
 the better from thence to disco∣ver the Isles of the 
Danube,
 and chuse a place for making a Bridge for his Passage.


Some of the great ones were of Opinion, that 
Vienna
 ought to be relieved by the Plain, passing the 
Danube
 at 
Presburg,
 this Opinion found ma∣ny partisans, their reason was that the Army posting it self above the City, would cut off the Communication of the Besiegers with those Countries from whence they drew their Pro∣visions; which being done, they judged the Turks would retire, without the Christians hazarding of a Battel. This reasoning did not want appearance, if it could be done before the Besieged were too much pressed; but the Enemies main force consisting in Horse, that of the Imperialists in Foot, the Duke thought Inclosures preferrable to the Plains; besides, the Allies not being able to meet at 
Krembs
 be∣fore the Month of 
September,
 many days would be spent in marching thence to 
Presburg,
 and laying a Bridge over the River there, in a time when the condition of the Siege deman∣ded all their haste. Moreover the Constructi∣on of a Bridge in that place was difficult, espe∣cially if the Enemy detached any strong Parties to oppose them, as they might easily do; in∣somuch that the Duke, who had in the begin∣ning of the Siege looked upon the Mountains of 
Kalemberg
 as the surest way for the Relief of 
Vienna,
 without any farther amusing himself, re∣solved to pass the Army at 
Tuln
 and 
Krembs,
 dis∣posing all things accordingly for the Execution of this Design. He did not believe the Enemy would come thither to oppose him, not only be∣cause part of his Army, and of that of the 
Ba∣varians
 was already on the other side of the 
Da∣nube,
 and maintained themselves there, with∣out attempts of the 
Turks
 to dislodge them; but also because it would be dangerous for these Infi∣dels to engage themselves with a great Body of Horse beyond the Streights or narrow Passages of the Forest of 
Vienna.


Many were the Messengers and Spies which past betwixt the Duke and Besieged, his High∣ness being careful to encourage and inform them. He now again assures them, that the Army composed of 
Bavarians, Saxons, Poles,
 and the Imperial Troops approach'd 
Krembs;
 That the King of 
Poland
 Commanded it in Person, and that he was accompanied by the Electors of 
Bavaria
 and 
Saxony;
 That the Emperour

was removed from 
Passaw
 to 
Lintz,
 to be near∣er 
Vienna,
 so that now there was nothing more required for the saving of Christendom, but a little more resistance, being all the Troops were ready to march. He added, that he himself was going to 
Krembs,
 to prepare the Bridges and eve∣ry other necessary thing, to the end that nothing should retard the Succour of the Place, assuring moreover the Governour, that he would expose himself to all dangers to force the Enemy from the Siege. Fortune did begin now to favour them, being 
Tekely
 had been defeated at 
Pres∣burg,
 and by the River of 
Marcka
 with great loss. This News caused a sensible Joy in all the Inha∣bitants, and particularly the Ecclesiasticks, where∣of many were troubled with bloody Fluxes, and very many considerable Persons had been dead of it. The cause of this Disease may well be at∣tributed to the ill Diet, the richest sort being forced to eat salt meats, differing from the De∣licacies of their former feeding, besides the Meal they made their Bread of was neither clean nor well ground.


The Duke in the mean time caused some Troops of the Regiments of 
Grana
 and 
Baden
 to secure 
Tuln,
 where there was a stone Wall and a Ditch, for he designed to preserve that Town, and make it one of the heads of his Bridge: the next day he went to discover the Ilets of the 
Da∣nube,
 and having found them useful for his De∣sign, he commanded ways to be made in them, and Boats to b
 
rought thither. Upon his re∣turn he found Count 
Palsi
 arrived from 
Lintz,
 with orders from the Emperour, that it was necessary he should expect the arrival of all the Allies before he approached near the Enemies.


About this time a noise was spread in the Ci∣ty, that the Turks, who incessantly mined and moved the Earth, had made a Subterranean passage which should open into the Emperours Cellars, by which they pretended to surprise the Town. The Governour, howbeit he belie∣ved nothing of it, ordered the Emperours Guards which were left for the Guard of the Palace, to keep watch and Centinels in the Cellars, which they did with no great regret. The same day there happened an accident, which for the rare∣ness of it may well be recorded. 
Kimpler,
 an able Engineer, working in a Countermine under the Castle-Gate, encountered, deep in the Earth within a walled Vault,
 a Coffin of Tin, where∣in he thought to have found a dead Corps, but opening it, he was dazzled with the lustre of a great many pieces of Gold and Silver, where∣with this Coffin was filled; he saw moreover rich Jewels enriched with precious Stones. Ha∣ving secured this Treasure, he found in the bot∣tom a Box of Tin, wherein was a Parchment where the following words were traced in an∣cient Characters.


GAUDEBIS SI INVENERIS, VIDEBIS, TACEBIS, SED ORABIS, PUGNABIS, AEDIFICABIS, NON HODIE, NEC CRAS, SED QUIA UNIVERSUS EQUUS, TURRIS ERECTA ET ARMATA, DIVERSA ORDINATA ARMA SUBSCRIPTIO ROLLANDT HUNN. MOG. POSUIT.


Those who would divine the Sentiments of 
Rowland Hun
 of 
Mets,
 who had deposited this Treasure in the Earth, pretended he had some Knowledge of the future, and that by this In∣scription he would manifest that he knew this Treasure would be found during the Siege of 
Vienna,
 and that the Infidels should be obliged to abandon it. Their Sense of the words follows. 
Rowland
 speaking to 
Kimpler,
 says to him. 
Si in∣veneris,
 If thou dost find what I have hid from all others, 
videbis, tacebis,
 thou wilt consider these words, and discover thy good Fortune to no body, 
sed orabis, pugnabis,
 but thou shalt ren∣der thanks unto God for reserving these Riches for thee, and, as obliged in gratitude, thou shalt fight against the Enemies of his Name; 
aedifica∣bis, non hodie nec cras,
 Thou shalt imploy the Mo∣nies I designed for thee to build Churches; but it shall not be when thy Native Country is deso∣lated by War; it shall not be neither to day nor tomorrow, 
sed quia universus equus,
 thou would'st ill take thy time whilst the 
Ottoman
 Cavalry sur∣round the Walls of the City; 
Turris erecta & armata,
 but fear nothing, the Ramparts raised for the defence of the City, and the brave Soul∣diers that Garrison it, will preserve it from the vain attempts of the Enemy. 
Diversa ordinata Ar∣ma,
 The Arms of the different Nations that thou seest arrayed in these Plains, shall only serve to render the Victories more glorious, their Triumph more splendid, and the flight of the Turks more infamous.


Count 
Starenberg
 received new assurance by his Spies from the Duke,
 of being relieved in eight days, which caused an universal Joy, re∣doubled the Care, and augmented the Courage of all men. On the other side, the Infidels pre∣pared for a general assault, whilst the Gover∣nour on the contrary did every day invent new Engines, as 
Freize
 Horses bearded with Iron, turn'd Pikes, and the like, to oppose in the Breaches. Five hundred Horse of the Besiegers passing the River, burnt some Villages, but they were encountered and defeated by a party of the Imperialists, commanded by Collonel 
Heister,
 who cut in pieces the greatest part of them, the rest endeavouring to save themselves by swim∣ming being drowned in the River.


We lest the Duke of 
Lorrain
 marching to∣wards 
Tuln,
 but upon advice that the 
Malecon∣tents
 were designing to make Incursions into 
Moravia,
 he detach'd 
Lubomirski,
 and two Re∣giments of the Emperours Horse to march to∣wards the Frontiers of that Province. This Report was grounded upon the Grand Visiers Order, who upon the Knowledge he had that the Imperialists and Auxiliaries took the way of 
Tuln
 and 
Krembs,
 had commanded Count 
Tekely
 to enter into the Hereditary Countries with Fire and Sword, thereby to oblige the Imperialists to return back to their defence. But the 
Malecontents
 having no mind to engage with the Duke, 
Tekely
 was contented to encamp upon the 
Mark;
 however, in obedience to the Grand Visiers Order, he caused the 
Tartars
 and 
Turks
 that were with him to enter into 
Austria,
 having promised to follow and second them with his Army.


The Duke being advertised that the Infidels were burning the Villages towards 
Eversdorf,
 changed his march, having sent orders to 
Lubo∣miski,
 who was in the Avant-guard to hault, and instead of marching towards 
Tuln,
 he went to meet the Turks, leaving his Baggage at 
Stoka∣reau
 with the Regiment of 
Rokondi,
 leaving to Count 
Lesley
 the Care of the Execution of those things which he had resolved in order to the Passage of the 
Danube,
 and the Conjunction of the Auxiliary Forces. The Duke being come to the height of 
Pisemberg
 about two of the Clock, he could see the continuing of the Fires; he

thereupon sent Parties out, who made some Pri∣soners. They were questioned, and answered, that the preceeding Night they had passed the 
Marck
 with a Body of twenty five thousand 
Turks
 and 
Tartars;
 that 
Tekely
 followed them, and their Camp was but half a League from the Bridges of 
Vienna.


The Duke hereupon immediately command∣ed Baron 
Mercy,
 with some Troops, to the top of the height to discover the Enemy. Upon his report he put the Army in Battalia, extend∣ing his right Wing towards the Wood, under the command of the Counts 
Caprara
 and 
Rabotta,
 posting the Dragoons there, and some small Field-pieces; and the left Wing was extended along the Plain under the Conduct of Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden.
 He drew the whole into two Lines, and a reserve, on the right whereof 
Lu∣bomirski
's 
Poles
 were placed. The Imperial Ar∣my was composed of thirteen Regiments of Horse, and five of Dragoons, besides 
Lubomirs∣ki
's two thousand 
Poles.
 Whilst the Imperialists formed their Squadrons, the Turks likewise ranged theirs, leaving the gross of their Troops in the bottom of the Plain. They began a line upon the heights extending to the left, as if de∣signing to gain the flank of the Imperialists. As soon as they were approached each other, they began to skirmish, and as the Armies grew near, the Infidels detach'd two great Troops, the one of 
Turks,
 which moved easily, and the other of 
Tartars,
 who advanced towards the left. Some Volleys of Cannon which the Emperours Dra∣goons had on their right, did somewhat disor∣der the Turks whilst they advanced, but did not hinder them to charge the 
Poles
 with much firmness. They immediately routed two squa∣drons, and with a surprising Vigour, or rather Temerity, passed even to the second Line, as well by the way they had made, as by the in∣terval which the Imperial Horse had left, re∣ceiving in their Passage the fire of all the Neigh∣bour squadrons which flank'd them in this charge. Notwithstanding that, some of them penetrated even to the Reserves, and endeavour∣ed to return by the same way they came, and after the same manner, but few of them came off.


On the left Wing, the 
Tartars
 having endea∣voured by small Troops to gain the flank of the Christians, were not more luckey, for those that past were cut in pieces by others that were sent against them, or obliged to return to their main body; after which, the Imperialists ad∣vancing always in good order to attack the whole front of the Turks, the Enemy separa∣ted before they could come up to them. One part took the way towards the 
Marck,
 and the other towards the Bridges of 
Vienna.
 They were followed some time without being overtaken. Those that took on the 
Danube
 side, finding themselves pursued, that the 
Poles
 were not far off, and that the whole Army marched that way, betook themselves to the only expedient for their escape, which was to cast themselves into the River, and endeavour a Passage by the remaining Posts and Pillars of the burnt Bridge, leaving their Arms, their Horses, and their Equipage on the brink of the River; but most of these were drowned, and the rest all kill'd or taken. The Night being come on, the Duke camped where he was. On the morrow he was presented with several Standards, Timbals, and Drums, and some Prisoners of note were like∣wise brought to him. The Turks lost, as was discovered by their own intercepted Letters, from a thousand to twelve thousand Men, ma∣ny were killed upon the place, but many were drowned. The Chams Son was hurt, but saved himself by swimming upon his Horse. The Bassa of 
Erlaw
 was slain, with many Officers. The next Morning some Prisoners were taken, found hid in the Hedges and Bushes. Their Army consisted of near fourteen thousand 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 all Horse, but that of the Malecon∣tents stayed at the 
Marck.


The Duke came the same day to 
Cronenberg,
 to refresh his Horse which had been upon Service twenty four hours, with design to go and fight the Malecontents if they continued in their Post. He sent, for this purpose, to General 
Siemariski,
 who was come to 
Nekelburg
 with a body of Horse, being the King of 
Polands
 Avaunt-Guard, to meet him the next day upon the way to 
Volgers∣dorff;
 but being upon his March, he had News that the 
Tekelists
 were retired to 
Tirnau;
 that the King had sent order to his General to attend him at 
Nekelburg,
 and that his Majesty would be at 
Krembs
 the first of 
September.
 The Duke hereupon returned to his Camp at 
Cronenburg,
 to expect the arrival of the 
Polish
 Army.


They seemed in the Town in much distress, for the Governour had caused forty Rockets to be fir'd from the top of St. 
Stephens
 Steeple, to advertise the Duke of the straits they were in, and the necessity of being suddenly relieved. The Grand Visier seemed to scorn these signs, answering them with two hundred Cannon shot. And yet it was observed, that the Infidels sent many Camels laden with Baggage and se∣veral Servants towards 
Presburg,
 probably to secure them in case they should be forced to raise the Siege.


The same day, the Duke sent the Chevalier 
Lubormiski
 to compliment the King of 
Poland,
 who had also orders to inform his Majesty of the measures they had taken for the relief of 
Vi∣enna:
 and that it seemed to require all their haste, as the Counts 
Capliers
 and 
Starenberg
 signified by their Letters, the Place being reduced to Extre∣mity, but writ in such Terms which made it evident they would defend it with their Lives, but could answer for nothing else.


The Grand Visier did in the mean time or∣der the 
Walachians
 to endeavour to rebuild the Bridges of 
Vienna,
 to the end that they might, by a diversion that way, retard the march of the Imperialists, or employ a considerable body by that means. As the Waters were grown ex∣tream low since the Bridges were ruined, inso∣much that the Pillars which had been then burnt level with the Water, appeared now three or four foot above Water which gave room for this Enterprise. They were furnished with Timber out of the Neighbouring Villages, and the Work was carried on by the 
Walachians
 and 
Moldavians
 with so much diligence, that near a third of the great Bridge was laid in two Nights.


The Duke having notice hereof, caused Boats to be prepared for the retaking of those Posts which he had quitted in the Isles. The Count 
Archinto
 and Collonel 
Heyster
 were employed herein, who on the Night of the 
31th
 of 
August
 re-entered their old Retrenchments, planting there some Pieces of Cannon. Upon break of day they began to play upon the Turks, who were so greatly incommoded by the continual firing of great and small shot, that they were ob∣liged to quit their Enterprise. They afterwards applyed Pitch and Tar Barrels to the Pillars that remained, and so burnt them. The same day the Turks sent away many Camels, Wag∣gons loaden with Baggage, and part of their Artillery, which they conducted towards the

Forest of 
Vienna.
 After Noon, those who were upon the Ramparts heard several Musket shots the way that these Infidels marched, which made them guess that they were skirmishing with the 
Pickeerers
 of the Christian Army, and that consequently the Succors were near hand.


At the same time, the Duke of 
Lorrain
 being advertised that the King of 
Poland
 lay at 
Heil∣bron,
 left the command of the Army to Count 
Caprara,
 and went to give this Prince a visit. He met him at the Head of his 
Hussars,
 and alight∣ing from his Horse, when he was come within twenty five paces of him, moved towards him, which his Majesty perceiving, he likewise de∣scended, met him and embraced him, and after some obliging discourse, he presented the Prince his Son to him, saying, he would have him to be his Servant, as he was, and that he had brought him with him to teach him betimes to serve the Emperour. The Senators, the Pala∣tines, and the principal Officers of the Crown, did likewise complement the Duke. The King and Duke mounted on Horseback, and having passed the Troops, continued their march, dis∣coursing the whole time together. When they arrived in the Camp, they entered the Kings Tent, together with the Prince and the Grandees of 
Poland,
 where the Duke entertained his Ma∣jesty with the main Discourses that tended to the Affairs in hand.


The Prince of 
Waldeck,
 who had no Oppor∣tunity to speak with the Duke in the Kings Tent, went to attend him at 
Stokarcau,
 where he communicated all his Thoughts, and agreed with him of the Manner and Method they were to use in relieving the Place.


The Duke dined that day with the King, sit∣ting at the upper end on the Right-Hand of the King, the Prince being seated on his left, all three in Chairs with backs. Some Palatines and Officers of the Imperial Army were also placed at the Table by the Kings Order. After this repast the Duke returned to his Camp very well satisfied with the Civilities done him by his Majesty, who likewise approved of all what this Prince had proposed to him, and upon his reite∣rated Instances he made to him for hastening the Conjunction of his Forces, he sent Orders to his Great General, who was stayed behind, to hasten his march. The King himself resolved to be at 
Krembs
 the second of 
September,
 where the Em∣perour was to come to agree about the Conjun∣ction and Passage of the Armies.


In the mean time the Emperour, who should have come to 
Krembs,
 not only to animate and authorise the Expedition by his Presence, but also to allay the infinite Difficulties which the Competition of so many Princes would occasi∣on, was retained at 
Lintz
 by an Indisposition of Health. Thus the Care of all was left to the Duke of 
Lorrain;
 as also to regulate the Preten∣sions of the Auxiliary Armies. Having at length found Expedients for all these Difficulties, he went and acquainted the King of 
Poland
 with what he had designed, which being highly ap∣proved of, he went thence to 
Otelsdorff,
 where at his intreaty the Duke of 
Saxony,
 and all the Ge∣nerals met him. After some Contestations, the Passage of the 
Danube,
 and the Conjunction of all the Auxiliaries was resolved upon, which was to be 
September
 5. in the Plains of 
Tuln.
 It was determined that the 
Polish
 Army, with that of the Emperours, should pass where they were. That the 
Saxons
 should traverse the River upon the Bridge at 
Krembs,
 and whereas the 
Bavari∣ans
 with some 
German
 Troops camped there un∣der the Command of Count 
Lesley,
 they should all march in body to 
Tuln,
 to joyn the Imperial Army, and that of 
Poland.


The Princes upon Consultation deferred the Execution of this Design till the seventh. The King began to pass the sixth, in the Evening. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 after having detached the Contes of 
Lodrox, Riccardi
 and 
Herberwiller,
 with their Regiments, and two Batalions of 
Lorrain,
 to joyn 3000 
Poles,
 which the King ought to add to them to form a Body to cover 
Moravia;
 he sent Collonel 
Heyster
 with 600 Horse to 
Clo∣sterneuburg,
 with orders to make Fires upon the heights of 
Khalenberg,
 to advertise the besieged by this sign, which was concerted betwixt them, of the approach of their relief.


The besieged had been extreamly pressed, for the Turks had finished their Galleries, and at∣tacked the two Bastions of 
Lebel
 and the 
Court,
 so that the besieged did daily by Messages and Rockets advertise their Friends of the extremi∣ty they were reduced to, the Enemy being now attacked to the very body of the place, having made a great breach in the Court Bastion. The sixth at Night they were greatly encouraged by the firing of five Fusees or Rockets upon the Mountain of 
Kalenberg,
 which made them judge their help near hand, and which they answered by the like Signal.


The Grand Visier, not ignorant of the Chri∣stians motion, on the seventh commanded a re∣view of his Troops to be made, which upon enquiry were represented to him by his Officers to amount to 168000 Men; a List whereof was found in his Tent, as also in that of 
Reiz Effendi,
 or chief Secretary, the which we have omitted here, not to puzzle the course of History with hard Names: but shall however, to satisfie the more curious, subjoyn not only that, but an ex∣act account of the Christian Army that raised this celebrious Siege, and also of those Worthies who deserve to have their Memories transferred to Posterity, for defending their City with so signal Bravery and Constancy.


It did not seem that the Christian Princes in the Turkish Army did serve them with any great good will. 
Tekely,
 who had been but once in the Camp to salute the Grand Visier, left but a thousand 
Hungarians
 with him upon his de∣parture; and 
Abassi,
 though often invited to the Port, excused his attendance by manifold Pre∣tences. However the Visier being entred 
Hun∣gary,
 he could not dispense with his waiting up∣on him at 
Javarin,
 though but with few Troops. He was notwithstanding well received by this Minister, and sent back to guard the Passages betwixt 
Raab
 and 
Ramnitz,
 and the Bridges which the Turks had built upon those two Ri∣vers, to secure a retreat in case Fortune proved their Enemy. The Vayvod of 
Walachia,
 already mentioned, caused a Cross of Oak of a prodigi∣ous bigness to be planted before his Tent in the Camp at 
Vienna;
 it is seventeen foot in length, with this Inscription in Latin upon it;




Crucis exaltatio est conservatio Mundi. Crux decor Ecclesiae. Crux custodia Regum. Crux confirmatio Fidelium. Crux Gloria Angelo∣rum, & vulnus Demonum.


Nos Dei Gratia servamus, Canthacuzenus, Va∣lachiae Transalpinae Princeps, ejusdem per∣petuus haeres & Dominus, &c. Ereximus Crucem hanc in loco quavis die devotione Populi, & sacro honorato in perpetuam sui suorumque Memoriam, Tempore obsidionis

Mahometanae
 à Vizirio 
Kara Mustapha
 Bas∣sa 
Viennensis
 inferioris 
Austriae.
 Mense 
Sept.
 die 
1.
 Anno 
1683.


Viator Memento mori.




The Infidels, upon the approach of the Chri∣stians, were in no little disorder, their whole Camp being in a tumultuous Motion, their Horse mov'd confusedly, and the Servants were seen to load their Camels with Baggage, which made the Besieged judge, that they design'd to march to meet the Succours; notwithstanding this Disorder, they did not discontinue their Approaches, and the following day redoubled the firing of their Cannon and Mortars. That Morning, a Prisoner being taken, reported, That the Turks were in a great Consternation, be∣cause the Christians were already upon the Mountain of 
Kalemberg.
 Those who were up∣on the Rampart saw their Enemies pull down their Tents, and go and joyn their Compani∣ons, who were advanced to oppose the Passage of the Christians, and about Noon they saw a great Body ranging themselves in Battalia at the foot of the Mountain, whilst others joyned them, carrying with them all their Baggage and Provisions upon Waggons and Camels, as if they designed to change their Camp, where they also planted their Pavilions in the same manner, as if they intended a long stay there, probably to refresh themselves, to be more brisk, and in a condition to fight the Succours when they should descend from the Hills. During all these motions, the attack was carried on with redoubled vigour, and though the defence was yet braver, yet at Night they fired many Rock∣ets to advertise their friends that the place was reduced to the last extremity, and that they could hold out no longer.


But now the Christians were seen to cover the Mountain of 
Kalemberg,
 and to salute their Ene∣mies with several volleys of Cannon. To com∣prehend well the joy of the besieged at so char∣ming a spectacle, we need but represent to our selves, how they had been close shut up the space of nine Weeks, being every hour, indeed mo∣ment, in cruel apprehensions for their goods, their lives, their Wives and their Children; and to see themselves now upon the point to be delivered from these terrible alarms.


The Christian Army being assembled, as is already said, at 
Tuln,
 and that the Duke of 
Lor∣rain
 had put an end to several difficulties which were again started about the Rank, and the com∣mand of so many Princes and Generals, he brought it to a conclusion, that they should march the next day, being the 
9th,
 towards 
Vi∣enna.
 As soon as this resolution was taken, he sent Baron 
Mercy
 to 
Morbach
 with 2000 Horse, to observe the countenance and motions of the Turks. The 
9th,
 at the point of day, he march∣ed with all the 
German
 Army, and came and encamped betwixt St. 
Andrew
 and 
Koningseck.
 In this Post he received advice of the Cities be∣ing reduced to its last extremity, and that they fired with nothing but Muskets. He sent to ad∣vertise the King of 
Poland,
 who was yet at 
Tuln,
 with the news, and caused the Prisoners to be conducted to him, who confirmed the advice. He writ also to him, beseeching him to advance and joyn with him.


The 
10th,
 the Duke caused the 
Germans
 to en∣ter the Mountains by three several avenues, and left a fourth for the March of the 
Poles.
 He camped at 
Wilbleng,
 and the 
Poles
 rested an hour behind to the right. The King himself came to discover the heights where the Imperialists were camped. The Duke shewed him 
Kalem∣berg
 from thence, whither he would march next morning; and his Majesty returned to his Camp. By favour of the night the Duke went in Person to discover the passage of 
Kalemberg,
 and to take possession of those Posts he judged necessary to as∣sure their march. He also seised the Chappel of St. 
Leopold,
 and having put 300 men into it to secure it, returned to his Camp, having sent to inform the King of what was done; after this the Ar∣my was put in Battel-array to possess 
Kalemberg
 by five differing ways, according to the directi∣ons given by the Duke, and consented to by the King. The way on the right was left to his Majesty, as the day before.


The Prince of 
Sax-Lawenburg,
 General of the Horse, took the next passage to the 
Poles,
 con∣ducting by that way the Right Wing, consisting of eight Regiments of the Emperour's Horse, two of Dragoons, and one of Crauats, of all the Horse and all the Dragoons of 
Bavaria
 and 
Francony.


The Infantry of 
Franconia
 and 
Bavaria
 took the third way, which was the middle-most, be∣ing commanded by the Prince of 
Waldeck.
 The Elector of 
Bavaria
 placed himself with the said Prince that day, and continued there all the day following, advancing with much firm∣ness in places of most danger, but without any Fonction or command, he having declared at first, that he would only serve as a Voluntier.


All the Emperour's Infantry, and that of 
Sax∣ony,
 took the other two passages to the left, whereof one was that of St. 
Leopold
's Chappel, being the high-way, and the other went along the 
Danube.
 Prince 
Herman
 of 
Baden
 and Count 
Lesley
 General of the Artillery were at the head of the Foot. Count 4
Caprara
 General of the Horse followed immediately by the same ways with the left Wing, which contained seven Regi∣ments of the Emperour's, 
Lubomirski's Poles,
 to which the King had joyned some Squadrons of his, and all the Cavalry and Dragoons of 
Saxony.
 The Elector of 
Saxony
 commanded the Auxilia∣ry Troops, which, however of differing tempers and Bodies, marched in Battalia, in as much as the ground would permit it, and were compu∣ted to amount to 65000 men. About eleven of the clock, the first Squadrons had gained the tops of 
Kalemberg,
 without any opposition at all. They there extended the Front of the Ar∣my above a league and a half, camping on the declivity of the Mountain towards 
Closternew∣burg,
 in three lines, and some places more, as the ground would permit them, seizing there∣by seven or eight Avenues, by which they might descend and range themselves for the combat.


They brought at the same time some small Field-Pieces to St. 
Leopold,
 and to the Monastery of 
Camaldoli.
 The remainder also of the day and all the night was spent in advancing the Train, which was not effected without great trouble, the Mountain being so steep, that none but small Field-Pieces could be brought up, nor they but in some time doubling and tripling the draught Horses.


The Turks seeing the Christians appear about the Chappel of St. 
Leopold,
 and the aforesaid Monastery, drew out on their right, advanced to the foot of the Mountains and extending thence to the brink of the 
Danube,
 they seized the Hedges, hollow-ways and heights, from whence they might incommode the Enemy at the des∣cent of the hills and first filings out of their streights.




The Cannon being arrived at St. 
Leopold
 and 
Camaldoli,
 they-quickly obliged the Turks to quit the Posts which they had taken, and re∣move out of their shot. The Troops which they had advanced, consisted in Horse, and ano∣ther sort of Militia, which fights like our Dra∣goons on Horse-back and on foot. Of these the number was great, and they had brought but few Foot out of the Camp, and without Cannon in all this detachment which they opposed a∣gainst the Christians.


The space betwixt 
Vienna
 and the entry of the Wood is reckoned a League and a half, the Country being very difficult, trenched with Vineyards, Ravines and hollow ways. The Vineyard was enclosed by a great Dike which covered the Turks Camp on the side of 
Helgstat.
 The Duke of 
Lorrain
 had chosen this march, to make use of the advantage of the heights, and judging that in a situation of this nature, he might secure his Flanks. His design was the next day to coast the 
Danube,
 and to attack the Turk∣ish Camp on their right. It was for this reason, and because of the cuts in the ground, that he placed a great Body of Foot to the left, this Wing being designed first to charge the Ene∣mies.


The King of 
Poland,
 who stay'd an hour be∣hind, having encamped, came to St. 
Leopolds
 Chappel, from whence the Duke shewed him the descent of the Mountain, the Camp of the Turks, and the Troops which were advanced to oppose the descent of the Christians. Their Countenance made his Majesty of opinion, that they would dispute all the passages, and that the Duke should do well if they could the next day seize the first heights at the entry of the Wood. He moreover desired some 
German
 Foot to joyn with his in the descent of the Mountain. Ha∣ving obtained four Battalions, he caused them to advance on that side, whereby the 
Poles
 were to descend. Towards the evening of that day, the Duke having surveyed the ground at the foot of 
Camaldoli,
 ordered Count 
Lesley
 to com∣mand some Troops to take post at night at the going out of the Wood, and to raise a Battery there, the better to secure the passage of the Army the next day. At first there were but two Battalions sent Count 
Lesley,
 deferring to send any greater number till it was with the Artillery. They laboured all Night at this work; but the Turks being aware of it, before it was finished, they sent some Troops very early to hinder the Labourers, and posted themselves neat them behind a Curtain, and behind Planks which well-nigh shut the descent from the Mountain before the Christians Battery. Count 
Fontaine,
 who commanded the Post, was quick in opposing their effort, and having called the men from their work, and got his two Battali∣ons together, he posted them betwixt his Batte∣ry and their Barricado, yet so as not to be en∣compassed by them, who at the same time be∣gan to stretch to the right and left, to gain the Christians Flanks.


The Duke, who observed from St. 
Leopolds
 Chappel the Turks motion, sent some Battalions of the Regiments next hand to the relief of his men. These being commanded by the Duke of 
Croy,
 arriving in time, the Imperialists exten∣ded their line, and took a resolution to attack the Infidels in their Post behind their blind. This was executed with so much vigour, that the Enemy were forced to give way. They a∣bandoned their Post, and retired to another, where the gross of their Body remained. The Duke of 
Croy
 having his shoulder pierced with a Musket-shot in this action, was obliged to re∣tire, leaving the command to 
C. Fontaine,
 who disposed all things for the defence of the Post, which the Enemy seemed forward to attack a∣gain, but they contented themselves with shoot∣ing out of their own station, the fire continuing brisk on both sides.


The Duke perceiving that the Turks made all that Body move which had camped beyond 
Neudorff
 to support their advanced Troops, he first commanded all the left Wing to march, and presently after he gave order to Prince 
Wal∣deck,
 and to the Duke of 
Sax-Lawenburg,
 to rush out of the Woods upon the Enemies, who were at the head of their Camp. He sent to advertise the King of 
Poland
 of all this, and understand∣ing that his Majesty came to St. 
Leopolds
 Chappel, he went to meet him there, and shewing the motions the Armies were in, he acquainted him with all the orders that he had given upon this occasion. After they had agreed upon all things, the King having performed his devotion at the Chappel, mounting on Horse-back, he went from Rank to Rank, exhorting his Officers and Soul∣diers to do well, and spake to them after this manner.


Generous Polish Cavaliers, 
It is not only to de∣fend the glory which your Ancestors, and your courage have acquired to you, of being esteemed the invincible Bulwark of Christendom against the
 Ottoman 
Power, It is not the defence only of your own Country, which the loss of
 Vienna 
by an infallible consequence will ex∣pose to the cruel Invasion of those against whom you are going to fight; but it is the cause of God, and to save the Empire of the West which does us the honour to have recourse to our Arms; an honour which our An∣cestors did never presume to hope for, and which is re∣served for your valour. Think then of nothing but conquering, or to dye nobly in this occasion, to which the glory of Martyrdom is concomitant. Think that your King fights in the head of you, to partake with you of your perils and your victories, and rest assured that the God of Battels, whose cause we are going to defend, will not fail to fight for us.


Whilst this Prince endeavoured by his dis∣couses to inspire his Troops with that generous ardour he was himself agitated; the Citi∣zens of 
Vienna,
 who had been advertised of the approach of their relief, saw with inexpressible content, the Army of the Christians descend from the Mountains of 
Kalemberg,
 being ascer∣tained by the noise of the Cannon which was shot against the Turks, who had parapetted the Passages with earth and stone, though to no pur∣pose, that their deliverance was near. And they would also contribute all they could to it, by the discharge of all their Artillery from the Basti∣ons and Curtains of the wall. There was also an infinity of small shot discharged on both sides, with many Granadoes. The Turks had not as yet shot so many Bombs since the beginning of the Siege, as they did this day, to retard the Christians that descended into the Plain, and to annoy those who crowded upon the heights of the City, to observe the descent of their friends and the combat.


Whilst the King of 
Poland
 continued his march at the head of his Army, the Duke of 
Lorraine
 caused 
Heisters
 Regiment of Dragoons, and a∣nother of 
Saxony,
 which Count 
Caprara
 posts to the left at the foot of St. 
Leopolds
 Chappel, to descend. That of 
Heister
 received orders at eight of the clock to go and attack the Enemies, who had possessed a place to the left, from whence they troubled the Imperialists, and the Infantry had likewise order to advance upon the Turks, who were retired behind their courtains

and hollow ways. This motion was made on both sides at once. The Turks made some re∣sistance at first, but not with Vigour enough to hinder the Christians advance, who obliged them to retire behind another blind.


Count 
Lesley,
 who had brought down some Cannon, planted it at the head of the Infantry. The Duke of 
Croy
 was also returned, for having used the first Applications to his hurt, he had force enough not to quit the fight the whole day. This advantage gave both time and room to ex∣tend the front of the left Wing, as it descended and issued out of the Streights. In the mean time, the first Line of Infantry, which in their march against the Infidels gave continual fire with their Musquets, mingled with that of Field∣pieces, beat them out of another Post, and a Line of Curtain which reach'd from the 
Danube
 Hill over against the 
Carthusians.
 The Duke about ten a Clock made a halt, and whilst the rest of the left Wing filled the ground which the first Troops had taken, and that Count 
Caprara
 ex∣tended it to the Banks of the 
Danube;
 he sent or∣ders to the Prince of 
Waldeck,
 who began to ap∣pear upon th first heights to the right, and to the Duke of 
Saxon-Lawenburg,
 who was also got out of the Wood, to continue their march until they were equal with the front of the Troops com∣manded by the Duke of 
Croy,
 and to advance extending to the right, until they came within shot of the 
Poles,
 upon their issuing out of their Avenues which were on the right hand of all.


These orders being given, the Duke returned to the head of the left Wing, to make the great Body of the 
Germans
 move at once. The Great Duke of 
Saxony
 came and joyned him, and continued always near him in the places the most exposed. At Noon they saw the King at the Head of his Troops, who came and joyned the right Wing of the Imperialists. The Duke in the mean time took care that in marching to the Enemy, the Subaltern Generals should rally and re-establish any Disorders which might have happened by the Difficulty of the Passages, and that all should advance with equality, firing continually with their great and small shot.


The march was in this order, though slowly, by reason of the roughness of the way, and the opposition of the Enemy, the left moving along the 
Danube
 as far as the Village of 
Neudorff,
 car∣ryed it, after a considerable resistance. To the right, upon the same Line, there was another Hill guarded by the Turks, at the attack where∣of a Dutch Batallion being disordered, was suc∣coured by 
Stirums
 Dragoons, ordered by Count 
Dunewald.
 This Batallion recovered, took the Post, and continued to advance.


The justness of this march, the Christian Ar∣mies order of Battel, and the scituation of the Place, which made the Imperialists appear as in a kind of Amphitheater, presented a great and formidable object to the sight, which astonished the Turks, and did not a little contribute to the Victory.


The King of 
Poland
 being yet behind, the Ar∣my halted near 
Newdorff,
 until he was advanced upon the same Line, after which they continued their march. The Imperialists carried, without very great resistance, the Post the Turks had at 
Helgstat,
 and the Prince of 
Waldeck
 obliged those that opposed him to retire.


In the mean time the Infidels, who were in Battalia in their Camp, moved as if they had designed upon the left Wing, but perceiving the Army of 
Poland
 upon the heights, they mo∣ved that way, so that the 
Poles
 and 
Turks
 faced each other almost in the same order, making more depth then front. The 
Poles
 seemed back'd by the Wood, and the 
Turks
 by their Camp.


The King, who was in the head of his Troops, detach'd some squadrons of his 
Hussars,
 who charged the Turks, being all Lanciers, with great Vigour they bore before them those that opposed them; but engaging themselves too far, they drew so many Enemies upon them, that they were forced to run. The Turks followed them to a Place where Prince 
Waldeck
 had op∣portunely posted two Batalions of 
Bavarians.
 The fire of these Foot cooled the pursuit of the Enemy, and gave the King of 
Poland
 time to cause his first Line to advance to re-establish the Disorder of his 
Hussars.
 Count 
Rabata,
 at the Kings desire, joyned the Emperours Dragoons with them. But this body of Turks detach'd from their Troops, did not dare to stand the shock of the Christians, but retired to a height where they had Foot and Cannon, with more diligence then they were come.


After this advantage, the King continued to march with all his Army, and the Turks en∣deavoured to obstruct their Passage from the se∣veral Posts they had. The fire of their Artillery and Musquets did some harm to the 
Poles,
 but did not break them, and so they advanced still gaining Ground insensibly upon the Enemy.


In the mean time, the Duke being far advan∣ced towards the left of the Enemies Camp, to divert their Endeavours upon the right, the Turks put themselves in battalia upon the Ra∣vine or — before their Camp, and planting some great Guns against the Christians, they made many shot, and seemed by their meen to resolve to defend that Post which was the strongest of all, and served for a Retrenchment for their Camp, but their firmness did not last long. The Imperialists being advanced within Musquet shot, they abandoned their Station about five in th Evening, and left them the convenience of passing it without disorder, and entring into their Camp.


It was then that the Duke, making use of this Advantage, wheeled all his left Wing, and in∣stead of continuing his way by the 
Danube,
 he caused it to march to the right, to enter into the Enemies Camp, no Souldier quitting his rank to pillage their Baggage which they had aban∣doned, and their Tents standing. This motion being perceived by the Turks who were enga∣ged against the 
Poles
 on the right Wing, quite dismayed them, and they began to retire for fear of being charged in the Flank. The King there∣upon passed the Ravine with his Troops, not∣withstanding the firing of some Janizaries that defended it, and pursued the Enemies. About se∣ven a Clock he entred their Camp some little time after Prince 
Waldeck,
 who passed into it with his 
Bavarians
 and 
Franconians.
 Half an hour after, the Duke having gained the Suburbs and Counterscharp, commanded Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Ba∣den
 to advance towards the Trenches of the Turks with some Troops that the Baron of 
Mercy
 conducted, but this Prince could not come there so soon, but that the Janizaries that were in guard there had leisure to make their retreat by favour of the Night that came on. They had begun it as soon as they saw the Chri∣stians approach their Camp. They retired with no great loss, having had the bravery before they abandoned their Trenches to attempt ano∣ther attack against the City, and to turn and fire the Cannon of their Batteries against the Army. The Night suspended the Victory, and obliged the Troops to make halt in that part of

the Camp which was betwixt the 
Danube
 and the City, the Turks being retreated on the other side of the River.


The Duke of 
Lorraine
 sent to complement the King, upon the happy success of that day, which was owing to his presence. This Prince returned his complement, confessing that every body had a share in it, but that all the honour was due to his Conduct, and to the valour of the 
German
 Troops, who first entred the Camp, and the Enemies works.


During the Night the Turks passed the Ri∣ver at 
Schunket,
 making their retreat by the Rear of their Front, and quitted their Camp with so much precipitation, that they left be∣hind them in the great Visier's Quarters the Standard of the 
Ottoman
 Empire, and the Horse Tayle, the ordinary Ensigns of their dignity. They left also all their Tents, and the greatest part of their Equipage, all their Ammunition and Provisions, which they had in great abun∣dance, all their Artillery, amounting to 180 pieces of Cannon and Mortars, and they hasten∣ed their retreat with so much diligence, that their formost Troops had the next day passed the 
Ra
b.


The Christians lost no body of consideration except Prince 
Thomas
 of 
Croy,
 the Count of 
Transmandorff,
 young 
Poloski
 Captain of a Com∣pany of 
Hussars;
 and the wounded, besides the Duke of 
Croy,
 the Counts 
Fontaine, Tilly,
 and 
Schalemburg,
 were inconsiderable.


The 
13th
 early, the Duke having appointed his Army to be ready, went to wait on the King of 
Poland
 to regulate their march, and the im∣mediate pursuit of the Victory. But finding him little disposed to it, he omitted no instan∣ces to perswade him to it, proposing to him to march with all the Army, or with all the Horse only, or else with a great detachment; but the King opposed the weariness of his Troops, and the necessity of refreshing them some hours. The King thereunto being unwilling, the Duke en∣tred into the City.


The Grand Visier, before his flight, caused the Heads of five of the Women of his Serag∣lio to be cut off, for fear they should fall into the hands of the Conquerors. The Baron of 
Kaunitz,
 the Emperors Resident at the Port, who was at present in the Visier's Quarters, was in danger of being killed by the Christians in the heat of the Battel, as being habited after the Turkish fashion. By day there was not a Turk left, though they were traced during the obscu∣rity of the Night by the Villages on fire, the Infidels having marked their retreat with this last cruelty, after they had first burnt their Camp, as far as the precipitation of their flight, and the fear which obliged them to be gone would permit them. They retired also out of the Isle by favour of their lower Bridge, the upper Bridge which they had layed being possessed by the Christians upon their arrival. The same evening many Cavaliers and Souldiers entered the City with great Droves of Cattel, which they found in the Camp and near it, which con∣tinuing the following days, Beef became so cheap that they were sold for five and six Florins each.


The Duke of 
Lorrain
 being now assured that he had no more Enemies to combat, dispatcht the Count of 
Aversberg,
 Son to the Prince of that name, to the Emperor, to inform him with the happy success of that day.


On the morrow of the fight, being the 
13th,
 the fire took in the Powder which the Turks had left a League from the City, and confumed an infinite number of Bombs, Granadoes, and other artificial fire-works. This accident was attributed to the negligence of some Christian Souldiers, and yet there were prodigious quan∣tities of Powder, Bullets, 
&c.
 left behind. It was observable that many of the Cannon which the Turks had abandoned were marked with the Arms of the Emperours 
Ferdinand
 the first, and 
Rodolf
 the second.


After the Souldiery had pillaged the immense Riches of the Camp, which amounted to many Millions, the King of 
Poland
 entered into the City, accompanied with Count 
Starenberg
 the Governour, many Commanders, and a great number of the 
Polish
 Nobility, where 
Te Deum
 being sung, he, the Duke of 
Bavaria,
 and several Grandees, were sumptuously treated by the Go∣vernour, the People by their joyful acclamati∣ons eechoing the praises of their Deliverers.


In the mean time, the Duke of 
Lorraine
 was employed in giving the necessary Orders for the Army, part of it beginning to discamp, and all together with the 
Poles,
 designing to go in pur∣suit of the Enemy, which favourable conjun∣cture was omitted in expectation of the Empe∣rour, who also arrived that evening at 
Vienna,
 where he was received coming out of his Boat, by the two Electors, and the principal Officers of War and Justice. Having taken a view of the Enemies works, He caused 
Te Deum
 to be sung with all the solemnity possible in the Church of St. 
Stephen.
 That done, he caused the Crescent and Star, the 
Ottoman
 Arms, to be taken down from the Spire of that Steeple, pla∣ced there since the time of 
Solyman,
 being these last Turks did not cease shooting at it, and rai∣sed the Cross in their place.


Wednesday
 being the 
15th,
 the King of 
Poland
 sent his Grand Chancellor to the Emperor with a numerous Train to complement him, and of∣fer him a part of the booty which he had found in the Grand Visier's Tent, and amongst other things, the Standard which was always carried before him when he marched. It was made of Horse-hair work'd with the Needle, and em∣broidered with flowers, the staff of it was guilt, as also the Apple which was of brass. They call it 
Tugh
 in their Language, which is to say 
Horse Tayle.
 The Chancellor made a very ele∣gant Latin Speech, and the Emperour answer∣ed it with Sentiments of esteem and acknow∣ledgment for his Majesty of 
Poland.
 After a quarter of an hours conversation with this En∣voy, and hearing Mass in our Lady of 
Loretto
's Chappel, he took Horse to ride to the Camp, where he was to visit the King of 
Poland.
 There was some difficulty about the upper hand. This Prince pretended it, and there were examples contrary to this pretension. In the mean time what he had done deserved particular conside∣ration. To conclude, it was resolved, for the removing of these obstacles, that the Emperor should go see the Troops, that they should be ranged in Battalia, and that these two Sove∣reigns should advance within twenty steps of each other, which was performed in the man∣ner following. The Emperour, having seen the 
Bavarians
 in Battalia, continued his way to 
E∣bersdorff,
 where the first Squadrons of the left Wing were drawn up, and thence he went to 
Swech
 where the right Wing was posted, and where the King of 
Poland
 expected him. Being within Pistol-shot of each other, the King, with the Prince his Son, upon a little gallop moved forwards, and then both Princes uncovered at once, saluted and covered again in a moment. The Emperor spoke first, and told the King,

That he was extremely obliged to him, for leaving his Country, and undertaking a long and painful voyage, to come and combat his Enemies and deliver
 Vienna; 
that all Christendom shar'd in the obligation, and that he had covered himself with glory by so generous an action.
 The King of 
Poland
 answered him, 
that it was to God alone that we ought to render our thanks for this Victory; that he had done nothing but what every Christian Prince was obliged to do upon the like occasion; and that he would endeavour for the future to do yet more for the Interest of Religion, that all his displeasure was, that he was not in a condition to pursue the Enemy upon their defeat, but that his Troops after a march of three days required some rest, especially his Cavalry, the Horse being extremely tired.
 Prince 
Alexander,
 who by order of his Father was clo∣thed that day after the 
German
 fashion, kissed the Emperour's hand, who thereupon returned into the City, and the King further into his Camp. His Imperial Majesty in his return obser∣ved that all the Villages and Palaces were burnt around, except the place where 
Solyman
 had formerly camped, when he besieg'd 
Vienna;
 in memory whereof the Emperour 
Rodolf
 had caused a house of pleasure to be built in that place, with Towers, which were covered with guilt Copper in the same symmetry or figure that the Sultans Tents were; so that the Turks being informed that this building had been made after the Model of 
Solymans
 Camp, would not ruine it during the Siege, but had made a Ma∣gazin of it, where was also found a great quan∣tity of Bread and Bisquet.


The Emperour employed the rest of the time that he stayed at 
Vienna,
 in visiting the Retrench∣ments and Fortifications with Count 
Starenberg
 had made behind the Bastions and the Walls, to defend the Ground foot by foot. The Prince Elector of 
Saxony
 parted the fifteenth with all his Troops. His retreat seemed precipitated, and supposed to be upon account of the Pro∣testants of 
Hungary,
 thinking perhaps he had done enough in saving of 
Vienna,
 whereto he no∣bly contributed. The Emperour, willing to re∣compence Count 
Starenberg
's Services, made him Marshal General of the Field, and of his Privy Council; he gave him 100000 Florins, and writ to the King of 
Spain
 to send him the Order of the 
Golden Fleece.
 He also conferred the same Employments, and Honours upon Count 
Capliers,
 and having presented Prince 
Alexander,
 the King of 
Polands
 Son, with a Sword richly adorned with Jewels of great value, He returned back to 
Lintz.
 The greatest part of those who fled upon the approach of the Turks, returned to the City when they knew the Siege was raised. They began to rebuild the Houses that were ruined, and amongst others the Emperours Pa∣lace and 
Scots
 Church,


During these Triumphs at 
Vienna,
 the Grand Visier, sensible of his misfortune, and the malice of his Enemies, and knowing that the Bassa of 
Buda
 would render him no good Offices at Court, upon the raising of the Siege of 
Vienna,
 resolved to prevent him, and informed the Grand Seignior, by an express he dispatch'd to him to 
Belgrade,
 that he had disposed all things to check the first onset of the Christians, and en∣gage them in Battel, which would undoubted∣ly have been accompanied with Success; but that he was forced to change design, because the Bassa retired with his Army, the 
Walachians,
 the 
Moldavians,
 and the 
Hungarians,
 which did so mainly abate the Courage of his Troops, that it was afterward impossible for him to bring them to fight; that so he had been obliged to re∣tire to conserve the rest of the Army, and not to hazard the Person of his Highness. Neverthe∣less the Grand Visier, having well examined the Consequences which the ill Success of his Enter∣prise might have, did scarce believe himself se∣cure by this precaution, and he perswaded him∣self that he must immolate the Bassa of 
Buda
's Life to preserve his own. He caused him im∣mediately to be arrested, together with the Bas∣saes of 
Erseck
 and 
Poslega,
 who he knew were of Intelligence with the former, and caused them all three to be strangled. These proceedings furnished his Enemies with Pretexts to destroy him, chiefly the 
Kisler-Agasi,
 a Creature of the Sultana 
Valide,
 to whom she had recommended upon her Death-bed, to revenge her upon this chief Minister, which he also did.


After the Death of these three Bassaes, the Grand Visier continued his march, but in his Passage by 
Raab,
 that Garrison fell upon his Rear-Guard, and kill'd near 600 of them. At 
Gran
 he was joyned by a body of 15000 Turks, who were going to 
Belgrade.
 The remains of the 
Ottoman
 Army were dispersed some at 
Gran,
 some at 
Newhausel,
 at 
Buda
 some, and the rest en∣trenched near 
Altemburg.


On the other side, the Christians discoursed of the rest of the Campania; but as part of the Al∣lies did think they had done enough in contri∣buting to the relief of 
Vienna,
 thought of return∣ing home, many Councils were held to examine by what means they might be stayed. The Duke of 
Saxony
 continued inflexible in his Reso∣lution, adn was marched for his Country. The Elector of 
Bavaria
 consented to leave his Troops with the Emperours, but the Prince of 
Waldeck
 gave them to understand, that he should want new orders for the undertaking of new Enter∣prises with the Troops of 
Franconia,
 which he commanded. But the Duke of 
Lorrain
 perswa∣ded himself that these Difficulties had not hap∣ned if by a quick engagement they had hurried the Allies to pursue the Victory, and this was one of the chief reasons that moved the Duke to press the King in it.


Several Projects were made to divide the Ar∣my for different Occasions, many Conferences were had with the Allyes, and all the time was consumed in Councils. In the mean time, the Duke, who thought of nothing but improving the rest of the Summer, proposed every thing that he thought favourable, either for the Re∣duction of 
Hungary,
 for the Siege of 
Newhausel,
 or that of 
Gran,
 or to take the Posts of 
Barcam,
 and that of 
Pest
 for the setling of their Winter Quarters, and made it appear that nothing of all this could be done without great Forces, the Army of the Turks not being wholly deseated, however routed, and that the Rebels Army was still entire.


He determined nothing, because he knew not what measures the Turk would take. He only affirmed, that they ought to march forthwith in∣to 
Hungary
 with all the Dispositions necessary to act as the Enemies should direct.


The Emperour having approved his Propo∣sitions, and the King of 
Poland
 conforming to them, they marched the 
18th
 towards 
Presburg,
 and they encamped the same day with all the Imperial Troops near 
Fichen;
 from thence they went to 
Heinburg,
 and the 
20th
 they approached 
Presburg,
 where the Duke expected the Boats from the Bridge of 
Tuln
 according to orders. However the Bridge could not be finished till the 
25th,
 by reason of the great Winds, and the Difficulty of getting Boats in a desolate Country. The 
Franconians
 continued camped near 
Vienna,
 and the 
Bavarians
 came the 
19th
 to 
Fichen.




The 
22th,
 news came that Count 
Budiani,
 who upon the arrival of the Turks had abandoned the passages which he kept upon the 
Raab,
 and embraced the party of the Malecontents, after having warred against the Emperour's Troops with a Body of 
Turks
 and 
Hungarians
 of his Ge∣nerality, burnt and pillaged a great number of Villages upon the frontier of 
Styria,
 had sur∣prised and cut in pieces those same Turks to which he was united, and had afterwards joyn∣ed with the Count of 
Aspremont,
 to endeavour to incommode them of the great Army in their retreat towards 
Buda.


The Bridge upon the 
Danube,
 to pass into the Isle of 
Schuts,
 being finished the 
25th,
 the 
Poles
 began to file over the same day, and being fol∣lowed by the Emperour's Army, they encam∣ped the 
27th
 at 
Gersdorff.
 The Marquis of 
Barch,
 who in the Prince of 
Waldeck
's absence, now sick at 
Vienna,
 commanded the Troops of 
Franconia,
 advertised the Duke that he could not follow him with the Troops of his 
Circle,
 and sent him the copy of an Order from Prince 
Waldeck,
 da∣ted the 
26th.
 He received at the same time a∣nother Letter from the Elector of 
Bavaria,
 dated the day following, from his Camp at 
Ort,
 two Leagues from 
Vienna,
 which gave him notice that the 
Franconians
 would not leave their Camp before they had received Orders from the Prin∣ces of their 
Circle,
 which he judged would be rather to recall, than cause them to advance. He added, that his Infantry being extremely weaken'd and diminished by bloudy Fluxes, and his Cavalry ruined, his Troops could not so soon follow the Army of the Emperour; And yet if they would undertake any great action, where they should be necessary, he would cause such as were in condition to serve immediately to march.


The Duke apprehending that this separation might put him out of condition of undertaking any thing considerable, sent Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden
 to the Elector, who was gone to 
Bin,
 to change Ayr, by reason of some indisposition of health; he was charged to perswade him to let his Troops follow, remonstrating to him that it would be a great matter, now that the Forces of the Christians were diminished, to hinder the Turks to take heart to oblige part of 
Hun∣gary
 to submit themselves, to take Post for Win∣ter Quarters in the Enemies Country, and there∣by encourage the 
Franconians
 to follow their example.


In the mean time the Season advanced; these Negotiations consuming much time, and the Duke could make no stay upon command of the Troops he was not sure of, and willing not to lose the season, he perswaded the King of 
Poland
 to continue the march of the Army to∣wards 
Komorra,
 without the Allies. The King advancing always an hour before the Imperia∣lists, they arrived near that City the second of 
October;
 they camped at 
Wismar,
 and a Council of the Generals of the Army was held there, to know what the Imperialists might undertake, independent without the Allies, in case of delay or being abandoned.


Intelligence was brought, that 
Tekely
 with his Army encamped at 
Lewentz;
 that the gross of the 
Turkish
 Army lay about 
Buda;
 that the Grand Visier had sent a Detachment towards 
Gran,
 that he had put 4000 men into 
Newhausel
 to fortifie that Garrison, but that there were in the Enemies Army a great many discontented Persons at the conduct of the Grand Visier, by so much the more dissatisfied, because that up∣on his return near 
Raab,
 he had caused the Vi∣sier of 
Buda
 to be strangled, as also some other Bassa's, and more than fifty Subaltern Officers, whom he accused of not having done their duty in the late Battel; besides that, he had also sa∣crificed a great number of those Run-aways, who had preceded his retreat.


After the Council held at 
Wiswar,
 they were not of opinion to attempt the Siege of 
Newhausel
 in a season so advanced, and in a Country full of Marshes, the Garrison being strong, and a great Army in the Neighbourhood; neither was it thought reasonable to propound the King's going against the Enemy, because the Troops of the Empire had not followed, and that they should be oblig'd to pass through a Country where Forrage would be wanting.


The attack of 
Gran
 seemed but little feasible before they were Masters of 
Barcam,
 that the communication might be cut off. This inclined the Duke to attempt the Fort of 
Barcam,
 which is the head of the Bridge of 
Gran,
 after which they would further deliberate to pass to 
Pest,
 or besiege 
Gran,
 according to the countenance of the Enemy. The Duke acquainted the King of 
Poland
 with what had been resolved, where∣uto his Majesty assented.


On the 
3d
 of 
October,
 the King began to pass that branch of the 
Danube
 at 
Komorra,
 called the 
Waagh.
 The Emperours Horse followed, and all the Cavalry marched to 
Mose,
 where the Count of 
Starenberg
 was to be on the 
7th
 with the Infantry, the King having promised to stay for him there. The 
7th
 day, which should have been a day of repose, to give the Infantry time to joyn the rest of the Army, the King sent to tell the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 that he would march towards 
Barcham,
 desiring him that he would do the same. The Duke, surprised with the change, having thereupon sounded to Horse, sent Count 
Dunewald
 to his Majesty, to represent to him the necessity of expecting the Foot, and the danger there was in separating in the neigh∣bourhood of the Armies of the Turks and Re∣bels, and in the middle of their Garrisons. The Count found the King already on Horseback, who answered him, that having advice that the detachment of the Turks towards 
Barcam
 was not great, he saw no inconvenience to continue his march. They seeing the King's resolution followed him, leaving but one Company of 
Crawats
 to accompany the Infantry, which that day were to be at 
Mose.


The King being come within a League of 
Barcam,
 was advertised by his advanced Parties, that some Squadrons of the Enemy did appear. He ordered a detachment to charge them. They did not stand, but being relieved by a greater Body, the 
Poles
 who attacqued them were re∣pelled.


The King commanded other Squadrons to second them, which being engaged, he advan∣ced himself with all his Horse. The gross of the 
Turks
 Cavalry, which had continued hither∣to covered by a great hill, unexpectedly appea∣red six or 7000 strong, and briskly charging the 
Poles
 in Flank and Front, put them to flight. The 
Turks
 charged them hotly in the disorder they were, and killed above 2000 of them, and amongst the rest, the Palatine of 
Pomerania.
 They took Tymbals and Standards, and some Baggage, which by being intermingled with the march of the Troops, did somewhat con∣tribute to their defeat.


The Count of 
Dunewald,
 who had marched all day with the King, seeing the encounters of the first Squadrons, sent to tell the Duke, that the 
Poles
 and the Enemy were engaged, where∣upon

he marched swiftly, and filing through a narrow passage betwixt him and the Plain, he saw upon his arrival that the 
Polish
 Horse was quite broke, and that the 
Turks
 were close in their pursuit. At this sight, his first care was to put the Emperours most advanced Troops into Battalia, leaving room for the flying 
Poles,
 to avoid their running upon him. As soon as he had some Squadrons of his first Line formed, seeing the 
Poles
 still in disorder, he advanced upon the Enemy with his first Squadrons, leav∣ing Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden
 to embattel the rest. This motion stopt the Enemies carreer, after which they retired with some speed under 
Bar∣cam,
 to avoid the Imperialists charge; whilst the Duke advanced, the Queen of 
Polands
 Brother came to him, and told him, that he believed the King was lost, because his Majesty was in the head of all in the places the most exposed, to animate his Men by words, and inspire courage into them by his example. The Duke seeing the Enemy retired, advanced towards the 
Poles.
 He found the King, who having advanced with the first, would be the last in retiring. He told the Duke how affairs had gone, and it being near Night, they thought of nothing but en∣camping.


Fear and Terror had seised upon the 
Poles,
 as is usual in such Encounters, they could scarce be perswaded to keep the Right, because of the Neighbourhood of 
Barcam,
 whither the Enemy was retired; insomuch that the King, for the greater security of his Troops, made them take the Left, desiring the Duke to march into the right with the Emperours Troops, which these last had always pretended to; before they dis∣camped, the Duke sent Orders to Count 
Staren∣berg
 to make haste and come and joyn him with the foot. The next Morning he was ad∣vertised that the 
Poles
 continued disquieted; that the loss they had suffered was extreamly sensible to them, that they would perswade the King not to advance any further, but to retire to the Places designed for their Quarters; that the principal Officers were much divided, and fi∣nally that many Difficulties were alledged to the King to hinder the Execution of the Resolutions which had been taken.


The Duke, who knew the Consequence of re∣taining the 
Polish Army,
 and in case it separated, they should lose the Fruit and Honour of the Campania, the which he desired to see finished with some handsome Action, and not upon a loss, went to the Kings Quarters, and having found things as they had been represented, he endeavoured to perswade his Majesty to conti∣nue in the Terms they had agreed upon. He demonstrated to him and his Generals, the un∣lucky consequences that were to be feared if they changed design, how easie it was to force this detachment if they did not delay to attack them, the importance of doing it suddenly, for fear all the Forces of the Enemy might rejoyn them, and he insisted that they should advance and charge them as soon as the Foot were come up. The King explained this Discourse to the Senators and Officers of the Army that did not understand the Language, and in order to it agreed to march the next Morning, irresolute only upon the ordering of the Battel.


The Duke, who had been visiting the Ground, made a Description to the King of it, and the Condition of 
Barcam,
 and afterwards discoursed of several forms of embattelling He proposed that which they had held at 
Vienna,
 offering the right to his Majesty, or to march as they were camped, and divided the 
Poles
 into the two Wings, which last proposal was accepted of, and the Resolution to march was taken.


The Army being put into Battalia with the Day, Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden
 commanded the right Wing, and under him Count 
Gondola
 and Baron 
Mercy,
 Count 
Dunewald
 was in the left, and with him the Counts 
Palsi
 and 
Taff.
 Count 
Starenberg,
 Marshal of the Field, conducted the Infantry, with the Prince of 
Croy
 and Count 
Se∣rin.
 This done, the Duke went to the King for the dividing of his Army. His Majesty having been informed that the Enemies detachment had been augmented by several Troops con∣ducted by 
Haly
 Bassa of 
Aleppo,
 and by the Bassaes of 
Sylistria
 and 
Caire;
 and apprehending that these Troops were followed by the rest, delibe∣rated a-new upon the Enterprise; but the Duke represented to him many motives which made him believe the Army could not yet be come thither. He added, that if it were, he believed the Ground whereon they stood was so advanta∣geous, that they ought not to change their De∣sign, being the Imperial Army possessed all the Plain, the 
Danube
 on the right, and the Moun∣tains on the left, and that the Ground growing narrower towards the Enemies, they could not make use of a great body, though they had it; these reasons being approved, the 
Polish
 Army was divided. The King with a party of his 
Hussars,
 of his Foot, and of his best Horse, placed himself in the right, betwixt the Emperours Horse and his Dragoons. The Great General 
Jabloriski
 did the same in the left, and the rest of the 
Polish
 Army made a third Line; they march∣ed for half an hour in this Order. About nine a Clock they saw the Turks drawn up in the Plain before them. They moved justly, and by their firmness their Forces were judged equal with those of the Christians. Being come near the Troops that appeared, made a motion, put∣ting themselves into three Lines, leaving only two great squadrons on their right. They then came and charged the left of the Christian Ar∣my with much fierceness, and searching the 
Poles,
 they attack'd the 
Hussars,
 which the Great General Commanded.


At the same time the gross of the Turks, who were in the middle of the height, advanced to∣wards the adverse Foot, as if they would have charged them, and being come within half Musquet-shot, they declined to the left of the Christians, exposing their Flank to relieve their own men. The Duke, who was gon towards his Infantry, seeing this motion, ran along the Line of the Horse of the left Wing, and with all the party of the first Line, which had not yet charged, he himself advanced at the head of the Squadrons, and charged the Enemy in flank, which put them to a general rout, incapacita∣ting them to make head again. He ordered 
Dunewald
 to pursue with the whole first Line, and with all the 
Poles
 of the same Wing, who fol∣lowed them Pell-Mell to the very Gates of 
Bar∣kam,
 and the Marshes of 
Gran,
 where many of them were slain.


Whilst Count 
Dunewald
 chased the Enemy, the Duke caused the Army to advance in Bat∣talia towards 
Barcam.
 The King having seen the flight of the Turks, was come from the right Wing to the left, to complement the Duke; the Generals and Senators who accompanied him, did the same. Amongst the rest 
Jablorisky,
 the Grand General of 
Poland,
 in presence of all, avowed, that his People refusing to advance to sustain the 
Hussars,
 the readiness of Count 
Dune∣wald
 to succour him, and the Vigour of the Em∣perours Horse had repaired that fault, and could

not be sufficiently commended. And now in the disorder the Enemy was in, they resolve to at∣tack 
Barcam.


The King caused some of his 
Cossacks
 to ad∣vance, and the Duke added five Battalions of 
Starenberg,
 of 
Grana,
 and 
Baden,
 all under the conduct of Count 
Starenberg.
 This detachment was scarce ordered, when the Duke, who was approached to the Fort to inspect it, was adver∣tised, that the Bridge upon the 
Danube
 was bro∣ken by the precipitate flight of the first Run∣aways, and that the crowding in 
Barkam,
 and upon the side to the River, were so great, that they seemed to be packed upon each other. He hasted thither, and would lose no time upon such an occasion. He gave Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Ba∣den
 orders to dismount the Regiments of Dra∣goons, of 
Schults, Comfettein,
 and 
Castell,
 and to march to the Fort on that side to make a second Attack. The command was instantly executed, and having sent some parties of Foot by Water, and five pieces of Cannon charged with Car∣trages; he ordered that the Fort should be as∣saulted, whilst the great and small shot plyed their Vollies upon the Banks of the River. The Turks seeing themselves thus pressed on all sides, could not withstand the Attack, the place being forced, the Foot and Dragoons entering at the same time by the ways they attempted it.


The slaughter was terrible, though most of the defendants, to save themselves from the fury of the assailants, precipitated themselves into the 
Danube,
 some leap'd in with their Horses, others tried to pass by swimming, holding by the Mane and tailes of their Horses, or some plank or piece of the broken Bridge, and there were some who crept over the dead bodies which were held by the cordage and pieces of wood remaining where the breach was. This slaughter continuing long, the number of the dead was very great, all that part of the 
Danube
 near the shore, not being very rapid, being filled with them; all the surface of the River, where largest, being covered with cloaths, and the equipage of Men and Horses, and there did not escape above seven or 800 of all this multitude, who found their preservation in the king of a Redoubt which was at 
Barcam,
 where they had put themselves, and from whence they deman∣ded quarter, and had it.


The Town being garrisoned with 
Dutch
 and 
Poles,
 Count 
Staremberg,
 seeing these two Nati∣ons were ready to murther each other for the booty, removed the Imperialists, having only the 
Poles
 there, who awhile after burnt 
Barcam,
 and all the Pallisado's that enclosed it, because the Turks had placed the Heads of the 
Poles
 slain in the late Engagement upon the tops of them.


Count 
Tekely,
 who had orders from the Grand Visier to joyn with the Bassa of 
Buda
 at 
Barkam,
 was advanced upon the Mountains within two miles of it, but being informed by those he sent to discover what the Christians did, of what was passed, he retired with much diligence.


By Letters from 
Gran,
 as also by the relation of Prisoners, there were not 3000 men of all this detachment of 14000 Horse, and 1200 Ja∣nisaries saved. They were the Hower of their Army, commanded by the 
Bassa
 of 
Buda, Haly
 Bassa of 
Aleppo,
 the Bassa of 
Silistria,
 and some Aga's The booty was great, above six thou∣sand Horses being taken, and the Tymbals and the Baggage which the 
Poles
 had left, were re∣covered.


This Victoty did not only re-assure the 
Poles,
 but put the Male-contents into a despondency, and did so strongly increase the disorders in the 
Turkish
 Army, that the Grand Visier, unable to master them, was obliged to retire.


The next thing the Christians undertook, was the Siege of 
Gran,
 though the Duke had need of all his Reasons and elocution to perswade the King of 
Poland
 to it, but having at length con∣sented, and the 
Bavarian
 Forces being come up, three Batteries were forthwith raised; and ten great Guns were by force of men, as also eight Mortars drawn up the Mountains of 
Martin
 and 
Thomas,
 deserted by the Enemy. The Castle was strongly battered on the Gate, on the 
Buda
 side great quantity of Bombs were thrown in, and the shooting lasted all day. The Imperia∣lists advanced to the Ditch, and lodged there on the side of the 
Bavarian
 approaches. They advanced to the foot of the Wall, which lookt towards 
Barcam,
 and about five in the evening, some commanded Battalions of the Imperialists attack'd the City on the other extremity, and carried it without resistance; for as much as the Enemy having retired, contented themselves to defend it by their great firing from the Castle, from whence the very sills of the Houses are discovered.


The Imperialists being masters of the City, the 
Bavarians
 in the Night gained the foot of the Castle, where they fell to Mining, whilst the Imperialists leaped into the Mote, and lodged there. Several men were lost there by the de∣fendants Bombs, Granadoes, Stones, &c. which they continually threw amongst them, whilst they were covering themselves. The Cannon beginning to make a breach about Ten Clock, and the Miner at work, a Summons was sent in by a 
Turkish
 Prisoner, with offer of goods and life, if they would surrender the place before the day was ended. The besieged demanded till the morrow, which being refused, the firing of the Artillery, Musquets, and Bombs were re-doubled. They passed the Moat, made two Lodgments, by favour whereof they attacked the Miner in a second place on the 
Martinberg
 side. This advantage obliged the 
Turks
 to send an Officer about Eleven at Night to declare, that they accepted the offer which had been made them, demanding Hostages whilst the Ca∣pitulations were a making, and offering theirs.


The 27th, the Hostages being delivered, it was agreed, that the Garrison should march out with Arms and Baggage, and that it should be conducted in safety to 
Buda
 and 
Vicegrade;
 that the Artillery and Munitions of War and Victu∣als should remain in the place, and that the Turks should deliver up their Christian Pri∣soners.


The impression that the battel of 
Barcam
 had made; the vigor and readiness wherewith they had gained the foot of the Walls, the Grand Visier's retreat, the Bombs which were thrown without ceasing, into a place so full of People as this, had caused so much terror and so much confusion, that though there were above 4000 effective men in the Garrison, commanded by two Bassa's, a Bey, and many Officers, we have seen a place reduced in five days, which in the two former Sieges had held out several Months, with weaker Garrisons, against more numerous Armies.


The season being too far advanced for further action, the Allies returned home, and the 
Poles,
 together with the Imperialists marched into their Winter-Quarters.


In the mean time, the Grand Visier being come to Court, told the Grand Seignior the same things he had writ to him against the Bassa

of Buda, and perswaded him to approve of the rigor wherewith he had treated him. He also accused Count 
Tekely
 of having ill seconded him; and finally, he knew so well to justifie his conduct with his Master, that he hindered the Widdow of that Bassa, who was his Highness's Sister, to complain against him for so barbarous an action, and procured an Order to be sent her from the 
Sultan
 to go immediately to 
Adrianople
 without seeing him. When this Princess arri∣ved there, she found the 
Sultana Valide
 dead, which caused her a sensible displeasure; because she had relied much upon the credit of this Prin∣cess, who having a great aversion for 
Cara Mu∣stafa,
 would not have been wanting in counte∣nancing the vengeance she would take of this Minister; but she learn'd from 
Kisler Agasi,
 or the chief of the black Eunukes, that 
Sultana Valide
 had charged him upon her Death-bed, to tell the Grand Seignior upon his return to 
Adrianople,
 that 
Cara Mustapha
 had a design to make himself Emperour of the West, grounded upon a Prediction told him, that he should one day be Master of one of the greatest Empires of the World. But whether this Prediction were true, or that the 
Sultana Valide
 had invented it to destroy the Visier, the news of it did extremely comfort the Bassa of 
Buda's
 Widdow, who wait∣ed the return of the 
Sultan
 with impatience, to execute the design which she had against this Minister, and revenge the loss of her Husband by his death.


The season being far advanced, the Grand Seignior, leaving 
Kara Mustapha
 at 
Belgrade
 to take care of his Army, and the places in 
Hun∣gary,
 during the Winter quarter, returned to 
Adrianople.


As the Christians got every day some new ad∣vantages over the 
Turks,
 and that the Grand Visier did nothing to repell them, his secret Enemies, and principally the 
Kisler Agasi,
 and the 
Kaimacan,
 who was jealous of his greatness, took ocasion hence to decry the conduct of the Grand Visier unto their Master. At this time Count 
Tekely,
 who was accustomed to receive great Subsidies from the Port, and who had his Spies near his Highness, by whom he was faith∣fully advertised of all that happened, knowing that he had been rendered suspect to his High∣ness, and that there was no more mention of sending him Supplies as usual, did by his Let∣ters omit nothing for his justification, but to no purpose. His Letters did not disabuse the Grand Seignior, who entirely believing what he had received from 
Kara Mustapha
 at 
Belgrade,
 was perswaded that this Count was of Intelligence with the Imperialists. 
Tekely
 seeing no middle betwixt his ruine and his justification, took the most dangerous Party. He went 
Incognito
 to 
Adrianople,
 and having by the credit of 
Kisler Agasi,
 who was his particular friend, found means of admission to the 
Sultans
 presence, be∣fore whom, prostrated with his face upon the Earth, he declared to him that he brought him his Head, and that he would rather lose it, than be exposed to the calumny of his Enemies, and to the disgrace of his Protector. 
Tekely's
 boldness look'd well. The Grand Seignior gave ear to his reasons, and judged by the relation that he made him, that all the misfortunes that hap∣pened at the Siege of 
Vienna,
 and since, ought to be imputed to the ill conduct of his Visier. He permitted 
Tekely
 to return, assuring him of the protection he demanded, and engaged himself to send him such powerful Succours, that he should in a little time be in a condition to repair with advantage all the losses he had suffered.


And now they begin to make complaints a∣gainst the Visier, and the loss of 
Gran
 did not a little contribute to his ruine. The Janizaries, that the Visier's secret enemies had caused to as∣semble tumultuarily, and demand his Head, under pretence that he had abandoned their Companions in the Trenches at 
Vienna;
 and this was a killing blow, so that the death of 
Kara Mustapha
 was resolved in a Divan, which the Grand Seignior had caused to be assembled to that purpose.


This fatal Commission was given 
Chiaoux
 Bassa, and to 
Kapiglier Kiaia,
 who immediately took Post for 
Belgrade.
 They arrived there the 25th of 
December,
 and addressing themselves to the Aga of the Janizaries, they communicated the Emperours Orders to him, which implied that he should give them all necessary assistance. The Aga disposed such as depended on him to obey, and went with these two Officers into the Grand Visier's house. 
Cara Mustapha,
 who per∣ceived them from his Chamber, did quickly suppose that his Enemies had taken advantage of his absence to ruine him, and those that he saw coming were to execute the Arrest of his death. Some Officers, who owed him their for∣tune, being then with him, and having heard him say what he thought, proposed to him to refuse the Door to the Aga, and them that ac∣companied him: they represented to him that he was beloved by the Souldiers, and if he ap∣peared but in his defence, he would instantly see a number of brave men for his defence.


But this great Minister, whose life seemed odious to him after the affront which he recei∣ved before 
Vienna,
 and who knew well, he could but defer his death for few days, being incir∣cled with the Enemies of his Religion, who would not fail to profit by the division of his Troops, believed that by his last submission to his Highness orders, he ought to disabuse those who believed him little attach'd to the Law, or rather he found himself so irresolute in so pressing a danger, that the 
Sultans
 three Officers entered his Chamber before he had taken his last resolution. He endeavoured to hide the dis∣orders of his Soul, and after he had returned them their civilities, he asked the cause of their coming. The Aga taking the word, told him, that his Highness had sent for the Seal of the Empire, which he had entrusted him with, and shewed him the order in Writing. At the same time the Visier opening his bosom drew it out, which he presented to him with respect, asking whether they had any thing else to require from him? he was obliged to render the Standard, which he did in the same fashion; and having yet again demanded, whether they would have any thing else, the three Officers answered him only with tears, letting him at the same time see in writing the 
Buyurds
 or Command, where∣by the Grand Seignior would have his Head. 
Kara Mustapha
 was not affrighted, being already prepared for it. He only asked, if the might not be permitted to say his Prayers. The Offi∣cers answered him, that they had no orders to refuse him that consoiation. He ordered his People to retire, that he might pray with less distraction, and when he had finished, they re∣entered again. He then drew a Paper out of his bosom, which he gave to the Aga, to render it to his Highness. It is believed that it was a Billet, by which the 
Sultan
 promised him never to put him to death, which he would make no use of, judging it useless, being he was too far from the Grand Seignior to undrstand his in∣tensions. He then sat upon the brink of the So∣fa,

whereof he lift up the Carpet, to the end to be only upon the Plank, demanding he might be strangled by his own Executioner, which was granted. After a few Moments to dispose of himself, he called the Executioner, and told him he should be quick, and not let him lan∣guish; he said also, that the Grand Seignior would think on him after his Death. The Ex∣ecutioner having put the string about his Neck, he himself disentangled it, saying, it was not necessary they should hold his hands. As soon as he was dead, the Executioner cut off his Head, and flead it, filling the Skin with hacked Straw, which was put into a Box, and carried to 
Adri∣anople,
 and given to the Sultan, who received it without any great Emotion, as he was coming from hunting.


The Visiers Corps was carried out of his Chamber, and exposed under a Pavilion to be seen of all Men. At the same time they seised on his principal Officers, who were brought to 
Adrianople.
 Of these the 
Reiz Effendi
 was hang'd, 
Mauro Cordato
 his Interpreter put in the Castle of the seven Towers at 
Constantinople,
 having first been spoiled of his Money and Jewels.


There were found in the Treasury of this Minister, ten or twelve Milions in Money, Moveables and Jewels, which is very considera∣ble, if the prodigious Expences of Presents be con∣sidered; these Spoils, and those of some of the Visiers Officers, and of the Tefterder, who was likewise strangled, amounted to fourteen Milli∣ons, which came all into the Grand Seigniors Purse. He refused to consent that this Moneys should be employed to pay the Troops, and re∣establish the Affairs of 
Hungary,
 although all the Divan was of that Opinion. The Sultan would neither suffer them to open his Treasury, which is the great resource of the 
Ottoman
 Emperours, and replyed to them that represented to him the necessity of doing it, that they must make use of the accustomed Revenues, and if that did not suffice, it was for his Council to search out other ways to supply it. And yet he was pleased to give all the Visiers immoveables to his Chil∣dren. This Humour of his Highness, and the Difficulties which were foreseen to settle the Af∣fairs of the Empire, diminished the heat of such who might pretend to the Employment of Grand Visier. The 
Kisler Agasi,
 who was always in great Credit, and who fancied, though without any ground, that the Grand Seignior had thoughts of placing him in this Post, declared before hand, that he would not accept of this Office, know∣ing that he had not Capacity enough to bear the weight of it.


Solyman Aga Selietar,
 who was his Highnesses true Favorite, and who judg'd he should be al∣ways powerful enough whilst he had his Ma∣sters Favour, signified to the Sultan, who offer∣ed to make him Grand Visier, that all his Am∣bition was to please him, and that he esteemed more the waiting upon his Person, than to di∣vide his Cares betwixt his Prince and the State, as he should be obliged to do, if he accepted the charge wherewith he would honour him. So obliging a denyal augmenting the esteem and affection which the Grand Seignior had for him, disposed him to name 
Ibrahim Aga,
 who was 
Kaymacan,
 and formerly called 
Kara Kiaia,
 for this high Employment.


The Christians continuing their Progress in 
Hungary,
 obliged this new Grand Visier to as∣semble the Divan very often, to find a way to re-establish their Affairs. He proposed the ma∣king of a Peace with the Emperour, and to con∣tinue the Trevis which 
Kara Mustapha
 had vio∣lated without any lawful pretence, and to carry the War into 
Poland,
 to revenge themselves on King 
John,
 for the ill success of the Siege of 
Vi∣enna.
 But the Sultan, who had promised Count 
Tekely
 that he would not abandon him, was of a contrary sentiment. 
Kara Kiaia
 urging his Opinion with too much heat, the Sultan grew so angry with him, that he was judged lost, which gave room to that false report that ran of him that he was strangled, and that 
Kana Houglou Camaikan
 of 
Constantinople
 was put in his place.


Most of the Officers of the Garrisons being changed, the new Visier employed all his dili∣gence to raise such Forces against Spring, as might salve the disgraces of the last Campaign, which yet they could not compass, the People being dejected even to Consternation at so ma∣ny losses.


On the other side, the Christians having hap∣pily finished their Campaign, and taken their Quarters in 
Hungary,
 used great diligence to pro∣cure Moneys, to separate the 
Hungarians
 from the Port, and to make new Alliances.


There was but the 
Pope
 that could travel ef∣fectually in the first of these things, seeing the other Princes of the Empire had enough to do for themselves, as long as the differences with 
France
 were not accommodated, besides the Pro∣testants could obtain no advantage for their Re∣ligion.


To effect the second point, a general Act of Oblivion was published by the Emperours com∣mand, with pardon to all that would return to their Obedience, and Commissioners being sent to 
Presburg
 to receive their Submissions, very many of the Nobility, Counties, and Towns were restored to their Duty as at the beginning, though 
Tekely
 would not, and the chief Towns in upper 
Hungary
 for fear of him, did not as yet dare to declare themselves.


But the third design had better Success, for however the 
Czars
 of 
Muscovia
 would not give ear to the Emperours Invitation and Propositi∣ons of Alliance made him by his Ambassador 
Blomberg,
 yet the 
Venetians,
 shewing a great In∣clination to be revenged of the losses they had suffered by the Wars of 
Candy,
 easily consented to the accomplishment of the League between the Emperour, the King of 
Poland,
 and the 
Ve∣netians.


This Alliance was to be offensive; none of the concerned should treat separately upon any Conditions whatsoever; that this League shall tend to no other thing but to make War against the Turks; the Emperour and the King of 
Po∣land
 shall act by Land with all their Forces, and the Republick of 
Venice
 with a Naval Army at Sea, and a Land Army in 
Dalmatia;
 that the War be made by diversion, the Emperour shall endeavour to recover 
Hungary,
 the 
Poles Kaminiec,
 and all the 
Ʋkraine,
 and 
Venice
 all she has lost, 
&c.


Whilst this was in concluding, there came News to the Imperial Court, of a very great defeat the 
Cossacks
 had given the 
Turks
 and 
Tar∣tars,
 the Chieftains of the 
Tartars
 being both slain, and 
Haly Beg,
 who commanded the 
Turks,
 taken Prisoner, who, though he offered a hundred thousand Crowns for his Ransom, was slain by the quarrelling 
Cossack
 in the heat of their con∣test about him.


But now the Season did invite both sides into the Field, where the Christians were chiefly Aggressors. The Christian Army in the begin∣ning of 
June
 assembled at their general Rende∣vous betwixt 
Schinta
 and 
Shella,
 to the num∣ber

of thirty thousand Men, from whence, after some stay, they passed the 
Danube
 near 
Gran;
 it was believed that the design was formed against 
Newhausel,
 and the rather, because it had been so greatly streightned by General 
Mercy,
 who had block'd it up all the Winter, and reduced it to the Condition, as was supposed, of a voluntary surrender. But it was at length discovered that 
Buda
 was at the bottom of the Design, as a thing of greater Consequence, being therefore to leave no Place behind them, the Army was transpor∣ted to 
Vicegrade,
 a place scituate upon the 
Danube,
 having left their Baggage under the Cannon of 
Gran;
 and having without much labour ren∣dred themselves Masters of the City, the Turks that were in the Castle surrendered the next day, marching out to the number of seven hun∣dred and forty men. In the mean time, the Turks of 
Alba Regalis,
 and the Neighbour Garrisons, to the number of six thousand, unexpectedly at∣tack'd the Baggage at 
Gran,
 but were so rudely received, that having lost two hundred of their Men, and four Colours, they were forced to give back. Major General 
Halloweil
 of the Im∣perialists was slain in this Fight.


But the Turks, sollicitous for 
Newhausel,
 and finding they could not sufficiently relieve it with small Parties, resolved to attempt it with an Army, and being advanced as far as 
Vacia,
 the Duke resolved to oppose them. To this purpose he set forwards, and found them drawn up in Battalia upon the heights near the Town. The place was of difficult access, having on the left the 
Danube,
 and a large Morass, and the right secured by a Wood. The Duke having embat∣telled his men, moved directly towards the Ene∣my, and about Eleven of the Clock passed the Morass, without any great opposition, till being come upon the heights, they were then charged with great fury, but the Turks not being able to break them the first time, they bravely at∣tacked them the second, and third time; but with like success, still repelled, especially the third time with great loss, and forced to save themselves by flight. The Foot saved them∣selves in the Castle, but were forced to surren∣der at discretion, after three hours resistance. 
Novigrade
 was hereupon quitted by the Turks, and as soon possest by the Imperialists.


This Victory animated the Christians to pro∣secute their march to 
Pest,
 whither being come, they cast a great number of Bombs into the Town, with that success, that the fire taking in several places of it, frightned the Garrison so, that taking their best moveables with them, they fled into 
Buda,
 after they had also reduced some Houses in the Town to ashes, and fired the Bridge behind them. But the Christians taking possession of 
Pest,
 quenched the fire, repaired the fortifications, and battered 
Buda
 with the Artillery they found in the place.


Hitherto fortune had been so favourable to the Imperialists,
 that they began to think no∣thing insuperable to their courage. This opi∣nion made them pass the 
Danube
 again, and un∣dertake the Siege of 
Offen,
 or 
Buda,
 the Capital of the Kingdom, sometimes the Residence of the Kings of 
Hungary,
 and now of the Bassa's, that govern that wealthy Kingdom with no less authority. After some ruffling and skirmishes, the City was invested, and the Suburbs taken without any great opposition. The Turks like∣wise quitted St. 
Gerards
 Hill, and the besiegers began to batter the Walls with their Artillery.


The Turks abroad were not idle, for having got twenty thousand Men together, they were resolved to attempt the relief of 
Buda.
 But the Christians having left all their Foot, with what Horse was necessary to continue the Siege, they marched with the rest of the Cavalry, one thousand Foot under the command of Count 
Aversberg,
 and two thousand five hundred 
Hus∣sars
 of Count 
Esterhasis.
 The Duke marched all Night to find out the Enemy, who, though well trenched, at sight of the Christians came out of their Camp, and embattell'd themselves for their defence. The dispute lasted near four hours, the Turks making several motions to gain the Flanks of the Enemy, which being per∣ceived, the Christians used all possible diligence to prevent them, and engaging at length, after a sharp fight, the Infidels being disordered, were put to flight, and so closely pursued, that not only their Camp and Cannon were taken, but at least four thousand of them slain, and the great Standard, the badge of the Grand Visier's dignity also surprised.


After this Victory, the Duke returning to the Siege, summoned the place, but received for an∣swer, that the Governour had in the presence of his Messengers caused forty Christian Slaves to be hewed in pieces, saying, he wished he could do as much to all the Christian Army. In re∣venge of this, the Christians assaulted the place, but in vain, though upon a second attempt they carried the lower Town, with their Swords in their hands, notwithstanding the opposition they found was great. They raised a Battery there of twenty four Cannon, and seventeen Mortars, from whence, as also St. 
Gerards
 hill, they battered the City. Nor were the besieged idle, who made a brave sally upon the Besiegers, wherein they slew some hundreds of them, with several considerable Officers, besides the wounded.


The Christian Army beginning to want For∣rage, they made a Bridge to pass to the Isle of St. 
Margaret,
 from whence they might be the better provided with all things. Many were the attempts, the batteries, the sallies, and endea∣vours on both sides. The Christians endeavou∣red to hinder the Turks, though in vain, from watering at the 
Danube.
 The Christians sprung a Mine by the great Tower, which did indeed take effect, but it was found that the Turks were too well provided to hazard an assault. About mid-
August,
 the Governour, or Visier of 
Buda, Kara Mehemet,
 was kill'd with a shot he received in his face, a Person very brave, and very know∣ing. 
Ephraim
 Bassa succeeded him in the Go∣vernment, but did not enjoy it long, being like∣wise slain with a Cannon Bullet, so that the Chief command was devolved upon the Aga of the Janizaries.


As the attack was vigorous, so the defence was brave, the Turks continually vexing the Christians with their Alarms and Sallies, who on the other side continued their approaches with great resolution, but their Foot being much spent, it was judged advisable not to hazard a General assault, before the 
Bavarian
 Forces, which were daily expected, were come up.


In the mean time the Serasquier Bassa formed a design to make a diversion some other way, in order to which he marches towards the fron∣tiers of 
Croatia,
 where General 
Lesley
 was cam∣ped, who had besieged 
Virovitza
 in 
July,
 beaten the relief designed for their succour, and there∣upon had the place surrendered to him upon composition. Having now notice of the Sera∣squier's design, he went and posted himself within half a League off his Camp, near a Bridge that was lay'd over the 
Danube
 at 
Turanowitz.
 A while after the Turks approached, who charged

with great fury eight hundred Croats, newly come to the Imperial Camp, but with their ac∣customed misfortune. They however returned immediately to the fight, and forced the Croats to retire, leaving them three Standards for prise, so that being animated with this advantage, they would attempt more, and attacked the Imperi∣alists in their 
Post;
 but they were so ill received, that they were obliged to retire with the loss of five hundred men, which were killed upon the place. The Christians lost two hundred.


Though this Siege, for the Greatness and Fame of it, deserves to be described in all its par∣ticulars, the Approaches, the Attacks, the Mines, the Battels, the Batteries, the Breaches of the Christians being carried on with so much Va∣lour and Constancy, that it amazed the wonder∣ing World; yet the Greatness of the Garrison, the Scituation and Strength of the Place, the re∣iterated Succours that were brought in, a potent Army commanded by a 
Seraskier,
 within the noise of their Guns, yea, oft-times their view; a vigorous and intrepid Courage in the Defen∣dants, frequent and furious Sallies, Counter∣mines, and the advance of a wet Season so fa∣vourable to them, rendred all the Endeavours of the Besiegers fruitless, and forced them to a Retreat.


The Duke of 
Bavaria
 had indeed brought with his Person, a considerable recruit to the Impe∣rialists, and they performed all that Courage could suggest; but being the fatal moment of the reducing of this Capital City of the King∣dom was not yet come, we will transmit the History of it till then, when the same great Atchievements were in a manner acted over again, and indeed by the same Generals on the side of the Christians, but with better fortune.


The Siege had lasted from the fourteenth of 
July,
 till the first of 
November,
 at which time the Christians having transported their Baggage, their sick, and some pieces of Artillery to the Isle of St. 
Andrew;
 the Army sending their great Cannon, their Ammunition, and the rest of their Baggage by Water, for want of draught-Horses, though well convoyed, followed them∣selves in a Body uninterrupted, and marched to their Winter Quarters, the 
Bavarians
 into up∣per 
Hungary,
 and the Imperialists into both the upper and lower 
Hungary, Bohemia, Silesia, &c.
 ac∣cording to their Repartitions.


The Turks attempted nothing upon the Ar∣my in their retreat, but brought near a thousand Prisoners, which were left in the Isle of St. 
Mar∣garet,
 into the City, not singly triumphing for so signal a deliverance.


Such was the end of this bloody Siege, where, following the common Opinion, the Emperour lost twenty thousand Men, and amongst them a great number of Officers. Of those of most note were the Counts of 
Altheim,
 two of the 
Sta∣rembergs, James
 and 
Lewis, Carlowitz, Richtari, Ho∣ken-Zollern, Furstenburg, Nassau, Durheim, Chri∣minz,
 and the young Counts of 
Harrah,
 and great quantity of others.


The Turks recovered their Garrisons of 
Pest
 and 
Vacia,
 without any great difficulty, but in exchange the Count of 
Zober
 took the Castle of 
Suran
 near 
Newheusel.


The Republick of 
Venice
 had a more fortu∣nate Campaign.
 Their Doge or Prince being dead, 
Marco Antonio Justiniano
 being elected Duke in his place, the Senate sent orders to their Se∣cretary 
Capello,
 at the Ottoman 
Port
 immedi∣ately after the conclusion of the Alliance made with the Emperour and 
Poland,
 to declare War against the Turks, and to save himself as well as he could, which he did; for having scarce finished his Declaration, he retired from 
Con∣stantinople
 in the habit of a Sea-man, and embar∣ked himself upon a 
French
 Ship. But two of his Domesticks, and six other servants, had the misfortune to be taken, whilst the Merchants of his Nation took Sanctuary in the 
French
 Em∣bassadour's Palace. The 
Kaimacan
 of 
Constanti∣nople
 would search whether 
Capello
 was not there also, but the Ambassadour answered him, if he came to re-search there without express orders from the Grand Seignior, he should repent it, which so discomposed him, that after some ex∣cuses, he proceeded no further.


The Council choosing their great Officers, made 
Morosini
 Captain General, 
Mocenigo
 Pro∣curer General of 
Dalmatia;
 the Prince of 
Parma
 General of the Infantry, 
&c.
 General 
Strozoldo
 passed out of the Emperour's service, to that of this Common-wealth.


The 
Morlacks
 did likewise, for the most part, embrace the Party of the 
Venetians,
 holding the Turks in perpetual Alarms, making oft-times very considerable Booty, perpetually pestering them with their ravagings and excursions.


The General Rendezvouz of the 
Venetian
 Fleet was at 
Corfu,
 where the Gallies of the Pope, of 
Malta,
 and of 
Tuscany
 joyning with them, consisting in all of forty-six Gallies, six Gallias∣ses, thirty-three Men of War, besides other smaller Vessels, manned with above twenty thousand Foot, and five or six hundred Horse. A General Council of War being held in pre∣sence of all the Chief of the Auxiliary Squa∣drons, it was resolved to attempt the Island of St. 
Maure,
 in pursuance whereof, arriving before the Island about the 
20th
 of 
July,
 the Army en∣tred the Port of 
Dameta,
 on the East side of the Island, where also they made their descent. Seignior 
Monetta
 landed first with one hundred and fifty Men, being followed by General 
Stro∣zoldo,
 with two 
Venetian
 Regiments, the Popes, and the Infantry of 
Malto,
 the rest of the 
Vene∣tian
 and Duke of 
Tuscany
's Forces landing on the West side. Having taken their Posts, the Generalissimo sent a Summons to them in the Fort, to surrender it, which they with contempt refusing, the Christians began to batter the Town from their Gallies and Galliasses, whereby the houses and fortifications of the City were greatly endamaged, as also a Mosque, which was ruined; and however the Turks were not wanting in their defence, yet they would hin∣der the Christians to lodge in the Suburbs, and to raise Batteries, which did greatly prejudice the Walls, besides that the Bombs did very great harm in the City. The first of 
August,
 a great Breach was made in the Wall, one of their Bulwarks being much ruined, and four of their Pieces of 
Cannon
 rendred useless to the Besieged; besides, the Town flamed in several parts, being fired by the Bombs; by favour of which advantages the 
Venetians
 advanced their approaches so well, that they began already to fill the Ditch, and making every thing ready for a general assault. Things being at this pass, General 
Morosini,
 by an unaccustomed kind of Clemency, sent them a second Summons, which they accepting off, hung out towards evening a white Flag, and about one in the Morning, sent three Deputies, to notifie they were content to surrender, upon condition they might carry all their goods with them, but they could obtain no more, than to march out with their Fami∣lies, and what they could carry. Hostages were next Morning delivered on both sides, and all the Slaves were released, save that they were

obliged to serve as Sea-men in the Gallies of the Common-wealth for a year. The Garrison with their Army, seven hundred in number, marched out that evening by the West Port, and the 
Venetians
 entred by the breach into the City,
 where they found store of Provision, and eighty Pieces of Ordinance, twenty whereof had the Arms of St. 
Mark
 upon them. During the time of the Siege, which lasted seventeen days, the Christians lost four-hundred men, and the Turks near three hundred.


And thus this Nest of Pirates, (the 
Leucade
 of the Ancients) about seventy miles round, and well peopled, and in the possession of the Turks ever since 
Mahomet
 the second's time, was re-taken in less than three Weeks, with so inconsiderable a loss. The General caused the Mosques forthwith to be re-consecrated, and 
Te Deum
 to be sung in them for so happy a Vi∣ctory, which was also celebrated in 
Venice
 with great magnificence.


After the fortifications of this place were re∣paired, and the Garrison provided with all ne∣cessaries, the Government of it being given to 
Laurence Venier,
 as extraordinary Provider, and to 
Phillip Parictz
 in ordinary, both Gentlemen of 
Venice,
 the General chose two thousand 
Vene∣tians,
 the remainder of those which were in a condition to march, by reason of the manifold sicknesses that reigned amongst the Souldiery, and dispatched them with Collonel 
Angelo,
 to assemble all the 
Grecians
 he could get together. and transported himself to the haven of 
Pettala,
 in expectation of the said Collonel's enterprise. He went thence, and ancred in the haven or Port of 
Dragomestro,
 where landing with two thousand 
Venetians,
 and one thousand of the Auxiliaries, he joyned himself with fifteen or sixteen hundred 
Grecians.
 These Troops rava∣ged the Country, chased the men which 
Saban
 Bassa, Governour of 
Prevezza,
 had posted to observe the Christians. Having allured the said Bassa into the field, burnt some Villages, and pillaged the Country five days together, they re-imbark'd at 
Pettala,
 and sailed thence to the Haven of 
Dameta.
 There, at a Council of War, the resolution of attacking 
Prevezza
 was taken, it being the only place that covered the Island of St. 
Maur,
 being some twelve miles distant from it. In order to this design, the Ge∣neral sent five Gallies, and six Galliasses towards the Castles called the 
Gomenizze,
 within sight of the Fortress, to oblige the Turks to divide their Forces, which also happened; for upon a sup∣position that the Christians would attempt the Towers, they sent most of their Men thither: The Army parted from 
Dameta
 the 
20th
 of 
Sep∣tember,
 and came to anchor that evening at the mouth of the Gulph of 
Arta
 or 
Ambracia,
 that City being famous for the Residence of King 
Pyrrhus,
 and its Gulf, for the Victory of 
Augustus
 against 
Marc Anthony.


The next day the Captain 
Monetta,
 who was come with twenty four Barks and Brigantines, landed his Troops, being assisted by the ap∣proach of the Gallies, which hindred the Turks from daring to appear upon the shore, before the 
Venetians
 were drawn up into Battalia by General 
Strozoldo,
 and had forced five hundred Spahis, who came to charge them, to retire. They took the Castle without difficulty, and posted themselves upon a height which com∣manded the City. The General thereupon sum∣moned the place, but the Officer who command∣ed in chief in the absence of 
Saba
 Bassa, refused the Letter and Messenger, shooting at the later, upon confidence of being relieved by his Go∣vernour. Several Mortars and Cannon were landed, and Batteries being raised, the place was sorely canonado'd, in so much that all the Ene∣mies Pieces but one were dismounted. The twenty fourth, they carried their Approaches into the Moat, and by Favour of the Obscurity of the Night, carried their Mine under the great Tower. The twenty eighth they made a Lodg∣ment in the Ditch, and the Breach being very large,
 Order was given for the Assault as soon as the Mine had played; but the Turks, sensible of their Danger, prevented it by hanging out a Flag of Truce. They demanded the same Con∣ditions with them at St. 
Maur,
 though but thir∣ty of the principal were suffered to go out with Arms and Baggage, the rest being only allowed what they could carry about them. There were found in this place forty six pieces of Can∣non, and much Provision. The Winter ad∣vancing apace, the Auxiliaries returned to their several Homes, and the 
Venetians
 to their Isles to pass the Season there.


In 
Dalmatia
 the 
Venetians
 happily ended their Campania with the taking of 
Narenta.


The King of 
Poland
 did not take the Field this year before mid-
August,
 after the Troops which had been last year in 
Hungary,
 and a par∣ty of 
Brandenburgs
 had joyned his Army. He took a review of his Army near 
Buzac,
 from whence he sent a strong detachment to invest 
Jastowitz
 but two miles off, whither he also came towards Evening with the rest of his Army,
 and summoned the place; but the Commander having answered, that the place being intrusted to him by the Grand Seignior, he would keep it to the last Extremity; but he was not as good as his word, for after having been battered two days, the Turks demanded a Parley. Hostages were given on both sides, and the Articles quickly signed, according to which the Garrison march∣ed out with their Arms, to the number of five hundred men. The King turned hence towards 
Swaniec,
 near the 
Niester,
 over which he caused a Bridge to be lay'd, and his Army to pass it. But he quickly repassed it again, upon the ad∣vice he received, that thirty thousand 
Tartars
 had passed this River, with design to make an irruption into 
Poland.
 His Majesty going in quest of them, had the luck to cut four hundred of them in pieces, but he could not ingage them in a formal battel, being they stayed no where, for this reason, and the season being passed,
 he resolved to send his Army into Winter-Quarters.


The successes of the 
Cossacks
 last year in 
De∣cember,
 which we have already mentioned, en∣couraged them with their General 
Kunincky,
 be∣times in the Spring, to go in quest of new Ad∣ventures, and being reinforced with 
Moldavians
 and 
Walachians,
 they marched towards 
Stravico,
 where the 
Danube
 disgorges it self into the black Sea, but being assailed by the 
Hospodar Duka,
 they were obliged to retire, and their General fled out of the Field with the Horse, but the In∣fantry standing firm, recovered the day, routed the 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 took 
Jas,
 the Hospodar's Residence, and himself Prisoner. But not be∣ing satisfied with their General 
Kunicky,
 they deposed him, and put 
Mohila
 into his place; and however that afterwards the old General was restored by the intercession of the King of 
Poland,
 and that the new had but a subaltern command under him, yet the 
Cossacks
 mortally hating him, they at length assassinated him, and gave the entire command to 
Mohila,
 after which they still continued their excursions, without ingaging before any strong Place.




The 
Ottoman
 Empire had been in no small distraction before the relief of 
Buda,
 and that seeming in some sort to compensate their loss at 
Vienna,
 they at least made use of it as an incen∣tive to raise the well-nigh desponding spirits of their People. It had been given out that the Grand Seignior himself would in Person come into the field, at least to 
Belgrade,
 to countenanee his Armies, though he was pleased to remain at 
Adrianople;
 and being the Forces he had or∣dered from the several Provinces of the Em∣pire were defective in the numbers he expect∣ed, he caused several of their Leaders to be strangled. The Troops of 
Asia
 did likewise mutiny, which so retarded his preparations, that the Christians got into the Field before him, and necessitated him to a defensive War. The Rendezvouz of his Forces was at 
Belgrade,
 from whence they passed by the Bridge of 
Esseck
 to 
Buda,
 whose fortifications they took care to re∣pair, for fear lest the Enemy might attempt a second Siege, placing twelve thousand men there in Garrison, with Victuals and Ammunition for its defence. The numerous Hoards of the 
Tar∣tars,
 which never failed to attend their Con∣quests, refused now to march, the 
Cham
 having sent the 
Grand Seignior
 word, that he could spare none of his Troops this Summer, having him∣self need of them, to secure his Country against the invasion of the 
Cossacks.


Newheusel
 had been block'd up all the Win∣ter by the Christians, under the command of Collonel 
Heusler,
 so that most of the attempts for its relief from 
Buda, Agria,
 and other of their Garrisons, proved fruitless. The Turks seeing no good to be done with small Detachmnts, drew a great Body of Men together, betwixt 
Pest
 and 
Vicegrade,
 and having provided a great Convoy of Provisions, resolved to attempt the relief of the place, which occasioned Collonel 
Heusler
 to be daily re-inforced with new Troops; who, ten thousand strong, posted his Men a∣long the River 
Gran,
 having taken care to se∣cure all the Fords and passages of it. His num∣bers daily increasing, the 
Ottomans
 who were gathered together betwixt 
Pest
 and 
Vacia,
 having intelligence of it, retired, having sent the Provi∣sions, designed for the relief of 
Newheusel,
 back to 
Buda,
 fearing they should be attack'd by the Imperialists, if they stay'd there.


The Christian Army, composed of the Im∣perial Troops, and their several Allies, being much more forward than the Turks, had ren∣dezvouzed, and were now encamped betwixt 
Newheusel
 and 
Barcam,
 where, upon the Duke of 
Lorrain
's arrival, it was resolved at a Council of War to attack 
Novigrade,
 to cut off by that means the communication betwixt 
Buda
 and 
Newheusel,
 and afterwards formally to besiege 
Newheusel.
 But he afterwards altered his mind, being it might take up too much time to besiege 
Novi∣grade,
 by reason of the distance, and would but little contribute to the Siege of 
Newheusel.
 Be∣sides, this last place was represented very defe∣ctive, through their wants and distempers.


Newheusel
 the 
Oywar
 of the 
Hungarians,
 is a large Hexagon,
 well bulwork'd and moated, the Plain about being Moorish and Fenny. The River 
Newtra
 runs within Pistol-shot of it, fur∣nishing the Town-Ditch with its Water, by a cut or trench, which conveys it into it. The resolution of attacking this important place being taken,
 it was invested by the Imperial Army, the lines of Circumvallation were made, and a resolution was taken to attack the place with vigour and conduct. Two lines of ap∣proaches were advanced towards two Bastions; that to the right by the Imperialists, and they of 
Lunebourg;
 and the other by the Imperialists, and the 
Bavarian
 Troops; the one commanded by the Princes of 
Hanovre,
 and 
Croy,
 byturns, and the other by Count 
Serini,
 with each three Ma∣ster Generals to assist them. The same night the Trenches were opened by three thousand Foot, and the Approaches carried on seven hun∣dred paces. Those on the 
Bavarian
 side towards the 
Mosque
 were enlarged and deepened, so that three Men might pass a-brest, and be covered. On the Imperialists side, the Duke caused two Batteries to be raised, both on the right of his Approaches, whereon they worked the whole Night; and though the Enemy continued to shoot their Cannon without ceasing, there were but very few killed or wounded. In short, the Approaches on both sides were carried on with such care, and industry, and courage, the Duke seldom leaving the Trenches till very far in the Night, but assisting and encouraging the Soul∣diery by his presence and authority, that maugre all the brave opposition of the Garri∣son, and their perpetual firing and sallies, the works were continued to the very Mote on both sides, strengthned not only with Lines of Com∣munication, with Redoubts, and with multiplied Batteries, but the Water also began to be drained out of the Ditch, by a Canal made for the purpose. The Besieged seeing themselves so sorely pressed, amongst others made a Sally a∣bout three a Clock, with two hundred Men, and surprised a Redoubt, wherein there were three hundred of the 
Suabian
 Troops, who to∣gether with their Officers were all cut to pieces. The Turks were so joyed with this success, that they testified it by a consort of Musick, after their mode, that Night. The Besiegers had endea∣voured to pass the Ditch in Boats, and so carry over their Minery, but the said Boats were sunk by the Defendants, and many slain; and now they begin to fill the said Moat with Faggots, and Sacks of Wool, and several Galleries were in making for the securer passage, but they were often burnt and broke by the Besieged, who o∣mitted nothing in their defence. They set fire on the 
Bavarians
 Gallery with their Arrows, at the sharp ends whereof they had fastned a mix∣ture of Sulphur and Pitch, which did not only burn it, but communicating its flames to the neighbouring Battery, burnt it quite down, with the Carriages of four of their battering Pieces, notwithstanding all the diligence and care to the contrary.


It was now the beginning of 
August,
 when the Besieged made a brisk Sally upon them that worked in the advanced Posts over against the Gate of 
Gran,
 killed fifty and hurt many, among which was 
Gallenfels
 Lieutenant Collonel, 
Puge∣relli
 a Captain, and several other Officers. The disorder was so great, that the Dukes of 
Bavaria
 and 
Lorrain
 ran thither, the latter wounding sorne of the Run-aways to stay them, and ill treating their Officers for their negligence. Collonel 
Burgstorf
 was killed the Night following in the Approaches, and Count 
Souches
 dangerously wounded in his Neck. The Besieged had filled up the Canal which the Christians had made to drain their Moat, but it was opened again. And now the Approaches, the Galleries, and fil∣ling the Ditch had been carried on with such violence, that the Cannon of the Town were well-nigh all dismounted, and the infinite num∣bers of Bombs and Carkasses which had been thrown into it, had well-nigh consumed it. The Besieged had indeed made new Retrenchments in the attack'd Bastions, where they had re-moun∣ted

their Cannon, and used them with success: but,


The Breach which the Christians had made was great, and the Gallery was carried over. The Moat was filled equal with the largeness of the Breach, and the Mines were a compleating, the Traverses of the Ditch were much enlar∣ged, so that the Souldiers might go in a large front to the assault. And yet they finish another Battery upon the brink of the Moat, where they planted twenty-four Pieces of Cannon of twenty four pound Ball, to make the Breach yet larger and easier. And now all things being prepared for the assault, they were hindred for two or three days by the great Rains.


In the beginning of this Month, the Bassa had desired a Parley, but demanded, in case of sur∣render, that he might march away, not only with their Arms, but all sorts of Ammunition and Cannon, and take with him all the Chri∣stian Slaves, 
&c.
 which conditions the Duke would not hearken to. The Bassa was indeed animated by hopes of relief from the 
Seraskier,
 who, he knew, was preparing for it, and had already in order to a diversion besieged 
Gran,
 which obliged the Duke of 
Lorrain
 with the Ele∣ctor of 
Bavaria,
 and forty thousand men, to rise and go and meet him, leaving eleven thousand Foot and five thousand Horse, with fifty-eight Pieces of Cannon, and eighteen Mortars, to con∣tinue the Siege under the command of Count 
Caprara,
 Marshal General of the Field, and the Prince of 
Croy,
 General of the Artillery.


But to return to 
Newheusel,
 the fatal 
19th.
 of 
August
 being come, a resolution was taken to assault the Town at Eleven of the Clock, to which end two Mines were sprung that morn∣ing, one at the North Bastion, and the other up∣on the neighbouring Curtain, which, though they had not their wished effect, which was to ruine some retrenchments of the besieged, yet they did much facilitate the passage, rendering the ascent more easie, so that it was resolved to assault the place at eight a clock, to this pur∣pose three thousand were ordered for the attack in two places, to each fifteen hundred, which were supported by a Reserve of two thousand. The Imperialists, had the Van on both sides. Count 
Sherffenberg
 commanded the right, being followed by them of 
Lunenberg
 and 
Suabia,
 and Lieutenant Collonel 
Samoraski
 the left, with the Troops of 
Colen, Bavaria
 and 
Franconia.
 Being thus prepared, they fired from all their Batte∣ries, and showred in their Granado's and Bombs from nineteen Mortars, with that impetuousness, that they put them within into such a conster∣nation, that for some time they durst scarce ap∣pear. During this Tempest, Count 
Sherffenberg
 first enter'd, and posting himself upon the Ba∣stion, the Sieur 
Rummel
 about the same, pushing at the new breach; the besieged were forced to give way on all sides, and retreating upon a Cavalier of their Retrenchments, did now the second time lift up a white Flagg, demanding quarter, but in vain; for the Christians rushing on, put all they met to the Sword; this rendred the rest so desperate, that four hundred of them precipitated themselves into the Town-Ditch, who were all destroyed by the Horse, so that of all the Garrison which was yet twelve hundred at the beginning of the assault, scarce two hun∣dred were saved. 
Hassan
 Bassa the Governour, desperately wounded in the head and breast, was brought to the General, and some ten more of the chief Officers were saved; but the Governor dyed two days after of his wounds.
 This 
Hassan
 was a Renegade, Native of 
Bohemia,
 though a man of extraordinary great parts and resolution.


There were found in the place eighty Pieces of Ordnance, and a great quantity of Ammuni∣tion and Provision, so that the perpetual noise of their wants was a fable, the Governour having always a great Magazin of Victuals, as well as Ammunition, which he did not think fit to ex∣pose before the Siege. Of the Christian Slaves there were but forty remaining, the Turks ha∣ving consumed the rest in their works, exposing them still where the greatest danger was. And although the Besiegers did scarce lose one hun∣dred in the storm, yet it is supposed, that during the whole Siege, the number of their slain did at least equal, if not surmount that of their Ene∣mies, yet with this difference, that the Turks lost all, and they but an inconsiderable part of a po∣tent Army: excepting the Prince of 
Wirtemberg,
 greatly lamented by the good and brave, and some other considerable Officers.


The 
Seraskier,
 not imagining the fate of 
New∣heusel
 so near, having with great industry ga∣thered a considerable Army, estimated betwixt fifty and sixty thousand strong, resoved to at∣tempt the relief of it, in order to which he would try the way of diversion,
 as less hazar∣dous, and upon that account marches to 
Gran,
 and though that very day of his arrival an ad∣ditional reinforcement of five hundred men, sent thither by the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 got into the Gar∣rison, yet he caused the Trenches to be opened, and began to attack the place with his Cannon and Mortars, from Batteries raised on St.
George
 and St.
Thomas
 hills. They also attackt the low∣er Town, but were repulsed with the loss of two or three hundred men. Several other attempts were made upon the Out-works, but with loss to the Undertakers, who understanding that the Enemy advanced, grew more remiss, possessing themselves of all the Hills by which the Chri∣stians might attack them, and thereupon quitted the Siege.


On the 
7th
 of 
August,
 the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 with forty thousand men, passed the 
Danube,
 up∣on a Bridge near 
Comorra,
 and arrived the 
12th
 at a Village that was burnt, where he found the Turks, who had abandoned the Siege of 
Gran,
 very advantageously posted, having Mountains on each side, covered with thick Woods, and a Morass before them, which reached to the 
Danube.
 Upon the arrival of the Christian Army, they skirmished near the Morass, where several were killed and hurt on both sides. The following Night the Christian Army camped in Battalia, and continued so the 
13th,
 but the Turks alarm'd them about noon, and skirmished all the day with the Christians right Wing, where the 
Hungarians
 were, many being slain and wounded on both sides. About noon the Duke comman∣ded some Pieces of Cannon to be planted on a Hill behind his Men, from whence they shot, and the Turks did the same with two great Pieces, from a height where the Janizaries were. The 
14th,
 the Turks advanced their Camp to the very Morass, upon Mountains opposite to our advanced Guards, where they made three Batteries with great Cannon, shooting into our very Camp.


The 
15th,
 a 
Polish
 Slave escaped out of the Turkish Camp, and gave advice, that the 
Seras∣kier, Ibrahim
 Bassa, was perswaded, that the Christian Army did not exceed twenty thousand, and thought or a retreat, so that he might easily rout them, if he suddenly fell upon them with his that was sixty thousand strong. Upon this advice, the Duke and the other Generals resol∣ved to feign a Retreat, and then, by drawing

the Enemy beyond the Morass, find a place to fight with them in a pitch'd Battel.


The same day the Turks advanced towards a place in the Morass where they might pass with the Horse, and took Post also in another, where they might make a Bridge for the Foot. As the Christians had already resolved to march the day following very early, towards the Bridge of Boats at 
Vyfali,
 they let flie some Guns only to amuse the Enemy. In the mean time the Orders for the march of the Army were given in the following manner. First, that the Bag∣gage should part that evening. The left Wing having the Avaunt-Guard, followed by that of the right. Secondly, that the Army should be ranged in Battalia before day, and march as the place would permit; the two Wings each in two Lines, but if the way would oblige them to file, that then they should begin by the left Wing, and enlarge themselves as the ground did permit, into their first order of Battel.


That the second line should have the Avaunt-Guard commanded by Count 
Dunewalt,
 which was to be followed by the first line in the same manner. At the right of the first line Count 
Styrum
 was to march upon the Mountains (which he had viewed the day before) with his Regi∣ment, the Dragoons of 
Luneburg,
 and all the 
Hussars,
 except those of 
Zoborra,
 with some Field∣pieces. That the 
Fauconets
 should march before the first line, and every Regiment with its Field∣pieces, as usual. And finally, that the Squadrons and the Battalions posted on the little Mountain on this side the Morass, as also those on the Moun∣tain to the right, commanded by Major Gene∣ral 
Tungen,
 should march at the sound of the Tymbals.


About ten at Night they had News that the Turks were passing the Morass,
 whereupon all the Generals took Horse, 
Lorrain
 in the right, and the Elector of 
Bavaria
 in the left, and all being in order, they began to march at the sound of their Trumpets, Tymbals, and Drums, which was continued till the Turks by Favour of the Night charged their left Wing, where∣upon the whole Army facing about, they mar∣ched to succour their engaged Troops, which done, they continued advancing, notwithstand∣ing the cries and howlings of the Turks, and their continual Skirmishing till it was break of day, when a great Mist covered the whole Field, that nothing could be discerned. Both sides made use of this accident, ranging their Armies to their uttermost Advantage.


After seven in the Morning, the Sun having dispell'd the Mist, the Turks advanced upon the Christians, with the noise of their Drums and horrible Cries, discharging some Cannon upon their right Wing, charged it with great fury, but they were repulsed; the same happended on the Mountain where 
Tungen
 commanded, who was hurt there. At the same time the Turks attacked with their greatest force, and principal∣ly their Foot, the heights on the Christians right where Count 
Styrum
 was, but he was so season∣ably succoured by some Imperial Battalions and other Troops of the second line, that the Turks were forced to retire, being indeed chased and repelled in all the parts of the Army. Being fled by the Morass, the way they came, they seemed to make head again in their Camp, but upon the advance of the Christians, who passed the Morass with their Foot and Horse, the terror and consternation was so great amongst the Tur∣kish Souldiers,
 that it was impossible for the Se∣rasquier, notwithstanding all his endeavour to perswade his Men to oppose the passage of the Morass. They also abandoned their Camp, Arms, Cannon, and other Instruments of War to the Pursuers, besides forty Ensigns and some two hundred Prisoners which were taken. The Serasquier was hurt in his Leg, and having left five thousand upon the place, secured the rest by a timely retreat. The two Armies separa∣ting after the fight, the Christians went back to 
Comorra,
 in order to their prosecution of the Siege of 
Newheusel:
 and the Serasquier having rallied his Forces, and punished with strangling some of his chief Officers, who had not well behaved themselves in the Battel of 
Gran,
 and passed the 
Danube,
 declaring he would relieve 
Newheusel
 whatever it cost, but soon after he received the news, as the Christians had at 
Comorra,
 that the place was taken by assault.


The Serasquier however having formed a new train of Artillery of twenty Pieces, which he took out of 
Buda,
 and being re-inforced with several fresh Troops, he marched towards 
Vac∣cia,
 incamping betwixt that place and 
Pest,
 but hearing of the approach of the Christian Army, he abandoned 
Novigrade
 and 
Vaccia,
 taking the Cannon and Ammunition with him that was there, demolishing the said places, and setting fire to them when he left them. He also ruined the Country about 
Pest,
 and having sent a De∣tachment to re-inforce the Garrison of 
Agria,
 he repassed the 
Dunube
 with the rest of his Army at 
Buda.


And now the Turks do not seem averse from Peace, the Serasquier having sent an Aga to the Duke of 
Lorrain
 with a Letter, wherein he ac∣quainted his Highness, that he had full power from the Grand Seignior to treat and conclude a Peace, which he conjures him to promote by offers of great advantage, as abandoning Count 
Tekely,
 and delivering of the three Hostages, which were in the Grand Seignior's hands. But the Duke answered him, that he had no Orders to treat of Peace, and that a Victorious Army was not to be amused with such Proposals, but that he would acquaint his Imperial Majesty with the Serasquier's desire.


The Serasquier having passed the 
Danube,
 the few Tartars he had, not exceeding six thou∣sand, left him and returned home. The Bassa's of 
Agria, Temiswar
 and 
Waradin
 were sent back, with the Troops under their command, and went home to their respective Governments, the Serasquier with the rest of his Army posting himself betwixt 
Buda
 and 
Alba-Regalis
 to observe the Christians motion.


The Imperial Army had advanced in quest of the Turks as far as 
Vaccia,
 but hearing that the 
Ottoman
 Army was separated in several Bodies, and marched as above, as also towards the Frontiers of 
Styria
 and 
Croatia;
 the Duke resolved likewise to send four thousand men to re-inforce Count 
Lesley,
 and being the Forrage was destroyed, to return, having ordered a De∣tachment of five Regiments of Foot, one of Cuirasiers, and two of Dragoons and Croats, to march unto uppper 
Hungary,
 where Count 
Caprara
 was to command in Chief.


The Serasquier had made several other At∣tempts for Peace, but the Emperour refusing pasports to his Aga, those overtures vanished. There had also been an 
Armenian
 sent in the be∣ginning of this year with overtures of Peace, but he was sent back with this Answer; That the Emperour will not enter into any Negotiation of Peace, but joyntly with the King of 
Poland,
 and Republick of 
Venice;
 insomuch that finding all his Endeavours for a Treaty fruitless, he re∣passed the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 sending part of his

Forces towards 
Zigeth,
 and the rest towards 
Sla∣vonia
 and 
Bosoria,
 whereby he also defeated Count 
Lesleys
 Design upon 
Possega.


To all the Miseries of War was added that of the Plague, which raged much at 
Constantinople,
 which, together with the accompt they had of the loss of 
Newheusel,
 and the other ill Successes of the 
Ottoman
 Army in 
Hungary, Morea,
 and in∣deed every where, had filled not only that Ci∣ty, but the Empire with Consternation and Tu∣mult; for the Janizaries, as is usual in all great Misfortunes, mutined, threathed not only the Grand Visier, but the Grand Seignior himself, and were not to be appeased without considera∣ble Distributions amongst them; it being also given out, that his Highness would himself com∣mand the Army in Person next Summer.


The Principal Armies of these potent Adver∣saries being in Winter Quarters, we will leave them strugling there to enlarge their Accom∣modations, and transfer our Pen to such Actions as have been remarkable in other Parts.


The Contests in upper 
Hungary
 were various betwixt the Imperialists and 
Tekelites,
 General 
Schultz
 commanded the former, who had or∣der to attack 
Ʋngwar,
 and afterwards to besiege 
Esperies
 and 
Cassaw.
 Count 
Tekely
 thereupon passes the 
Tybiscus,
 assembling what Troops he could together, sending to the Neighbour Coun∣tries to cause their Militia to march and to joyn him, which 
Schultz
 endeavoured to hinder, es∣pecially his joyning against the Turks. And now he lays close Siege to 
Ʋngwar,
 which was defended with no less Valour than Obstinacy, insomuch that after the loss of several Officers, and a considerable number of Men, he was ob∣liged to raise the Siege. Some time after he laid siege to the City of 
Esperies
 with eight thou∣sand men, where he found no less Opposition than at 
Ʋngwar,
 the besieged seeming resolved to defend the Place to the last extremity, not∣withstanding the offer made to the Rebels of a general Pardon, which was intimated to the Magistrates and Citizens of 
Esperies
 by an Offi∣cer sent from the General, but they, instead of taking advantage of the Emperour's Clemency, barbarously killed the said Officer, which the General resented so highly, that he caused a general assault to be given the place, but in vain, being beaten off with the loss of several hun∣dreds of their Souldiers. The place had alrea∣dy held out six Weeks, but General 
Caprara
 be∣ing ordered to command in chief in upper 
Hun∣gary,
 and a Detachment of ten thousand men being sent to reinforce the Siege, it made them stoop, and desire a Parley, which produced a Treaty,
 and then a Surrender, such of the Gar∣rison as would being entertained in the Empe∣rours Service, 
and the Magistrates and Citizens to enjoy their antient Priviledges, and the Places and Employments they at present posses.


General 
Schultz
 marched from 
Esperies
 to 
Cas∣chaw,
 and beleagured it, and General 
Caprara
 to∣wards 
Tokay,
 with a Resolution to take that place what ever it cost, being it opened a passage betwixt 
Transilvania
 and 
Zatmar,
 nor did it make any remarkable Opposition, but with other les∣ser Places surrendered without resistance upon Conditions.


Count 
Caprara
 being come in Person before 
Caschaw,
 
Peterhasi,
 one of Count 
Tekelies
 chief Officers, being sent with six hundred horse to reinforce the Garrison, made a shew of accep∣ting the general Pardon, and entering into the Emperours Service; but being come near the Town, put himself into it, with the six hun∣dred men he had with him, which mainly en∣couraged the besieged to defend the Place. 
Ca∣prara
 sent to summon them, but in vain, so that he was forced to use all the Formalities of a Siege. The Garrison consisted of four thousand, com∣manded by Count 
Tekeli's
 best Officers, who de∣fended themselves with great bravery, making very many sharp Sallies into the Enemies Quar∣ters. The Imperialists notwithstanding carried their Trenches to the Town Ditch, and began to thunder upon the place from three Batteries. One of the Attacks being commanded by the Prince of 
Wirtemberg,
 who was slain there by a Cannon Bullet. But this Siege did not last long, though the Capital of upper 
Hungary,
 and pro∣vided with all things necessary for a long de∣fence. But the Reasons of their surrender, which hapned by a very surprising accident, is very excusable.
 Count 
Tekely,
 sollicitous for this Capital of this part of the Kingdom, having writ to the Bassa of 
Waradin
 of the Consequence and Danger of the Place, and to press him for speedy Succour in order to relieve it. The Bas∣sa admitting of his Reasons, assured him he would give him all the assistance he could, only he had received some Orders from the Grand Seignior of great Importance to the common Cause, which it was not convenient to commu∣nicate to him by Letter, therefore desired he would repair to him to 
Waradin,
 that he might inform him of the secret by word of Mouth. And for his greater Security the Bassa sent him a pasport.
 Upon this Invitation he resolved to go thither, accompanied with 
Petrossi,
 and some others of his principal Adherents, and five hun∣dred Horse. The Bassa met him without the Gate, and received him with all the appearance of Kindness and Esteem, and conducted him in∣to the Town with some few of his Attendants, causing all the Cannon of the Place to be dis∣charged, with other marks of Respects, and en∣tertained him at Supper; but that being ended, an Aga with his Janizaries entred the Room, and having told 
Tekely
 he had Orders from the Grand Seignior to seize him, and carry him to 
Adrianople,
 caused Irons to be put upon his Hands and Feet. At the same time, the Bassa told 
Pe∣trossi,
 that the Grand Seignior gave him the Prin∣cipality and Commands which 
Tekely
 had had, and that he would assist him with all his Forces. 
Petrossi,
 who was next to 
Tekely
 in Power, seem∣ingly accepted of the Honour, but being got out of the place and Danger, he informed 
Tekelies
 party of what had hapned, exhorting them to return with him to their Duty to the Emperour, which they consenting to, 
Petrossi
 marched di∣rectly to the Camp before 
Caschaw.
 Being kind∣ly received by General 
Caprara,
 he was sent into the Town, where he easily perswaded the Gar∣rison to accept with him of the General 
Amnestie,
 so that the place was immediately delivered up upon Articles. After this the General sent also to the Princess 
Ragotzki,
 Count 
Tekely
's Wife, to surrender her strong Castle of 
Mongatz
 to the Emperour's Service, which, contrary to expecta∣tion, she absolutely refused to do. And this put an end to the Campaign in those parts, except their Excursions, beating up of Quarters, and Surprises, which were frequent on both sides.


Nor were the Turks more fortunate on the side of 
Croatia,
 where Count 
Lesley
 commanded the Imperialists, for he burnt the Suburbs of 
Ca∣nisia,
 and destroyed the Countrey four Miles round; and now understanding that the Turks had left but three or four thousand men to guard the Bridge at 
Esseck,
 the Serasquier having ta∣ken the rest with him to fight the Imperialists, he decamped from the Place of his Rendezvous

near the 
Drave,
 with a Resolution, if possible, to burn the said Bridge of 
Esseck.
 In order to this he left his Baggage at 
Turanowitz
 with a Guard of two thousand Men, discamping with four thousand 
Germans,
 and two thousand Croats, all choice Men, each one being ordered to carry Provision with him for ten days, by rea∣son of the scarcity of Victuals by the way. 
Michalovitz
 being surprised, expecting no Ene∣my, surrendred to his 
Avantcurrers
 upon his further advance, the Country being alarm'd, some Turkish Horse appearing, skirmished with the Avant-guard of 
Croats,
 and had treated them ill, if they had not been succou∣red by the 
German
 Dragoons and Cuirasiers who had the Guard; they however left a Captain-Lieutenant with near thirty Souldiers. They marched on, but no Turks opposed, scarce ap∣peared before they came to the Plains of 
Esseck.
 Then there appeared a thousand Turkish Horse with some Foot at a distance behind them, which obliged the Christians to range themselves in Battalia, and the Turks suffered them to ad∣vance till they came within Musquet shot; they then begun to stir, and being charged on both Wings by the 
Croats,
 they were wholly broke and routed, and many of them slain in the pursuit. The Infantry saved themselves in the Town, and afterwards in the Castle. The Christians advanced in order to the Suburbs, which they took at first onset, and afterwards the City, both which they miserably pillaged and plundred.


The City of 
Esseck
 is great and populous, ha∣ving at least five hundred shops of Merchants of in it, many Mosques and Hacars, which are great Inns for Passengers. All was crowded with Rice, Flower, Bread, Bisquet, Salt, 
&c.
 as also Barley, Oats, and Forrage in abundance, enough to furnish an Army. As soon as they were Master of the City, they placed a Guard against the Castle, whilst the General went to see the Bridge, the like whereof is not in the World. On this side the 
Drave
 from 
Esseck
 to the said River, it is about eleven hundred paces long, and on the other side more than eight thousand, all of Oak Wood. It is twelve paces broad. The Drave is not large in this place, the Bridge being supported by only sixteen Boats. The Turks brake it the preceeding day, letting the materials vogue with the stream into the 
Danube.
 Count 
Lesley
 caused thirteen fair Mills upon the Drave to be burnt, and having in vain attemp∣ted to burn the Bridge on the other side, consu∣med that on this with Fire in few hours. The Imperialists knowing that the Inhabitants had saved their best goods in the Castle, they would also attempt that, but having lost several Cap∣tains and other Officers, they desisted, and 
Lesley
 returned back to his Camp at 
Turanowitz.


The Wars aginst 
Poland
 were carried on with more Success,
 at least Equality, by the 
Ot∣tomans,
 who, together with the 
Tartars,
 made perpetual Incursions into the 
Ʋkrain,
 and the con∣fining Provinces, burning and ravaging the Villages and Countrey, carrying the alarm to the very Gates of 
Leopol.
 Nor were the 
Poles
 forward in their Proparations, moving but very slowly to their general Rendezvous, so that the King not going to the Field in Person, it was ve∣ry late in the year before they were come toge∣ther, however, entertained in the mean time with a very sad account from 
Podolia, Volinia,
 and the lesser 
Russia,
 of the miserable Devastati∣ons of those Countries by the continued Incursi∣ons of the Infidels.


The Grand Seignior had appointed 
Solyman
 Bassa, now Seraskier, to command his Army against the 
Poles,
 which he endeavoured to raise and form with all imaginable Industry, being sollicitous for 
Caminiec,
 which he took care by reiterated Convoys, though some sometimes miscarried, to provide for. He hearing of the Christians advance towards the 
Niester,
 the 
Cham
 of 
Tartary
 being joyned with him, and both near forty thousand strong, posted himself near the River to hinder the 
Poles
 from passing it.


And now the Armies drawing near, it was supposed they would not separate without a Battel. The 
Poles
 passed the 
Niester
 with theirs, consisting of betwixt twenty and thirty thousand men, on a Bridge they had made for that pur∣pose, advanced into 
Moldavia,
 where they en∣camped; and now the whole Army being come up, the Crown General having summoned a Council of War, it was determined to go and find the Enemy, and force him to fight. The Army marched accordingly, and were three days passing the Woods and Streights of 
Bouco∣visia
 without any Intelligence of the Enemy. Being come into a Plain, their Van-Guard was presently charged by a Body of 
Tartars.
 Ten Troops of Horse were sent to support the Chri∣stians, but being over-power'd, were forced to give way. The Prince of 
Courland
 advancing with three Battalions, and some Field-pieces, gave the Christians Opportunity to rally, and returning to the charge, obliged the 
Tartars
 to retire to the Hill from whence they came. The next Morning the two Armies stood in view of each other, only some slight Skirmishes passing betwixt them. The third, the 
Seraskier
 design∣ing to fall upon the Enemies right Wing with his main force, charged it briskly, but finding it strengthned from the main body, retired and fell upon the main body it self, but with the like suc∣cess. The 
Poles
 left Wing was charged by the 
Tartars
 with some advantage at first, but in the Conclusion were forced to retire. That day the Turks had been incommoded by the opposite Artillery, composed of thirty pieces of Ordnance, and the following day, having received Cannon from 
Camineck,
 they repayed them in kind. The Christians continued encamped the two follow∣ing days, securing themselves with Trenches and Redoubts. On the ninth day, the Christian General being informed that a great Detach∣ment was sent to fall in the rear of the Army, and shut up the Passages of the Forrest, he re∣solved to retire; and that he might do it with less trouble, he caused all their Waggons that were not absolutely necessary, to be burnt. It was next Morning before the Turks were aware of their march, when, descending into the Plain, they charged three Battalions of foot which had not yet entered the Wood, but they being well covered with turn Pikes, and each two Field-pieces, they received the Enemy with so great a Fire, that they forced them to retire. And yet they escaped by their Courage and Re∣solution the danger that threatned them, for∣cing their Passage back to the 
Niester
 by a very orderly retreat, which they likewise passed, tho' the Turks were much stronger than they, and so were dispersed into their Winter Quarters.


Nor were the Turks very unsuccesful in 
Dal∣matia.
 The Christians had besieged 
Singn,
 but were forced to retire by the joynt Forces of the Turks in those quarters with loss of some hun∣dreds of their men, two pieces of Cannon, and most of their Baggage. But the Wars being ra∣ther defensive in those parts, on both sides, than otherwise, nothing of any very great Conse∣quence, besides Incursions and mutual Ravages, worthy of Memory did happen.




The traverses at Sea were of more noise and consequence. The Turkish Fleet was affirmed to consist of sixty Gallies, and twenty men of War, who were at Sea, though supposed not well manned. On the other side, the 
Venetian
 Fleet was stronger, full of Sea-men, besides thirteen thousand Land-Forces of several Nati∣ons, all commanded by their General 
Morosini,
 who sailing for the 
Levant,
 landed his Forces in the 
Morea,
 at the Fortress of 
Calamata,
 which he took, and afterwards sate down before 
Coron,
 where, having made large Breaches, and ex∣tremely annoyed the place with their Bombs, the Bassa hung out a white Flag, but all Condi∣tions, except surrendring upon discretion, being refused him, he put out a black Colours, inti∣mating he would defend it to extremity, which he also did.


The Bassa of 
Petrasso
 marched with eight thousand Men to his relief, but upon conside∣ration of the strength of the Christians, he durst not attempt it; but contenting himself to re-inforce the Garrison of 
Modon,
 and with fal∣ling upon the 
Greeks
 (that avoured the 
Veneti∣ans
) he made a great slaughter of them. The Visier of 
Morea, Kalil
 Bassa, having got toge∣ther a competent Army of near ten thousand, would re-attempt the relief of 
Coron;
 in order to which, he sent a Party to attack a Redoubt somewhat distant from the Line of the Besiegers, but were repulsed, but assaulting it again, they took it at the second storm. Hereupon the Chevalier 
de la Tour,
 a Knight of 
Malta,
 hasten∣ing thither with twelve hundred Men, recovered it from the Turks, with the loss of his own life, and many of his Men. A while after, the 
Visier
 made an attempt upon the main Camp, but was beaten off with mutual loss. In the mean time, the Christian General finding the neighbour∣hood of the Turks troublesome, and foreseeing that his Troops would not be able to subsist, un∣less they had the Country open, resolved to at∣tempt their removal; in order to which, draw∣ing ten Men out of a Company, to which were joyned fifteen hundred Voluntiers, with one of the Regiments of 
Brunswick,
 and that of 
Malta,
 they, marching before day, surprised, and fell upon the Enemy on all sides; the action was so sudden, that the Turks before they could recol∣lect themselves were driven out of their several Posts, pursued, and quite dispersed. Of the E∣nemy there were near a thousand killed in the action and pursuit, of which number was the Visier 
Kalil
 and 
Mehemet
 Bassa. All their Can∣non and Baggage were taken, with nine pieces of brass Cannon, seventeen Colours, and the great Standard, with three Horse-tayles hanging at it. This Victory was some days after com∣pleted by the taking of 
Coron,
 where the Chri∣stians, forcing the way into the Town, through their very large Breaches,
 put all they met to the Sword. There were above three thousand of the Turks slain in this storm, and four or five hundred of the Christians, among which were two Knights of 
Malta,
 Prince 
Phillip
 of 
Savoy,
 the Prince of 
Brunswick,
 the Marquiss of 
Courbon
 and St. 
Paul,
 besides thirty Knights of 
Malta,
 with several other Persons of Quality wound∣ed. There were seventy-six Pieces of Brass Cannon, besides great store of Ammunition and Provision, with Plunder, reckoned at above two Millions, found in this place.


These Successes encouraged the Greeks to sub∣mit to the 
Venetians,
 and the Province of 
Maina
 being also disposed to cast off the 
Ottoman
 Yoak, were greatly encouraged to it by 
Morosini,
 who sending a Detachment with such 
Maynots
 as were entred into the Service of the Re-publick, gave them orders to attack 
Zarnata,
 a Fortress built to keep that People in awe. In the mean time the Christian Fleet sailed towards 
Calamata,
 near which place the Forces landed.


The Captain Bassa, hearing of the ill succes∣ses of his Country-men in 
Morea,
 came with his Fleet to 
Napoli di Romania,
 where securing the Ports with great Chains, he landed what Men he possibly could, and joyning with a great Body of. Horse and Foot, he marched towards 
Calamata,
 to keep the 
Mainotes
 from revolting to the 
Ventains. Zarnata
 had been threatned into surrender, six hundred Men that garrisoned it marching out with their Arms and Baggage, though the Aga that commanded it, distrusting his conduct, stayed in the Christian Camp.


The Captain Bassa being advanced, 
Morosini
 being re-inforced with three thousand 
Saxons
 resolved to fight him. Being met, the Turkish Horse fell upon the Christians left Wing, and at the same time a great Body of their Foot advan∣ced towards their right; but found such brave resistance, that they were forced to retire. They returned to the charge again, but with the same success, and being pressed, fell into disorder and were defeated; though the loss was not very great on either side. The Garrison of 
Calamata
 hearing of this rout, fired their Magazin and quitted the place, leaving eleven Pieces of Can∣non behind them, which was immediately gar∣risoned by the victorious. The 
Maynotes
 there∣upon besieged 
Porto Vitulo,
 the which with 
Chie∣lifa
 and 
Passavia
 are the only places of strength that the Turks possess in that great Province, but these likewise, as also 
Porto Vitulo,
 being for∣ced by the Inhabitants to surrender, came all under the dominion of the 
Venetians,
 from whence, General 
Morosini
 having put good Gari∣sons into those places, marched towards 
Nava∣zino.
 But the season being too far advanced, having razed 
Calamata
 and 
Passava,
 as not very defensible, he dispersed his Army into Winter Quarters, sailing himself with his Gallies to 
Santa Maura.


A Fleet under the command of the Seigniors 
Molino
 and 
Delfino,
 had cruised the whole Sum∣mer in the 
Archipelago,
 putting those Islands under contribution, though no material action at Sea had passed betwixt the two Fleets of the Christians and Turks.


The Captain Bassa, after these misfortunes, shewed a great inclination to peace, signifying his desire to set a Treaty on foot for that pur∣pose, to which end he signified the same to Ge∣neral 
Morosini
 by a particular Messenger,
 who referred him to his Superiours.


There had likewise been an Aga some time at 
Comorra,
 who declared, that the Grand Seig∣nior did desire to re-establish a Peace or Truce betwixt the two Empires,
 desiring that Com∣missioners might be appointed on both sides for that purpose; that he had ordered the Bassa of 
Buda
 to cease from all Hostilities, and that he caused Count 
Tekely,
 the Author of the War, and the Evils that attended it, to be seized upon by his command. But all the answer he could get was, that the Emperour would enter into no Negotiation of Peace, without the partici∣pation of his Allies. And yet some Propositions were obliquely made in their names. The Em∣perour demanded restitution of all the Places that are possessed by the Turks in the Upper and Lower 
Hungary,
 and in 
Croatia.
 The 
Poles
 demanded 
Caminiec,
 and the whole Province of 
Podolia;
 and the 
Venetians
 the whole Country of 
Morea,
 To conclude, the 
Aga
 was sent back

with this answer, That the Emperour and his Allies will receive no Proposals, but such as come immediately from the Grand Seignior himself.


The 
Cham
 of 
Tartary
 had also offered the King of 
Poland
 his Mediation by an Embassy, and at the same time made Proposals of Peace, but his Majesty answered roundly, that he would hear of no Overtures of accomodation without his Allies, the Emperour of 
Germany,
 and the Commonwealth of 
Venice.


And now all thoughts of quiet being laid a∣side, all the great Parties made all imaginable preparations,
 by Leagues, by Levies, by amassing of Moneys as well as Men for the future Cam∣pain.


Thus ended this year 1685, and the follow∣ing was no less active or turbulent. The Impe∣rialists, as a prelude to their future Successes, beat a Party of the United Garrisons of the Turks, consisting of about six thousand near 
Arach,
 which place they also took, with eleven Colours, and three Kettle Drums, besides much spoil.


This success was followed by others, St. 
Job
 being surrendred to Count 
Caraffa,
 the six hun∣dred Men which composed the Garrison of it,
 being conducted to great 
Waradin,
 and a Party from 
Comorra, Raab, Papa
 and 
Vesprin,
 took the Castle of 
Sehwar,
 betwixt 
Vesprin
 and 
Alba Rega∣lis,
 which had much incommoded those Garri∣sons, upon as easie terms; the besieged being only allowed what they could carry upon their backs.


Great were the disorders and consternation at 
Constantinople,
 and throughout the whole 
Ot∣toman
 Empire,
 for the late ill 
Successes
 of their Arms in 
Hungary
 and 
Morea;
 and being to be unfortunate, is to be criminal in that Court, 
Cheitan Ibrahim, Seraskier,
 was condemned to lose his head, the defeat at 
Gran,
 the loss of 
New∣heusel,
 and the burning of the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 being laid all to his account. His eminent ser∣vices in the former Wars against the Crown of 
Poland,
 and his valorous defending of 
Buda
 in 1684 against the united powers of the 
Ger∣man
 Empire, could not obtain his pardon, being he was likewise blamed for having discontented the Souldiers in defrauding them of their pay. Several other of the Chief Officers being accu∣sed of not having done their duty at the Battel of 
Gran,
 were strangled with him; and 
Solyman
 Bassa, who had so successfully commanded the Army last year against the 
Poles,
 was by the Grand Visier recommended to the Grand Seig∣nior, as a Person very fit for that Employment in 
Hungary,
 which his Highness also approved of, but the Bassa being surprised at the choice was made of him, sensible of the fate of his Pre∣decessors, and the danger of the Employment, taking his opportunity, threw himself at the Grand Seignior's feet, and humbly prayed to be excused from so difficult a Province, being the Campaign would not probably end, under the circumstances he was to undertake it, but with the loss of his Head, which he would rather now sacrifice at his Majestie's command, than dye hereafter in his displeasure. The Grand Seig∣nior wondering at what he heard, and that he should scruple at so eminent a command, de∣manded his reasons: He replied, that the mis∣fortunes of the last Campaign were occasioned by the ill payment of the Troops, many other things of great importance to his service having been likewise omitted, not obscurely hinting at the Grand Visier, he would notwithstanding take the command upon him, if his Majesty, ac∣cording to the example of his Predecessours, would himself appear at the head of his Forces. The frankness of this discourse wrought so much upon the 
Grand Seignior,
 that he immedi∣ately sent to the 
Visier,
 who was, or pretended to be indisposed, and consequently kept his bed, to know, whether he was in a condition of health to attend him into 
Hungary,
 where he purposed to go himself? But the Visier excusing it, by reason of his indisposition, his Majesty sent to him for his Seal, which being delivered, he immediately gave it to 
Solyman
 Bassa, making him by that eminent mark of dignity Grand 
Visier
 in the others room, who yet had his life granted him, and part of his Estate to subsist upon, being now in his House on the 
Canal
 of the black Sea, near 
Scutary.


The Treasure of the 
Seraglio
 was opened, Officers were sent into all the extent of the Em∣pire, and the utmost diligence was used to raise men, not only to recruit their shattered Armies, but to make new Levies, but with the usual fate that attends unsuccessful Arms.
 So that not∣withstanding all their endeavours, the Christi∣ans were in the Field before them, not only with the Imperial Troops, but the united Forces of all the 
German
 Princes. The general Rendez∣vouz was appointed on the 
30th
 of 
May
 in the Plains of 
Barkam,
 though the 
Saxons,
 the 
Bavari∣ans,
 the 
Brandenburgers,
 and them of the 
Carcles
 could not get thither so soon by reason of their distant Marches.
 The whole Empire seemed to move, and the 
Danube
 was so covered with Barks and Barges full of men, provisions, and all sorts of Warlike Instruments, that it yielded a prospect of terror and pleasure.


The Forces being come together, the Senti∣ments of the General Persons that composed it were very differing. Some proposed the Siege of 
Alba Regalis,
 as being a place that had much annoyed them, by protecting the 
Seraskier
 under the Cannon of the place, when they besieged 
Buda
 two years ago. Others would have 
Agria
 and 
Montgatz,
 the remains of 
Tekely
's rebellion in Upper 
Hungary,
 attempted, and the rest were for marching directly to the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 for securing that important passage, and then to besiege 
Buda.
 Others were of opinion, that these three designs should be enterprised at once, by dividing their Army into two parts, for the two first Enterprises, and that General 
Schults
 should with the Army of 
Croatia
 attempt the Bridge of 
Esseck.
 But they were very few that concluded positively for the Siege of 
Buda,
 which had already been absolutely resolved upon by the Emperour and the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 upon a certainty that the taking of that place would vastly inlarge their Quarters, and a supposition (though not so well grounded) that all 
Hun∣gary
 would follow the fate of their Capital City.


But this design was kept very secret,
 nor was it discovered until the arrival of Count 
Straat∣man,
 Great Chancellor to the Emperour, who having in a Council of War prudently compo∣sed the punctilio's and differences between so many General Officers about their commands, to all their satisfactions; he shewed them the Emperour's Commission and Orders to begin the Campaign with the Siege of 
Buda,
 exhort∣ing them to do their duty in an enterprise of such great importance, whereon depended not only the conservation of his Highness's Con∣quests, the security of his Crown, and the good of Christendom, but also the ruine of the 
Otto∣man
 Empire, being the loss of this considerable place would be attended on with the surrender

of the other Cities and Fortresses of 
Hungary,
 which would return to the Obedience of their natural Sovereign.


The Generals, who expected to begin with the Siege of 
Agria
 or 
Alb-Royal,
 were overjoy'd to understand that the design was upon 
Buda;
 and this News being spread amongst the Officers and Souldiers of the Armies, they all testified their Satisfaction by their forwardness, and their desire to see themselves before a Place where they might signalize their Valour, and revenge the Death of their Comrades, who had been interred in the Trenches of the former Siege.


The Voluntiers, to the number of six thou∣sand, of all Quality and Conditions, which were come thither out of 
Germany, France, England, Spain,
 the 
Low-Countries,
 and other parts of 
Eu∣rope,
 to seek Honour in so pious a War, shewed much Ardour and Zeal to signalize themselves in so glorious an undertaking. The Troops of the Circles were not yet come, and they of 
Bran∣denburg,
 who marched through 
Silesia,
 and the Straits of 
Jabluncka,
 advanced but slowly by rea∣son of the difficulty of their way, and could not come so soon as desired. But the Armies, to lose no time, discamped on the twelfth of 
June
 by break of day, the Duke of 
Lorrain
 taking his way by the Bridge of 
Gran,
 had passed it the thir∣teenth, the Troops of 
Saxony
 having the Vaunt∣guard. The Elector of 
Bavaria,
 marched on this side the 
Danube
 to possess the City of 
Pest.
 Whilst the two Armies were thus marching on both sides the River, Count 
Rabatta,
 who was Com∣missary General, had caused a prodigious quan∣tity of Gabions and Fagots, which the Souldiers had made as they came to the general Randez∣vouz, to keep them from Idleness, to be im∣bark'd and sent by Water towards 
Buda,
 toge∣ther with the Artillery, Ammunitions, Provisi∣ons, Forrage, and other necessary things for the subsistence of Armies. The next day the Ar∣mies advanced, the great one near 
Vicegrade,
 and the other by 
Vaccia.


The fifteenth, the Imperial Horse, followed by the Foot, and their Cannon and Baggage, passed 
Vicegrade;
 some Prisoners having been made by a party that the Duke had sent to make Disco∣veries. These unanimously declared, that they of 
Agria
 and 
Alba Regalis
 fearing a Siege had re∣fuged all their best Moveables in 
Buda,
 and that this Capital City was, as well as the other Places, furnished with Troops and necessary Provisi∣ons to sustain a long Siege, in expectation of Re∣lief.


Being come within an hour of the Town without any encounter, the Horse made halt, as well to repose themselves, as to expect the com∣ing up of their Infantry and Artillery, and now they begin to lay a Bridge of Boats at the Isle of St. 
Andrew
 for the Communication of the two sides of the 
Danube.


On the eighteenth, the Baron of 
Diependal,
 General 
de Battalia,
 invested the City of 
Buda,
 whilst the Infantry were marching up, and ta∣king up their Posts half a League from the place, they began to break Ground, and work at their Line of Circumvallation. A great party of Horse and Foot appeared out of the Garrison at the 
Vienna
 Port, but they returned again upon the advance of a Detachment of Imperial Horse, who had Orders to charge them, contented to welcome the Assailants with eight Volleys from their Cannon, though they kill'd but one Pio∣neer, by reason of the too great distance.


The nineteenth, the Duke advanced with the Army as far as the hot Baths, the Turks having abandoned that Post the day before. The ge∣neral Quarters were taken up within a quarter of a League of the Town. The same day the Elector of 
Bavaria
 seized upon the City of 
Pest,
 which the Turks had quitted, retiring with their Cannon, Ammunitions and Provisions into 
Bu∣da,
 after they had broken part of the Bridge be∣hind them. The 
Croats,
 who scouted about the Country, took a Turkish 
Chiaux,
 with a Con∣voy of forty 
Spahis,
 who was sent with Letters from the Port to the Visier of 
Buda.
 Being brought to the Camp, his Letters were examined, which contained rigorous Orders to the Visier, to be very careful of the Places which depended on his Government, and to assure him of a quick and powerful relief in case he were at∣tack'd.


On the twentieth, the Bridge over the 
Danube
 was finished. The same day a party of Horse sallied out of the Town with design to surprise the Christians advanced Guard, but the Duke being advertised of it in time, sent four squa∣drons, to which many Volunteers joyned them∣selves, with orders to charge them; but they up∣on their approach retired without any engaging. The Artillery being arrived, two Batteries were raised against the lower Town, where the Duke of 
Lorrains
 Attack was, and at Night the Tren∣ches were opened. A Janizary who deserted, reported much after the same manner that the Prisoners already mentioned had done; that there were but eight thousand men of formed Troops in the Town. The Visier having some time before sent two thousand Souldiers to 
Agria,
 and as many to 
Alba-Regalis,
 upon a supposition that the Christians would not think of besieging 
Buda,
 which had been so fatal to them but two years ago. This Run-away affirmed further, that the Place was abundantly furnished with all manner of Provisions and Ammunitions to su∣stain a very long Siege, that the Visier 
Abdi
 Bassa was no great Warrior, and therefore the less considered by the Souldiery; that he had assembled all the Officers and Souldiers of the Garrison together, had exhorted them to do their Duty, and to support with Honour the Glory of the Turbant, adding, that he had Or∣ders from the Grand Seignior to defend the Ci∣ty with his Life, which he was resolved to do, and expect the Succours which the Grand Visier would infallibly bring them. To this the 
Ja∣nizaries
 and 
Spahis
 replyed, that they were ready to sacrifice their. Lives in his Highness's Service, and for defence of their Laws, upon Condition however, that the Visier would immediately give them ten Crowns a Man, that the Souldi∣ers and Officers that were detained in Prison for what Crime soever should be set at Liberty, and that he would not suffer things to come to the last extremity, lest the same misfortune might happen to them, as did to those of 
Newheusel,
 all which the Visier promised them to observe ex∣actly.


I must acknowledge I am entring into a te∣dious Narrative, and somewhat against my Hu∣mour, which affects lucid brevity; but the Hi∣story of this Siege, perhaps circumstantially the greatest upon Record, full of such strange Events; of Emulation in the pursuit of Glory; of succes∣ful Temerity, and an invincible Resolution on the one side; as also the Fidelity, the Constan∣cy, and the unfortunate Valour of the other, hurries me on to a description of it in all its par∣ticulars, which I will do with that Candor, that the very indifferent Reader shall find nothing that may justly shock him, and the curious wherewith to content him.




The Elector of 
Bavaria,
 having left a Garri∣son at 
Pest,
 and passed the Bridge of Boats at the Isle of St. 
Andrew,
 came with his Army be∣fore the place, and took his Post in the same place where he had commanded in the prece∣ding Siege, that is, on the Castle side, and the upper Town, to form the second attack, the third being reserved for the 
Brandenburgers,
 who were expected in a few days, and were to be re∣inforced with the Troops of 
Suabia
 and 
Franco∣nia.
 That Night the Turks fired mightily up∣on them that worked in the Approaches and Batteries, whereof several were killed and hurt in the 
Lorrain
 Attack.


The Duke sent all the Imperial and 
Bavarian
 Horse, under the command of the Generals 
Palfi, Gondola,
 and others, to camp in the Neigh∣bourhood of 
Alba Regalis,
 on purpose to con∣sume the Forrage, and keep that Garrison in continual alarms, there remaining in the Camp but three thousand Imperial and fifteen hundred 
Bavarian
 Horse to secure the Trenches and Pio∣neers. The Night passed, the Battery against the lower Town was brought to perfection, and twelve Pieces of Cannon mounted upon it, which played all the following day with the loss of five men slain, and several wounded, from break of day the Cannon continued firing with such success, that they made a breach in the Wall of the lower Town, which was found to be twenty paces large. In the mean time the 
Bavarians
 on their side carried their Approaches on with great diligence, and had also some killed and wounded.


The day following, the breach being enlarged, was assaulted towards evening, the Walls being easily gained, for the Defendants retired into the upper Town after the first discharge. The Chri∣stians lost a Captain of Foot, a Lieutenant of Granadiers, some Souldiers, and six Voluntiers in this attempt, besides seven or eight hurt; and from that time they began to attack the Town in form, it being resolved that the Trenches should be relieved every day by a Lieutenant General, and a Major General, as well in the Duke of 
Lorrain
's attack, as in the Elector's. The 
25th
 Count 
Souches
 and 
Diependal
 relieved the Trenches, but nothing was done besides as∣suring the Lodgment upon the Wall of the lower Town, and opening the Gate which the Turks had shut up on the right, far enough from the breach where they took Post, and that the Labourers might be less incommoded, Ge∣neral 
Souches
 caused fire to be put in the neigh∣bouring Houses, where some Fuseliers did lurk, who were burnt with them. The 
Bavarians
 fi∣nished the same day a little Battery upon St. 
Ge∣rards
 Hill, which the Turks had abandoned, from whence they threw some small Bombs in∣to the City to try experiments. They also fi∣nished another great Battery to beat the great Rondel which joyns the Castle to the upper Town. The same day Count 
Budiani
 presented some Standards to the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 taken from a party of Turkish Horse, which convoy∣ed fourteen or fifteen Barks loaden with the Wives and Children of the Officers of 
Buda,
 who retired with all their riches to 
Belgrade,
 and which his 
Heyduques
 and 
Hussars,
 reinforced with some Imperial Dragoons, had surprised and bea∣ten at the Island of St. 
Margaret.
 The booty was great, and ninety-two Women and Chil∣dren taken, amongst which was the 
Visier
 of 
Buda
's Wife.


The 
26th,
 they made several traverse Lines, and laboured to compleat the Approaches to se∣cure their Quarters in the lower Town, which was furnished with two thousand Souldiers, and a good number of Pioneers. The Earth being rude and stony, did much obstruct the Labour∣ers. The great Master of the Teutonick Order, which commanded the Trenches, observing that the Pioneers in the lower Town might be ea∣sily insulted and beaten by the Besieged, had up∣on his demand six Battalions sent him, which were posted along the Wall to countenance them. Two fugitives, who said they were 
Hun∣garians,
 rendered themselves, and confirmed that the Garrison was but eight thousand Comba∣tants, who by order of the Visier had begun to untile the Houses, and unpave the Streets, to hinder the effect of the Bombs. In the evening betwixt six and seven a Clock, the Turks fallied out with great Cries, to intimidate them who were posted in the Rondel by the Water side, but they were so well received, that they re∣treated confusedly. Marshal 
Starenberg
 hastned thither seasonably with two Battalions of them that had been posted the day before behind the Wall, without which Succour the Turks would have made a great Slaughter amongst the La∣bourers. The Enemy was pursued, and the Souldiers cut off some Heads, which they pre∣sented to the Duke, who gave them a golden Ducket for each Head. A Captain was hurt in this scuffle, and ten or twelve Souldiers killed, and as many wounded.


The 
Bavarians
 raised two Batteries for Bombs on the two sides of their great Battery. They carried on their Trench above one hundred pa∣ces, and ran three traverse Lines, with a place of Arms for the defence of their Battery. The Turks fired much with their Artillery, but kil∣led only two Souldiers.


The 
27th,
 the Christians compleated the works they had made in the Night, new tra∣verses were made, some Musketiers were placed in the Mosque of the old Town, a Post was ta∣ken on the right near the Gate which makes the Angle of the Upper Town, the Lines were en∣larged, and deepned, and the great Battery was well-nigh finished, with the loss only of one Man, and some few wounded. This Morning the Enemy appear'd where they had been yesterday, seemingly disposed to skirmish, but seeing that the Christians were ready to receive them, they retired without attempting any thing. About Eleven a Clock they sallied out, Horse and Foot, with design to dislodge the Be∣siegers posted on the right, but having stood a Volley, and seeing Count 
Hoffkirchen,
 Lieutenant Collonel to 
Dunewald,
 advancing with the Guards of Horse, they returned into the City, leaving twenty of their men dead behind them. Of the Christians there were but two killed, and five or six hurt. Another Deserter came out of Town, who reported, that the Governour was greatly perplexed, in that he saw the inevitable fall of the City, which the Grand Seignior had committed to his charge, and that he lost in the Sallies his best Souldiers, without being able to ruine the Enemies works; but that he resented nothing equally with the captivity of his Wife, and those of the Principal Officers of the Place, taken when they thought them past danger. In the 
Bavarian
 attack they finished a battery to play upon the Castle, and the Rondel that joyns it to the City.


The 
28th,
 in the 
Lorrain
 attack, a Line of Communication four hundred paces long was drawn from the Post at the Angle on the right to the middle Gate, and another Line was made to go to the new battery, upon which they plan∣ted twelve pieces of Cannon. A little one was

likewise in hand for four Mortars which were carried thither that Night, with some Cart loads of Bombs. The besieged began to shoot Bombs and Stones out of Town. A Captain and six∣teen Souldiers were wounded that Night, and some killed. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 foreseeing that Forrage would grow scarce in the Camp, sent most of the baggage Horses to the Meadows assigned them betwixt 
Gran
 and 
Newheusel.
 Ge∣neral 
Dunewald,
 who commanded the Horse, camped near 
Alb-Royal,
 advertised the Duke, that the Turks having abandoned the Castle of 
Bathyan
 upon the River of 
Zarvis,
 he had put men into it, and that he was going to make a tentative upon 
Palotta,
 a place of good strength near 
Alb-Royal.


The twenty ninth, they continued to compleat their Works, and the Duke augmented the number of the Labourers with an addition of six hundred more. The besieged made no Sal∣lies these two days, but they plyed their Artil∣lery more furiously than ordinary to ruine the Christians great Battery. About five a Clock they sallied upon the 
Bavarian
 attack, with two thousand Horse and Foot, with so much Success, that they put the Besiegers into much disorder, and the Janizaries leaping into the Approaches, were busie in throwing of them down, when Count 
Hoffkirch
 flying thither with the Guard of Horse from the Duke of 
Lorrain
's Quarter, and the 
Bavarian
 Generals with their reserves, the fight was rude on both sides, till the Turks were forced to retreat, being pursued even to the Gates of their City, notwithstanding the conti∣nued fire from their Cannon and Musquets from the Walls. Prince 
Eugenius
 of 
Savoy
 had his Horse killed under him. Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden,
 and the Generals 
Fontaine
 and 
la Vargne
 signalized themselves in this Action, as also the Voluntiers, and particularly the Prince of 
Commercy. Switter∣dael,
 a 
Bavarian
 Lieutenant-Collonel was slain, as also six Voluntiers, with thirty seven Soul∣diers, besides sixty two wounded, one Cap∣tain, two Lieutenants, and an Ensign. The loss on the Turks side was greater, being the Christians brought away sixty of their Heads, besides what a fugitive 
Rascian
 reported, that the Turks had had near two hundred kill'd and wounded. That Evening the four Mortars pla∣ced by the great Battery began to play into the besieged Works. Six Culverins were also plant∣ed upon the old Battery, wherewith they design'd to shoot into the Town Gate, to incommode the Sallies of the besieged.


The thirtieth, the Troops of 
Suabia
 and 
Fran∣conia
 arrived in the Camp, and took the Posts designed for them; all the Night and Day were employed to advance the Works, which are so numerous, that they are scarce distinguishable. Count 
Souches,
 who commanded the Trenches that day, having sent three Granadeers to dis∣cover the distance betwixt the Approaches and the Rondel, they brought word that it was no more than three hundred paces, and that the Turks were making a Ditch at the foot of the said Rondel. Every Night great store of Gabi∣ons, Fagots, Munitions, and Provisions, arrived in the Camp, by the care of the Commissary General, Count 
Rabatta.
 Count 
Caprara
 parted from the Camp with the 
Suabian
 Horse, to joyn those encamped near 
Alb-Royal,
 and to com∣mand the whole in chief. Five 
Rascian
 Shep∣heards, feeding their Sheep without under the Walls, slipt insensibly into the 
Bavarian
 Quar∣ters with at least four hundred, where they were well received and gratified. All they could say was, that the Consternation was great amongst the besieged, who were yet resolved to defend themselves, in expectation of the Succours they were in hope for. They added, that the Bombs and Carcasses had fired the Town in several Places, though it had been luckily enough ex∣tinguished.


The first of 
July,
 Count 
Starenberg
 shewed General 
Schoning,
 who commanded the 
Braden∣burg
 Auxiliaries, and arrived in the Camp the Night before, the Approaches and the Attacks which were reserved for his Troops, which was on the Water side on the left of the Imperialists, after which he was magnificently treated by the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 from whence he went to joyn his Troops which were expected the next, or the following day. This Morning the Imperialists began to shoot out of their new Battery, out of four Pieces which shot twenty four pound Bul∣lets. The five Mortars by the great Battery continued to play upon the Rondel on the right, with such Success that the Defendants durst not shew themselves there. The Works were com∣pleating, and there were two Redoubts made to secure the Communication with the great Bat∣tery. This Night there were but five hurt, and one killed, and this Morning an Adjoutant Ge∣neral was hurt in the Head with a Musquet-shot, as he was carrying Orders into the Approaches. There hapned nothing in the 
Bavarian
 Quarters, where they only continued their Labour and their Batteries, made a Breach in the outward Rampart. The rest of the Troops of 
Franconia,
 consisting in fourteen hundred Foot, arrived there, who were placed near the rest of the same Circle.


The second, the 
Lorrain
 Attack advanced within two hundred Paces of the Walls of the City. The battery of twelve Guns of twenty four pound Balls was finished, and four other Mortars that played without ceasing all the last Night, fired the Town near the great Church, which lasted till Morning; the Cannon was plyed all this day against the two first Rondels, which are in a manner defenceless. Two Bat∣talions more were sent to reinforce those who were camped under the Wall of the old Town. The besieged threw again many Bombs and Stones, but with little prejudice to the Besiegers, killing them not above three or four Souldiers. The Troops of 
Suaben
 began to work at their line of Circumvallation, and purpos'd the follow∣ing Night to raise a Battery upon a height which they possess'd. The 
Bavarians
 thundred furiously against the Castle and upper Town, and had thrown many Bombs which had kindled a fire that was not yet extinguished. The Duke ap∣prehending that the Turks might when it was dark, put, by the help of small barks, Men, and Ammunition into the Town, went in Person to discover the suspected Places about 
Pest,
 com∣manding the Prince of 
Savoys
 Regiment of Dra∣goons to post themselves there, to assist the 
Hun∣garians
 who were already there, and had Orders to raise some Sconces along the River side for their Security.


On the third of 
July,
 the 
Brandenburg
 Troops were seen to march on the other side of the 
Da∣nube.
 The Duke of 
Lorrain
 went to visit them, where he was received by General 
Schoning
 with a triple 
Salvo
 of all the Foot, ranged in battalia, with their Cannon at the head of the Infantry. His Highness was treated there with much Gal∣lantry, and afterwards returned to his Quarters extremely satisfied to see such a fine body of Men, so brisk, so well disciplin'd, and provided with such a good Train of Artillery. The Im∣perialists finished another line for to defend their

Approaches. They made such great fire with their Cannon and Mortars, that they did not only make a notable breach in the Wall, but ruined also the batteries upon the two first Ron∣dels, so that there was no more shooting thence. The 
Bavarians
 carried their lines to the very Castle, and made a new battery on the right towards the 
Danube,
 upon which they placed nine Mortars with success. They shot also three days together from another battery of seven Demy-Cannon upon the Rondel; whilst they play'd from another with four Guns upon the Flanks. They moreover worked at another of eight Cannon to batter the left of the Ron∣del. In the 
Lorrain
 attack there were seven slain, and several hurt. Amongst the rest of the De∣serters, there was an Ensign of the Janizaries, who quitted the Town for having (as he said) killed a Turkish Officer. He affirmed that there was but fifteen hundred real Janizaries in the place, but that counting the 
Spahi
's, Albamans, and other Troops, they amounted to seven thousand Combatants; He added, that the Bombs and Carkasses had already ruined many buildings, and occasioned a great loss of Men and Cattel. He further said, that the besieged were busie in making Mines behind the breach on the 
Lorrain
 side, and that no body had hi∣therto entered into the place. General 
Dunewald
 had desisted from his design upon 
Pallotta,
 be∣cause the place was provided with a good Ga∣rison. The Turks there killed some of those who were sent to discover. Those of 
Alb-Royal
 attacked and disordered also some Foragers of Horse quartered in their Neighbourhood, and amongst others killed Count 
Papenheim,
 a Cap∣tain of Horse in the Troops of 
Bavaria.


July 4th,
 The Approaches of the 
Lorrain
 attack were run within one hundred paces of the breach in the Rondel to the right. The besieged be∣gan to run a Line out of the said breach, which they lengthned till within fifty paces of the Chri∣stians, to render their approach more difficult; and however, they fired continually with their small shot, and threw a multitude of stones, yet they killed and wounded but thirteen men. The besiegers had now fourteen Mortars mounted, out of which they perpetually tossed Bombs and Carkasses. There was nothing done at the 
Bavarian
 attack, but securing the works, and heightning the batteries. A 
Pole,
 who had ser∣ved amongst the 
Turks,
 came over this morn∣ing, and reported that the besieged were resol∣ved to surrender, if they were not relieved in a Months time. Another Run-away came this Afternoon, and declared, that five Turkish Ca∣valiers were by the means of a little Bark land∣ed on 
Pest
 side, who were by several ways to endeavour to arrive where the 
Seraskier
 was, and press the Succours which had been promi∣sed them. The Duke of 
Lorrain
 dispatched some Horse towards 
Voitfar
 to consume the Forage there, and watch the Enemies motion. A party of 
Tartars
 fell upon the Foragers on the other side the 
Danube,
 and took some Horses, and two Grooms belonging to the Prince of 
Baden,
 out of the Island of St. 
Margaret:
 the following Night, sixty Granadiers with some Workmen were sent to ruine the Line which the besieged had begun before the breach of the Rondel, which luck'd so well, that they filled the Ditch with the loss of two Soldiers only. The breach∣es were every day enlarged, as well on the 
Lor∣rain
 as the 
Bavier
 attack, and what the 
Turks
 re∣paired in the night, was thrown down by day. All the Troops of 
Brandenburg
 are at present ar∣rived in their Quarters. The 
Turks
 made a sally upon them in the Night, who, though they were well received, and pursued even to the Town Gate, yet they killed many brave men of the besieged, and amongst the rest Field-Marshal General 
Dorfeling
's Son, two Lieutenants, and twenty-seven Souldiers, with the like number wounded.


Jul.
 6. A line of communication was made from the 
Lorrain
 attack to that of 
Brandenburg,
 which is but fifty paces from the Rondel of the middle Gate, and about sixty from the breach on the right. This morning they shot the Can∣non with that fury, that they quite threw down the two Rondels, and the Curtain, and at night throwing Bombs and Carkasses without ceasing, they caused a fire to burn on the right of the Rondel, that could not be quenched in less than three hours time. The 
Brandenburgers
 advanced their works briskly, their Generals of Battalia's keeping alternatively in the Trenches. They had eight slain and six wounded, besides a Cap∣tain of Granadeers, Lieutenant Collonel 
Fonk
 was also hurt in the Legg, and six more of the 
Lor∣rain
 attack, besides two killed.


Jul.
 7. The Night preceding, very many Bombs were thrown with success, being they fi∣red the Town in two places, but upon the arri∣val of the Engeneer 
Gonzales,
 it was presumed the Town would be thundred with greater violence, he is expected in two or three days in the Camp, where the Cannon, Mortars, Bombs, Carkasses, and other artificial fire-works of his invention are already arrived: The besieged made this morning a salley upon the 
Brandenburgers
 with Horse and Foot, but to their prejudice, being beaten back with disorder. Yesterday the Mi∣ners began to work in the 
Lorrain
 attack to wi∣den the breaches, and this Night the same will be done in that of 
Bavaria,
 where they have fi∣nished two new Batteries, one of ten, and the other of seven Cannons, besides a third on the Water side, to better the attack'd Rondel, and a Post by which the besieged used to creep out into a covered way which they had made be∣fore the Rondel. Yesterday the 
Bavarians
 had carried their approaches to the very foot of the Castle, so that they could come no nearer be∣fore the breach was enlarged. The works in the 
Lorrain
 attack were so near the Wall, that they could advance no further, but by lodging in the breach. There were about fifty killed and hurt in the three attacks. The besieged shot a Bomb, which falling upon one of the out-Batteries into a Barrel of Powder, killed nine Cannoneers that attended there.


The 
8th,
 Two new Batteries, each of three Demy-Cannon, were raised in the 
Lorrain
 attack nearer the Walls, and on the left, where they were equally advanced with the right, the ap∣proaches were advanced to the Wall of the Rondel; and as these Works were so near, there were twenty-five hurt and wounded, most with Stones and Granadoes, amongst whom Major General 
Thungen
 was one, Major 
Bis∣chosshausen
 had his Arm broke with a Musquet, and some other Officers wounded. The Miners which were attack'd to the right of the Rondel, had not yet encountered the Enemies Mines. At night they will plant others to the left of the middle Rondel. Some Peasants having found means to escape out of Town, came to the Camp, affirming, that there were still above three hundred men which worked continually at the Mines and Retrenchments which the be∣sieged made behind their Walls, for their re∣treat in case of necessity.




July
 the ninth, the whole Night was spent in shooting of Bombs and Carcasses into the City, to keep the besieged in Action, and take away their desire of repose, but these perceiving at break of day that the Enemy had made a Gallery of Planks to pass the Miners to the middle Ron∣del, they rolled down many Bombs, threw many Granados, and other artificial Fire, with combustible stuff in such abundance, that the Planks were burnt, and the Gallery reduced to Ashes. At five in the Morning the besieged sprung a Mine some Paces from the Wall, be∣twixt the middle Rondel, and that at the Gate with Success, being it overturned one of the Christians Mines, with the loss of seven or eight of the Miners. They seconded this with a sharp Sally, disordered the Workmen, ruined their Labours, and posted themselves betwixt the 
Im∣perialists
 and 
Brandenburgers,
 but the reserve coming to their Aid from their place of Arms, they forced them back into the Town. There were above eighty of the two Attacks killed and wounded in this Adventure, one of their chief Cannoneers slain, and several subaltern Officers. The besieged lost as many; Notwith∣standing this check, the Works were continued with the same Vigour in the Approaches, Lines, and Galleries. On the 
Bavarian
 side they ruin∣ed the little Port from their Battery with ten demy Cannons, and the breach there was very spacious.


July
 the tenth, At the 
Lorrain
 Attack they work'd all Night to repair the Batteries and the Approaches which the besieged had ruined in the former Sally, and to redress the Gallery which they had burnt, and the Miners were again fired that Night. At the 
Bavarian
 Attack the Miners worked under the Palizade of the Rondel, and under the Wall, with hopes of compleating their Mines in three days; several were slain, amongst whom was Lieutenent-Col∣lonel 
Wachtenheim.
 The Christians had Intelli∣gence by their Spies, that the Turks, to the num∣ber of seven thousand, reinforced with some 
Tartars
 who ravaged the Country, had a design to introduce a new Commander, with a recruit of Troops into 
Buda,
 which obliged the Duke of 
Lorrain
 to command some Foot to post them∣selves on the other side of the 
Danube,
 and upon occasion to joyn with the Horse that were there already, and meet and fight the Enemies.


July
 the eleventh, This evening five demy Cannons were mounted on the two new Batteries in the 
Lorrain
 Attack, and two Mortars planted in a little Fort, with the loss only of two killed, and five hurt. The 
Brandenburgers
 placed three pieces in battery, and would plant more the Night following to shoot glowing Bullets into the City. The 
Bavarians
 fortified their Attack by two Re∣doubts. Yesterday in the Evening four hun∣dred Foot were ordered to raise some Defences on 
Pest
 side near the 
Danube,
 to hinder lest any thing should pass that way into 
Buda.


July
 the twelfth, All the Batteries of 
Lorrain
 and 
Brandenburg
 were compleated, and the first lines of these two Attacks were so joyned, that men could pass from the one to the other un∣discovered, by the Enemies Fire. And now they were so near the Walls, the besieged did perpe∣tually throw hand Granadoes and Stones to in∣commode the Workmen, but without any great harm. The Miner on the left found him∣self much advanced under the Wall, but they met with more difficulty on the right, and so they would inlarge the breach by force of their Cannon. The Count 
de Souches
 inspected the breach by order of the Field Marshal 
Starenberg,
 and it was found spacious enough to be assaulted: The 
Brandenburgers
 began to shoot their infla∣med Bullets and Bombs out of twenty two Can∣nons, and two Mortars, but with no great Suc∣cess, being the Besieged had uncovered all their Houses. The Bombs and Carcasses invented by the 
Franciscan
 Frier were highly esteemed. They now only plained and inlarged the Breaches, and prepared themselves for the assault. There were nine hurt and three slain with Granadoes and Stones. The Breach in the great Rondel on the 
Bavarian
 side was large enough, and the Miner was at work under the Pallizade of the Ditch. The Duke having Intelligence that the Seraskier was advanced with some thousands of Turks near 
Hatwan,
 commanded 3000 Horse, and six Battalions of Foot, 
Imperialists, Branden∣burgers,
 and 
Bavarians,
 under the Conduct of Ge∣neral 
Mercy,
 to pass the 
Danube,
 and post them∣selves on the other side of the Bridge, to hinder the Turks to put a recruit of Troops into the Ci∣ty, with the new designed Commander, 
Achmet
 Bassa, who had the Reputation of being one of the best Officers that the Grand Seignior had in his Service.


July
 the thirteenth, This morning the besie∣ged sprung a Mine under the middle Rondel near the Christians Mine, which was already finished, which Mine did what the besiegers de∣signed, by throwing down part of the Rondel, where they had no breach as yet. There were two hundred Turks ready to fly into the adverse Works as soon as the Mine took, but seeing it had a contrary effect to what they designed, they retired. All things being disposed for an assault, thereby to make a lodgment upon the Wall, Count 
Starenburg
 directed the attack in the manner following. Count 
Guydo Starenburg
 commanded on the right of the Rondel, Count 
Herberstein
 the middle of the Curtain, and Count 
Aversberg,
 all three field Officers, on the left. They had each of them two hundred and eighty Soul∣diers; the Engineers, Granadeers, Fuseliers, Car∣penters, and Pioneers, were posted betwixt two, and the rest, to the number of two thousand, were divided into three bodies of Reserves to support the Assailants: the Voluntiers who had demanded the point, mingled themselves with the first. Betwixt seven and eight a Clock the signal for the Assault was given, by a discharge from all the Batteries, and a shower of Bombs and Carcasses which were discharged upon the City, and the Retrenchments which the besieged had made behind the breach; and notwithstanding all the resistance of the besieged, the Christians mounted the breach, where the Combat was very rude and obstinate on both sides for three quarters of an hour, with all possible bravery. The besieged sprung a Mine under the Assai∣lants first line, which buried Captain 
Kalkreiter,
 and some Souldiers. But seeing they could not take post for want of Earth, that they could not force the Pallizado'd Retrenchment behind the breach, and that the chief Officers were already all hurt or slain, by the continual fire of the be∣sieged; it was thought expedient to make a re∣treat; five or six leap'd over the Turks Retrench∣ment, but being ill followed, got off with the rest. The Regiments of 
Souches
 and 
Mansfeld
 suffered most in this Action, and that of 
Staren∣burg
 was also ill treated. There were more than four hundred kill'd and wounded, but the loss of so many brave Officers and Voluntiers who lost their Lives there, were particularly deplo∣red: but few that were hurt escaped, which be∣got a belief that the Turks shot with envenom∣ed Bullets. Amongst the dead were Count 
Her∣berstein,


Count 
Kuffstein,
 and another Captain of the same Regiment, the Baron 
Rolle,
 three Captains more, and eight Lieutenants and En∣signs. Of Voluntiers that were slain there, or died of their Wounds, the Duke of 
Vexar,
 a Grandee of 
Spain,
 who was one of the first upon the breach, was one, a Son of Prince 
Roberts,
 with another English Lord, the Baron of 
Scheyf∣fer,
 the young Count of 
Courmaillon,
 a Conte of 
Dona,
 and seven or eight more of Quality. Amongst the wounded, as well Officers as Vo∣luntiers, were reckoned Count 
Guydo Starenburg,
 Count 
Aversperg,
 the Prince of 
Veldens
 of the House of the Palatinat, Prince 
Picolomini,
 two English Lords, the Duke of 
Escalona,
 a Grandee of 
Spain,
 the Marquess of 
Valero,
 Brother to the Duke of 
Vexar,
 the Prince of 
Commercy,
 and more than thirty other Persons of mark. The 
Spani∣ards
 and the 
English
 distinguished themselves by a noble Emulation, opposing the greatest Fury of the Turks. The 
English
 were so ill treated, that of twenty of them, all Persons of Quality, there were but six of them that were not slain or wounded. The loss of the besieged was also great, for they had two hundred of their bra∣vest men wounded and killed. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 and Marshal Count 
Starenburg
 were pre∣sent in this Action, giving Orders every where as occasion required. It was believed that the 
Brandenburgers
 would have attempted somewhat on their side, but they excused it because their breach was not large enough. On the 
Bavarian
 side there was a notable breach made in the Rondel and in the Wall that covers the Castle, which the besieged repaired by Night with Ga∣bions, Pallizadoes, and Fagots.


July
 the fourteenth, The whole Night and Day were imployed in inhuming the Dead, and repairing the Approaches, in planting more Cannon upon the Batteries, and in advancing the Mines. Two Galleries were likewise fra∣med betwixt the second and third Rondel. The Duke of 
Lorrain
 having also sent for three Re∣giments of Horse from 
Alba-Regalis
 to reinforce General 
Mercy,
 they passed the Bridge this Morning to go on 
Pest
 side. The besieged sprung a Mine in the 
Bavarian
 Attack on the left of the Castle 
Rondel,
 which succeeded ill. His Electoral Highness having caused eight Pa∣rapets of thick Oaken Planks to be made, shod with Iron, of a new Invention, each capable of securing a hundred armed Men, they were thought proper to be used in Attacks and As∣saults. The same day the 
Bavarians
 discovered and disappointed two Mines of the Enemies.


July 15th,
 They continued to work in their Lines, and being lodged close to the Wall, the Besieged were heard to work under the Breach. 
Gonzales
 the 
Spanish
 Engineer being now come, Bombs and Carcasses were thrown into the Town, which did great Execution. Upon the Advice that the Duke of 
Lorrain
 had, that the Turks that had passed the 
Tibiscus
 near 
Segedin,
 were still encamped under the Cannon of 
Hat∣wan,
 he caused two Regiments of Horse more to joyn 
Mercy
 to oblige the Enemy to repass the 
Tibiscus.


July 16th,
 A new Battery was raised in the 
Lorrain
 Attack without the Wall of the lower Town to the right against the great Rondel, the which was also batter'd on the other side to render the Breach larger, and themselves Ma∣sters of it. A 
Rascian,
 with Letters which the Governour of the Place had entrusted him to carry to him of 
Alb-Royal,
 came and deliver∣ed them to the Duke; but they being writ in the 
Armenian
 Language, and no Interpreter in the Camp, they were sent to 
Vienna
 to be decy∣phered. Some Peasants got out of the Town reported, that the Janizaries had begun to mur∣mur against the Bassa, as designing to hold out to the last extremity, but that he had by the Punishment of the most mutinous, by his Libe∣rality, and the assurance he had given them of speedy relief, reassured them to that degree, that they promised to hold out with their Lives. This Evening the Elector of 
Bavaria
 commanded 150 men, seconded by a greater number to go and attack the Palizado which was in the Ditch at the foot of the Rondel of the Castle. Lieutenant-General Count 
Fountain
 was on the right of the Attack, and General Count 
Aspremont
 at the left. They used three of the above mentioned wooden Parapets for the first time with Success, and they attack'd this Post so vigorously, that they carried it with their Swords in their Hands, cutting in pieces all them that defended it, but they sold their Lives dearly, being the Assailants lost Count 
Fountaine
 and 35 Souldiers, and Vo∣luntiers. Count 
Aspermont
 received a Contusion in his Head by the stroke of a Musquet which knock'd off his Steel Cap. The Captains 
Gotta∣linsky
 and 
Vaubon
 were dangerously hurt, with di∣vers others. This Post gave access to the Ron∣del.


July 17th,
 Yesterday the Besieged began to fire from a new Battery of four great Guns, which they had raised upon the inward Wall; but General 
Starenberg
 having commanded all the Cannon that could bear to shoot that way, they were quickly silenced and disabled. About Noon twenty or thirty Janizaries appeared upon the Breach of the Rondel to the right, as if they had designed a Sally, but those in the Trenches having given them a Volly, they quickly reti∣red. The 
Brandenburgers
 and 
Bavarians
 did no∣thing but compleat their Works, besides their continual firing from their Batteries.


July 18th,
 A new line was advanced to the right, the better to cover the Miners, and be of use in the subsequent Assault. The 
Brandenbur∣gers
 augmented their great Battery with three pieces of Cannon. Nor were the 
Bavarians
 idle, their Miners working under the Wall behind the Pallizado Moat, of which they were in possession. The Besieged did not much appear by day, but in the Night time kept continual firing, killing a great many of the Besiegers with their Stones and Granadoes, which they threw into their Works.


Jul.
 19. The Cannon was mounted upon the new Battery, and the Line was strengthned with two small Forts. Last night the Besieged sprung a Mine behind our Miners, who worked under the Wall, which endammaged our Mine, into which a new entry was to be made to make it serviceable. Some of the Christian Miners were covered with earth, most of which were pulled out again, except 
Libert
 their Captain, who could not be found. Mr. 
Kerry,
 a 
Scotch
 Gentleman, with seven or eight Souldiers were killed in the ap∣proaches, besides others wounded. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 assisted by the General persons of his Ar∣my, held a Council of War this morning, but the result was kept secret. Some Deserters assu∣red the Duke, that the Besieged resolved to make no composition, but to expect the Relief which the Grand 
Visier
 would bring them.


Jul.
 20. The new Line in the 
Lorrain
 attack was compleated. There were three false alarms given to harass the Besieged, by causing some Granadeers to run up the Breach, and throw their Granado's into the place, upon which the Turks hastening to the defence, they were salu∣ted

with Volleys of Cannon, Bombs, and Car∣kasses, not without execution. These kind of attacks were frequently used to keep the Enemy in continual alarms, and in ignorance of the time of the real Assault. In the mean time the Mines were vigorously carried on, and a certain 
German
 undertook a new one, which he under∣took to finish in two or three days. In the attacks of 
Brandenburg
 and 
Bavaria,
 the Miners hoped to be the following Night under the Rondels, con∣tinuing to batter the Walls with great fury, and to shoot glowing Bullets, Bombs and Carkasses into the City, which produced much disorder. Upon advice that the Turks disposed themselves to attempt to put relief into the Town, the Ditch of the Circumvallation was deepened, and forti∣fied with certain Redoubts, the better to secure the Besiegers, to which purpose 200 
Heyducks
 were added to the number of Pioneers.


Jul.
 21. The principal working was now at the Mines, which were made in three several places, and would suddenly be ready. Captain 
Libert,
 not∣withstanding all the diligence that had been used to dig and remove the earth to seek him, had not been found. He was a 
Walloon
 by Nation, and was regretted by all the Generals, and such who had skill of his knowledge in conducting of Mines. The Miners were now within hearing of each other. A Battery was also raised for four Mortars, near the three 
Spanish
 Pieces which beat upon the Rondel on the right, and they re∣solved to approach all the Cannon and Mortars nearer the Breaches, to batter them with more force, that they might inlarge them with more ease, and ruine the Enemies Defences, which were behind the said Breaches. There were twenty-seven slain and wounded only at the 
Lorrain
 at∣tack; amongst the dead were Major 
Bacneburg
 a 
Dane,
 and Captain 
Lerneux
 the 
5th
 of 
Starenberg
's Regiment. 
Gonzales
's Bombs and Carcasses had the Success expected, and by report of a Fugi∣tive, one of those Bombs sunck into a House where a hundred Persons of both Sexes were re∣tired, who all miserably perished in the Ruines of it. The 
Bavarians
 finished their Battery near the Rondel, and began another on the Water side, to canonade the Flancks of the City on that side. At present, being the three Attacks were ad∣vanced as far as the Breaches, which were large enough, all things were disposed for a general Assault, two thousand Ladders being got ready for false and seeming Attacks by scaling the Walls, whilst others mounted the Breaches.


July 22th,
 There hapned nothing at the 
Lorrain
 or 
Brandenburg
 Attack, the Turks sprung two Mines this Morning, which did nothing but ru∣ine a part of the Curtain, where there was no Breach. The new Battery of four Guns upon the brink of the Ditch of the Rondel in the 
Ba∣varian
 Attack being finished, the Turks came there at break of day, and gave them a bloody Serenade, for a strong party of them having slipped out by the Bridge on the right, they crept into the Ditch along the Palisade, and be∣ing come to the Battery, before they were disco∣vered, by favour of the Darkness, they began to howl and make terrible cries, nailing up three Cannon, and a Mortar, and ruining part of the Battery: The 
Saxons
 of the neighbouring Posts ran to the noise, but were disordered. The Re∣giment of Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden,
 which was up∣on the Reserve, arrived seasonably, and repul∣sed the Turks with the loss of thirty men, which was but a sorry compensation considering the loss on the other side, where above one hundred were killed and wounded, the most 
Saxons
 and 
Bavarians.
 Amongst the slain, Collonel 
Lebel,
 a 
Saxon
 was one, besides several Subalternes, and 
Geschwint,
 Collonel of the Artillery, was dange∣rously wounded with a Cymitar. The Turks got no great advantage by this Sally, for the Nailes being easily drawn, they began in a very little time to play again, as if they never had been nailed. And the revenge which was re∣turned was sudden and fatal, for a Bomb of the 
Bavarians
 falling into the Magazine of Powder in the Castle,
 blew it up with such a terrible de∣struction and noise, that the whole City did not only tremble with the blow, but also the whole Camp, and, as was afterward reported by some fugitives, more than one thousand persons of all ages were buried in the ruines, the stones being thrown up with the violence of the Powder in such abundance, that they fell like Hail into the approaches, that many of the Besiegers were hurt by them.


Jul.
 23. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 his Mines be∣ing now all ready, and all things ready for an assault, sent the Count of 
Koningsec
 with an In∣terpreter to the Besieged to summon them to surrender. In this interval there was a cessation of Arms on both sides, which was employed in burying the slain. The said Count, after two hours stay, returned into the Camp with a Letter from 
Abdi Bassa,
 in a Purse of Crimson Damask, which he delivered the Duke. The answer was fierce and arrogant, implying, that not being necessitated to surrender, he could not be capable of so abject a thought, that he fought for the glory of his 
Prophet,
 and the honour of the 
Musselmen;
 that he and his Garrison were resol∣ved to try the utmost extremity, and to defend the place with their latest breath. That the Go∣vernment had been intrusted to his care by the Grand Seignior, which he would preserve for him, or lose his life; that when the Duke should come to wrest it from him, he should find him upon the Breach to dispute his entrance, and that he might order the assault when he pleased, he would expect him there without stirring a foot. The Duke having read this brave answer, cau∣sed all the Batteries to fire with more fury than formerly, and all the preparatives for a general Assault to be made ready, for which purpose he sent for some thousands of 
Hungarian
 Foot, who had voluntarily offered to be the first that should mount the Breaches.


So fierce an answer and so brave a defence, makes it apparent, that the impressions which the Run-aways had at the beginning of the Siege given of 
Abdi Bassa
's conduct, were very false, affirming he was despised by the Souldiery, as being more a Merchant than a Man of War; and the 
Serasquier
 was in the wrong in designing to remove him, for it is to be presumed that scarce any other would have eluded the efforts of so great an Army so long time. A 
Pole
 was observed by the Guards in secret conference with two Turks, but upon his return to the Camp was seised upon, visited and examined, and be∣ing found to be a Spy, he was immediately hanged. This evening a 
Bavarian
 Gunner was apprahended, as he was going over to the Ene∣my.


Jul. 24th,
 This morning about eight a Clock a great Mine was sprung in the 
Lorrain
 attack, and 300 men were commanded to lodge upon the Breach, together with some hundreds of 
Hungarians,
 but the Mine had a contrary effect to what was designed, for it ruined and over∣threw part of their own Approaches, and filled their Lines with Earth, besides the slaughters of 100 men killed and wounded. The Duke upon this ill success, caused the firings of the Batteries

to be redoubled to enlarge the Breaches, to ren∣der them in a Condition to be mounted without any new Mines. The new Battery which the 
Bavarians
 rais'd by the Water side would be rea∣dy at Night, and that which they had already raised upon the brink of the Ditch, had made a great gap in the Wall on the right. By inter∣cepted Letters he was also informed, that the Great Visier highly encouraged the Besieged to defend themselves, assuring them that by the eighth or tenth of 
August
 he would come to their relief with a formidable Army. General 
Caraffa
 who commanded the Imperial Troops upon the River 
Tibiscus,
 sent an Officer to the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 and the Elector of 
Bavaria,
 with an acccount of a great Advantage which he had had over the Garrison of 
Agria
 by the means of two Ambushes which he had laid for the Turks, which luck'd so well, that having drawn six hundred of the Garrison into them, he quite defeated them, killed three hundred upon the Place, with 
Osman
 Bassa the Commander of 
Agria,
 and took forty Prisoners, together with the 
Vice
 Bassa, who was dangerously wounded.


July 25th,
 The whole Night was spent in re∣pairing the Works ruined by the Mine, which had been sprung with so much disadvantage. The Duke pressed forward the Preparatives for the General Assault with all possible Vigour, having ordered the making of Places of Arms, or Parades, as were necessary, within the Lines and Approaches. Betwixt four and five the Be∣sieged put fire to a Mine on the right of the Rondel, in pursuance whereof they sallied with two hundred Men, but were repulsed by the Guard that were in readiness with the loss of fourteen men. A little after, they sallied again in greater numbers to the left, where the 
Bran∣denburgers
 were, who likewise repulsed them. They returned yet the third time with more Troops, and put the 
Brandenburgers
 Guards into disorder, which obliged the Duke of 
Lorrain
 to order the Reserve which was posted at the Wall of the lower Town to advance, which General 
Souches,
 who commanded the Trenches, had di∣vided into three parts, whereof one was placed to the left on the Water side, another in the Approaches, and the third was commanded to keep by the Mosque. The Duke moreover cau∣sed the Battalions of 
Mansfelt, Salm, Souches,
 and 
Lorrain,
 to advance to the right. The Skirmish∣ing lasted a good time, the Turks retiring of∣ten, and as soon returning with great fury and out-cryes. The 
Hayducks
 after the first discharge did also charge the Turks, but gave way, occa∣sioning much confusion amongst them upon the left of the Mosque, from whence the Besieged gave brisk fire with their Cannon, though with∣out any great harm, so that seeing they could profit nothing by a longer stay, they retired into the Town. Count 
Starenberg,
 who had signali∣zed himself, luck'd better than his Adjoutant, who had both his Legs shot off. The Battalions of 
Souches
 and 
Mansfelt
 were ill treated, and had most dead. The Baron of 
Asthi
 was hurt in the Foot, and the Baron of 
Hoghenworth
 slain, and several subaltern Officers killed and hurt, besides above a hundred private Souldiers. But the loss on the Enemies side was much greater, as was reported by a Dutch Boy who run out of Town, where he had been since the Siege of 
Vienna,
 ha∣ving been sold by a 
Tartar
 to a Citizen of 
Buda.
 This Boy said further, that the Turks made great Retrenchments within the Place, and that the Garrison consisted still of at least five thou∣sand fighting men.


July 26th,
 Never was more Diligence used since the Siege began in carrying on the Lines and Approaches, than last Night, and all this Day to make the Places of Arms, which are fi∣nished, and at present every thing is disposed of for the general Assault, and posting themselves upon the Breaches, the Rondels, and the Walls, and consequently to render themselves Masters of this important Place, which had cost the Christians so much Blood. The Besieged made a little sally on the 
Bavarian
 Attack, but having stood the first discharge, were forced to retreat as fast as they came.


July 27th,
 Every thing being disposed for the general Assault, and the Troops that were to be employed in it at their Rendezvouzes in all the three Attacks, it was resolved that the Onset should be given at five a Clock in the Evening, to which end the Duke had distribu∣ted his Orders to all the Officers high and low, how they were to act. The Faggots, Gabions, Spades, Mattocks, Hatchets, and Sacks with Earth, were there in great abundance, as well to break the Enemies Retrenchments, as to co∣ver the Assailants when they should be Masters of the Breaches. The signal was given from 
Pest
 by some Cannon shot, and the Assault was carried on in manner following. Forty Grana∣deers under the command of a Captain, one Lieutenant, and one Serjeant, were at the head of the Rondel to the right hand, they were fol∣lowed by fifty Fuseliers and Souldiers, with Hatchets, commanded also by a Captain-Lieu∣tenant, and a Serjeant, with a hundred men carrying Spades and Mattocks, supported by two Captains, two Lieutenants, two Serjeants, and two hundred Musqueteers, all under the Con∣duct of the Prince of 
Newburg,
 Great Master of the 
Teutonick
 Order, who had the Direction of this Attack. That of the middle toward the Curtain was directed by Lieutenant General 
Sou∣ches;
 there were fifty Granadeers under a Cap∣tain, Lieutenant and Serjeant, a hundred Fuse∣liers, two hundred men with Hatchets, and to second them two hundred Musqueteers, divided into two squadrons, which were followed with a hundred and fifty more, with Shovels and Mattocks: The Attack on the left of the little Rondel was ordered by the 
Brandenburgers
 after the same manner. Behind the Sacks filled with Earth, Wooll, and the like, in the second line were posted a party of choice Harquebusiers, who were not to stir thence, but fire continually upon the Turks, who stood there themselves in the Breaches. The 
Heyducks,
 commanded by the Lieutenant Governour of 
Raab,
 were posted on the Water side, where a great part of the Wall had been thrown down by the fire of the Maga∣zin already mentioned; they were only to make a false Attack, being seconded by a Major with some select Companies. The chief Officers were dispersed into several Posts to execute the fun∣ctions of their Employments; and thus 
Nigrelli,
 General of Battalia, Collonel 
Keth,
 Lieutenant Collonel 
Rederer,
 and the Major of 
Staremberg
 assisted the grand Master of the 
Teutonick
 Order. General 
Souches
 had for Assistants 
Diependal,
 Count 
Octtingen,
 Lieutenant Collonel 
Jorger,
 and the Major of 
Crop
's Regiment. There were above 1200 men of reserves in the covered way, com∣manded by General 
Thungen,
 under twelve Cap∣tains, twelve Lieutenants, and other subaltern Officers, with all the other Lieutenant Collo∣nels and Majors, to succeed in the place of those that should be slain or wounded. The 1200 Musqueteers were to advance in small parties in the Lines as the other gained ground; the rest of the Foot were at their Arms ready to engage,

and all the Generals in the Trenches. In this order the Souldiers full of Hopes and Courage went to the Assault, and mounted the Breaches. They found great Opposition, particularly at the great Rondel where the Breach was high, and the Defendants very numerous and resolute. The Christians were beat back two or three times, but returning still to the Assault, they at length took possession of the Breach, and posted themselves in it. The 
Brandenburgers
 took the Wall of the little Rondel. The Combat lasted from five till nine a Clock with great effusion of Blood, not so much by the Turks Arms as their Mines, and Powder which they had strewed in great quantities in several places, which they successively fired as they were forced from their Posts. There could be nothing more lamentable than to see two or three hundred men at once tossed up by force of the Mines, which were most killed, or grievously wounded. And yet the Be∣sieged could not terrifie the Christians, nor hin∣der them by their obstinate resistance to lodge upon the Rondels and the Curtain. The 
Hay∣ducks
 apprehending the fire, failed in their false alarming on the Water side. The Duke and General 
Staremberg
 were near the Great Master with their Swords in their Hands, encouraging the Officers and Souldiers to do well, and the Prince of 
Croy
 was in the middle near the Cur∣tain, where he was hurt. The Night being come put an end to the fight, and it was spent in se∣curing their Lodgments with two Lines of Com∣munication from the Approaches to the possessed Rondels, and the Miners were fastned to the in∣ner Wall or Retrenchment, where the Turks fortified themselves. This Assault was one of the bloodiest, the most hardy, and best disputed that ever was seen, whether we consider the bravery and intrepidness of the Assailants, or the obstinate Valour of the Defendants. The number of the slain, amongst whom was Adjou∣tant General 
Attein,
 was not very great, but that of the wounded very surprising, of which Ca∣talogue were the Prince of 
Croy,
 the Prince of 
Commercy,
 General 
Diependael,
 General 
Thungen,
 the Baron of 
Asti,
 the Major of 
Starenberg,
 Lieu∣tenant Collonel 
Redere,
 Major 
Pini,
 Conte, 
Schlick,
 Baron 
Gera,
 and many other 
Captains
 and sub∣alterne Officers. On the 
Brandenburg
 side, Count 
Dona,
 Collonel of Foot was slain, Major 
Marwitz,
 and the Prince of 
Curland
 grievously wounded, with very many others.


At the 
Bavarian
 Attack the Elector had order∣ed the Assault in this manner. The Palizades upon the Breach having been burnt the day be∣fore by forty choice Souldiers, the Elector com∣manded a Lieutenant with 20 Fuseliers, a 
Serje∣ant,
 six Voluntiers, and ten Granadeers, and a Corporal, with six Carpenters to cut the Paliza∣does, an 100 Musqueteers with their Officers were ordered to post themselves at the Enemies Pali∣zade, and to shoot without ceasing to favorise the Pioneers to make the Lodgment upon the Rondel, amongst which there were twenty five with Spades and Pickaxes and 75 with Hatchets commanded by a Captain, and seconded by a Lieutenant-Collonel, a Major and a Captain, with fifty men armed with half Pikes, Halberds, and Partizans, by a Lieutenant with thirty Grana∣deers, and by 200 Musquetters under two Captains and two Lieutenants. Things being thus dispo∣sed as well on the right as the left, the two Neigh∣bouring Redoubts were furnished each with thirty Harquebusiers, and three Battalions of 
Imperialists, Bavarians
 and 
Saxons,
 were to second the Assailants. The Gunners had order to fire from all the Bat∣teries, and to throw Bombs and Carcasses with∣out ceasing into the Castle, and betwixt the two Walls on the Water side, as also to point their Cannon against the high Walls and Windows of the Castle. All things being thus ordered, and the signal given from 
Pest,
 they advanced towards the Breach, however difficult to mount on the right and left of the Rondel, as also the Curtain, and that with so much Vigour, that they became Masters of the Post, driving out the Besieged for all their incessant firing, and a shower of Stones which they threw from their Castle Windows. They also took the 
Swingher,
 which is a great Place in form of a retreat betwixt the Walls and the Houses, but this Place being commanded by the said Walls, whence the Turks annoyed the Aggressors with Granadoes, Stones, and Bombs which they rolled down; the Elector caused those that were there to retire, being content to secure the Lodgments upon the Rondel, and the Wall of the Castle by a Line of Communication from the Gate of the Bridge to that of the 
Swingher,
 so that the Bridge remained in their Power, which was further secured by traverse Lines, and two Redoubts. The Elector eminently appeared in all this Action, and the Generals signalized their Courage, as did also the Voluntiers, Officers and Souldiers, who fought with all the bravery that was to be expected from men of Courage. Nor were the Turks less commendable for their Con∣stancy and Fidelity, doing every thing that op∣pressed Valour could be capable of. They who defended the Rondel and the Swinger were for the most part killed and hurt. There were eight pieces of Cannon found there, and two Mortars turned now against the Besiegeds second Wall and Retrenchments. In this Assault, of the 
Ba∣varians
 there were slain two Majors, two Captains, four Lieutenants, one Ensign, but the wounded were many; one Collonel, two Lieutenant-Col∣lonels, two Majors, 25 Captains, 16 Lieutenants, thirteen Ensigns. The Generals 
Lavergne, Rummel,
 and 
Aspremont
 were of the number of the woun∣ded, as also the Duke of 
Escalona,
 a Grandee of 
Spain,
 and some other Voluntiers of Quality, making up with the Officers and Souldiers the number of 117 slain, and 972 wounded. Of the Troops of 
Saxony,
 a Lieutenant-Collonel, and some under Officer were killed; one Lieutenant-Collonel, two Majors, two Captains, one Cap∣tain-Lieutenant, and three Ensigns were hurt; of the Souldiers there were seventy slain, and a hundred ninety nine wounded; so that the number of the slain and wounded in this Assault amounted to above three thousand men.


July
 28, In the three Attacks they were only employed in burying their dead, and securing their Lodgments upon the Breaches. The Duke of 
Lorrain
 did also apply the Miner to the second Wall, which was done in three several Places, as did also they of 
Bavaria
 and 
Brandenburg.


July
 29. The three Mines in the second Wall were sprung with that Success that they made a new Breach there, and filled part of the Ditch with the Ruins. The 
Bavarians
 advanced to the right of the Rondel, and seized two Mortars there, which they turned against the Besieged. The great Cannon was advanced, and they pretended to batter the City with an 100 pieces of Ordnance, and forty Mortars, if the Turks continued in their Obstinacy. The Besieged howsoever made seve∣ral Cuts and Retrenchments behind the second Wall. The Duke seeing that well nigh all the Generals of the Infantry were hurt and in no Condition to act, order'd for the future that the Generals of the Horse should serve in the Ap∣proaches, to wit, the Count of 
Stirum,
 and the Conte of 
Lodron,
 and so the first mounted the

Guard that Night with General 
Souches,
 and was to be relieved on the morrow by the grand Master of the Teutonick Order, and the Count 
de Lodron.
 A Battery of three Demy-Cannon, and another of four were finished. Some 
Rascians
 come out of the place, reported, that the besieged were resol∣ved to defend themselves to the last extremity, but that some began to waver, saying, the further effusion of bloud ought to be prevented. A Coun∣cil of War was held thereupon, and the result was, that the Duke should send a second Summons to the Commander of the place, 
to surrender whilst it was time, and that he might do it upon honourable con∣ditions, which if neglected he would not be answerable for the bloud that should be spilt, if they came to the last extremity, being in that case they should spare neither Sex nor Age. Abdi Bassa
 civilly received his High∣ness's Letters, and demanded a Day to consult with the other Officers of his Garrison, which was granted him, with a cessation of Arms. The Deserters, who escaped in great numbers, affirm'd that the Besieged lost in the last Assault, in the 
Bavarian
 attack, only 300 slain, and 700 hurt. They had that Night notice that 4000 Turkish Horse were seen within four Leagues of the Camp, to enquire into the state of the place, but fearing a surprise, they presently retired.


Jul.
 31. At nine in the Morning the Count of 
Launberg,
 Adjoutant General, was commanded by the Duke of 
Lorrain
 to go with an Interpreter, and received the Besieged's answer, which was to this purpose, 
That he neither could nor would so easily surrender the City, it being the Key of the Ottoman Em∣pire; but if they would make a general peace, they would give another equivalent.
 After noon the Besieged demanded a suspension of Arms at the 
Bavarian
 attack, and sent two 
Aga
's in Hostage to the Elector, who sent the Baron of 
Creuz
 Lieutenant Collonel of 
Baden
's Regiment with an Interpreter. The Turks received them with great ceremony, and all imaginable civilities. He was not immediate∣ly conducted before the Bassa, but to another House, the streets as he passed along were lined with Souldiers in very good order, though no great number. Being entered into the House, he was presented with Rice, a rosted Pullet, little Py
s, Coffee and Wine. The Bassa excused himself, 
That he could not yet speak with him, being he consulted the other chief Officers upon the propositi∣ons he was to make to him.
 In this interval of time many Turkish Officers came to salute the Baron: half an hour after the Bassa sent him word, 
That he would take it for a favour if he would come over to him.
 Which he immediately did, accompanied with a great number of Turks, being taken by the arms by the two chiefest of them, accord∣ing to the custom of the 
Ottomans,
 who led him thus before the Bassa, who was in a Lodge of Wood over-against his House, very well furni∣shed and hung with rich Tapistries. Having caused the Baron to sit down, he used this dis∣course to him, 
That he was sorry to find himself in a place of that importance, that had been so often besieged without success, and was now so long abandoned with∣out relief. On the contrary, that he found himself pres∣sed by the Emperour's Son-in-law, and the grand Visier, that he wished he were able to give his resolution con∣cerning the surrender, but that being an affair of the last importance, and as much as his life was worth, it was impossible for him to resolve upon a surrender.
 Ad∣ding however, 
That if they would demand any other place in Hungary, he would cause it immediately to be evacuated for them:
 The Baron replied, 
That he had no Commission to discourse of conditions, but only to know from the Bassa himself whether he would surrender or no. That he might please to consider that the Chri∣stians were already Masters of the Walls of the City, that it would be too late to capitulate, if he stayed till another assault, that it would not be in the power of the Generals to restrain the fury of the Souldiers, or prevent this Siege from being as Tragical as that of Newheusel.
 At this discourse the Bassa only lift up his shoul∣ders, but the Baron being upon the point to take his leave, he desired him to enter with him in∣to his Cabinet, where, calling the 
Mufti
 and three other Turks of the first rank, he remonstrated to him again, 
That he could not upon any consideration do so great a prejudice to the
 Grand Seignior, 
as to surrender a place upon which depended
 two hundred Leagues of Country, 
and which is the
 Key of Turky, 
but offered again any Town in Hungary with its Appendances and Dependencies.
 Yet declaring fi∣nally, 
That if they would give him assurances of a ge∣neral peace with the Port, he would yet resolve to sur∣render Buda.
 The Baron having no Orders to treat, took leave of the Bassa, telling him he would make report to the Elector and Duke of 
Lorrain,
 of the Declaration he had communica∣ted to him, but that he could not assure him that things would be so concluded. The Bassa desired this Declaration might be published in Writing through the Camp; and invited him to stay all Night in the City: But the Baron ex∣cused the later, desiring to be reconducted to the place from whence he came, which was done with great ceremony, he being accompanied with many 
Turkish
 Officers to the Gate. Nor the Baron, nor his Interpreter could sufficiently de∣monstrate the ruines occasioned in the City by the Bombs and Carkasses which had beaten down the greatest part of the Buildings. The Cessation which had been observed during this Parley was broke towards Evening, the Cannon beginning to fire with more fury than formerly. The Besieged sprang a Counter-mine in the 
Lor∣rain
 attack, to ruine the Christians Mine made under their Battery, opposite to the great Ron∣del, but without success. A while after, two of the Besiegers Mines, which were designed to fill the Ditch, were fired with execution. Count 
Starenberg
 looking betwixt two Gabions was hurt with a Musket-shot, but without danger, 20 or 30 more were hurt and killed in this and the 
Brandenburg
 attack.


Aug.
 1. A Battery was finished in the 
Lorrain
 attack upon the Rondel, upon which two pieces of Cannon were planted. A Mine was sprung in the Morning near this Rondel, and though it succeeded well, there was no other attempt made, because the Moat was not sufficiently filled, and so it was resolved to fill it with Faggots, with Sacks of Earth, and the like Materials, which were carried in abundance upon the place. The Workmen perceived so great a stink in this Mine, that they could scarce endure it, two of them, who were suffocated with it, being carried out of it. About Noon, intelligence came that 7000 
Turks
 were posted at 
Sexaritwan
 thirteen Leagues from 
Buda,
 and that the 
Grand Visier
 had begun to pass the Bridge of 
Esseck
 with the Army that he had formed out of the Garrisons of 
Hun∣gary,
 and the Neighbouring places, and with other Troops which he had got together, a∣mongst which there were 7000 men drawn out of 
Bossina.
 It was further assured that the defecti∣on amongst the Turks was very great, and that of 8000 Janizaries, which the 
Grand Visier
 had brought from the middle of Turky, 3000 had deserted upon the march: and yet he pretended his Army consisted of 50000 Combatants, resol∣ving to attempt the relief of 
Bud
.
 General 
Dune∣wald
 returned this afternoon to the Camp, with the Regiments of Horse with which he had been on the side of the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 to inform

himself of the march of the Enemy. The Ge∣nerals 
Caraffa
 and 
Heusler
 arrived also from 
Zol∣nock
 in two days, with 5000 Horse and some 
Hungarians.


All things were disposed for to assault the se∣cond Wall. The 
Bavarians
 had thrown down a great part of the Wall with their Cannon, and a Mine, rendering themselves Masters of the se∣cond 
Zwinger,
 where they at the same time sei∣sed upon the Enemies Cannon and Mortars, which they turned against the City.


Aug. 2d.
 They continued to fill the Ditch: every thing was ready for the assault, which was deferred, because of the continual rains. Upon the reiterated news brought in by Scouts of the 
Grand Visier
 having passed the Bridge at 
Esseck,
 all necessary preparations were made to receive him well, in case he attempted to relieve the Town.


Aug.
 3. A Run-away, who pretended to be a Domestick of one of the most considerable Offi∣cers in the Town, declared, that the Besieged had prepared a Mine, and begun a second in the 
Brandenburg
 attack: That they expected with great impatience their Succours, and that of all those which the Bassa had sent out, not one had returned, which rendered him very uneasie and chagrin, and that the number of serviceable 
Soldiers
 exceeded not 2000 besides the Inhabitants. The Besiegers could not finish their great Mine because of a Rock they met. Some small Banks and Parapets were made upon the Breach to se∣cure the Souldiers firing during the assault, which was ordered in the manner following. At noon the Trenches were relieved, and those that went off were appointed for reserves. The first attack was to the right of the Rondel. Fifty Granadeers with a Captain, and Lieutenant, and a Serjeant followed by 20 men preceded, these were follow∣ed by 50 Fuseliers Officer'd as the first, and 50 men which followed them with Hatchets. The same method was held by the 
Brandenburgers
 on the left, and the 
Hungarians
 fell upon the Curtain in the middle, preceded by 30 
Germans,
 and fol∣lowed by 60 with their necessary Officers. The assault began betwixt 5 and 6 a clock in presence of all the Generals, the Great Master of the Teu∣tonick Order commanding the Trenches. The design, by reason the Mine had not the desired effect, was but feigned, but the Duke of 
Lorrain
 being advertised by an Adjoutant, that the Ele∣ctor of 
Bavaria
 had already effectively began the assault, did also command the false attack to be converted into a real one. The Fight lasted two hours. There were 1000 Troopers on foot, 300 whereof were employed in the assault, who be∣haved themselves well, as the 
Hungarians
 also did; but the Breach being of difficult ascent, the Be∣sieged very well covered with Palisado's, and de∣fending themselves like desperate men, the Duke would not risque more of his people, contenting himself to make a Lodgment at the right of the angular Rondel, where 40 men immediately in∣trenched themselves. There were not many kil∣led by the Besieged's fire, but about 200 wounded by Stones and Arrows, which were shot in such abundance that it resembled a shower of Hail. Count 
Leopold
 of 
Herbersteyn,
 a Lieutenant Collo∣nel, Major 
Bischophawsen, &c.
 were of the num∣ber of the hurt. The 
Bavarians
 were not exempt from the same Artillery of Arrows and Stones, besides Bombs which were rolled upon planks out of the windows of the Castle. The Prince of 
Savoy
 was hurt in the hand with an arrow, toge∣ther with 3 Captains, some subaltern Officers, 7 or 8 Volunteers, and 90 Souldiers as well kil∣led as wounded. Prince 
Lewis
 of 
Baden
 going in the morning to view the approaches, was shot with a Musket-bullet which burnt his Coat, and made a great contusion upon his Brest, but his Arms being of proof saved his life.


Aug.
 4. The firing from the Batteries was re∣doubled from the three Attacks to enlarge the breaches, and ruine the Defences of the Besieged. The Line of Circumvallation was strengthened, being furnished with many Redoubts and Forts to flank the whole work. All the heights and eminences about the place were intrenched and possessed by the Besiegers. The 
Heyducks
 took their Post along the inner Wall of the lower Town, and so the attacks were continued with the same vigour as before. The 
Bavarians
 raised a Battery of nine Guns of 24 ball upon the Ron∣del of the Castle, wherewith they beat the Flanks and widened the Breach, but the Earth being very narrow and streight, so that but few could pass a brest, the Besieged might the better dispute the access of the Assailants.


The Scouts brought advice that the 
Grand Vi∣sier
 had effectively passed the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 and that he had 20000 men with him, which with the Troops by 
Alba Regalis
 amounted to 40 or 50000, most old Soldiers, taken out of their Garrisons and Fortresses, into whose places they had put their new Levies. There came also ad∣vice, that the Bassa of 
Agria,
 having assembled some thousands of Turks out of the Garrisons of upper 
Hungary,
 was advanced near 
Hatwan,
 where he had commanded a great many Charets out of the Neighbourhood, to carry Pontoons to the 
Danube
 side, by means wherof he pretended to put relief into the Town, at the same time that the 
Grand Visier
 should attack the Lines on the other side. This advertisement obliged the Christian Generals to use such necessary precautions which might secure them on 
Pest
 side.


Aug.
 5. In the 
Lorrain
 attack the approaches were advanced from the great Rondel towards the second Wall, where they had posted them∣selves in the assault of the 
3d.
 instant. The Mi∣ners were busie at the right of the Breach, the better to attack the Enemy in flank, as also un∣der the Curtain, to blow up the Besieged's Re∣trenchments behind the Breach. A Gallery was begun on the right of the Battery, to go into the inward Ditch, and the better to assure the attack the Flanks were pallisado'd. The besieged spent the whole Night in throwing of Bombs, Grana∣do's, and Stones, to incommode the contrary Workmen, but without much harm, save the killing of 3 
Heyducks,
 and wounding 5 or 6 other Soldiers. This afternoon one of their Bombs fal∣ling into a Barrel of Powder upon the Besiegers Battery, killed five, and hurt three.


Aug.
 6. A new Battery of two Demy-Cannon was raised in the 
Lorrain
 Attack behind the great Rondel, by means whereof the Defence of the little Rondel was ruined, which the besieged had hitherto used with great advantage. The Chri∣stians continued to fill the inward Moat with Fa∣gots, Tuns, Sacks with earth, and the like, and made a Redoubt behind the great battery to se∣cure the Workmen. The 
Brandenburgers
 and 
Ba∣varians
 continued their attacks with vigour, no∣thing else considerable intervening.


Aug.
 7. Last Night several false alarms were given, as if the Turks were come to attempt suc∣couring the place. The Christians continued to deepen the Ditch about their Lines, and to for∣tifie their Posts to make the Enemy despair of forcing their Camp. The Mines were also carri∣ed on with great industry, and would in 3 or 4 days be ready for execution. The 
Heyducks
 under∣took to fill the Ditch of the second Wall in 48

hours time, upon the assurance of a recompence of 4000 livers, which was promised them by the Generals. The breach which was made in the se∣cond Wall was very spacious, and as soon as the Mines were finisht, they will again assault the se∣cond wall. They found much difficulty in the 
Ba∣varian
 attack to render themselves masters of the Castles, by reason of the various Walls and De∣fences which were to be forced, and of the obsti∣nacy of the Defendants. This obliged the Elector to redouble the fire of his Cannon to throw down these Walls, and in effect they did little else, be∣sides beating the Castle from their several batte∣ries, which plai'd upon the Flanks and Curtains with so much fury, that they hop'd in a few days to see them quite down. Thirty 
Hussars
 meeting with as many of the 
Turks,
 killed one of them, and took 4 Prisoners, which they brought with them to the Camp. Amongst these was an 
Aga,
 who four years since was ransomed out of 
Raab,
 where he had been Prisoner, for 8000 Crowns. These reported that the 
6th
 instant the 
Serasquier
 should arrive at 
Alb-Royal
 with 26000 Horse, and was to be followed by the 
Grand Visier,
 who as∣sembled his Army about 
Esseck,
 which was not to be inferiour in number to that which was last year imployed at the Siege of 
Gran.
 They added, that the Seraskier had express Orders not to ha∣zard a battel with the Christians, for fear of lo∣sing the City and Army at once, but to endea∣vour to put Supplies of Troops in the besieged Town one way or other, or to perish in the attempt.


Aug.
 8. Four thousand 
Turkish
 and 
Tartarian
 Horse appeared upon a Hill near the 
Bavari∣an
 quarter, and retired after some light Skirmi∣shes with Count 
Budiani
's 
Hussars,
 reinforced by some commanded Men and Voluntiers. The Prisoners taken there deposed, that the 
Seraskier
 was camped under the Cannon of 
Alba-Regalis
 with 20000 Combatants, and that the Grand Visier with the Grand Army was expected there; but the Duke, by the report of his Spies and Scouts knew that the 
Grand Visier
 was uncer∣tain whether he ought to proceed with all the Army, or continue about the bridge of 
Esseck,
 with a great part of his Forces, capable to oppose the 
Croats,
 which might ruine the said bridge, if he abandoned it, and so cut off his retreat. The mines in the 
Lorrain
 attack would be ready in two days. The fortification of the Camp was conti∣nued, as also the perpetual discharge of the Cannon and Mortars against the besieged.


Aug.
 9. Some thousands of 
Turks
 posted them∣selves not far from the Camp, in an advantage∣ous place, as if they designed to prepare them∣selves there for some attempt; but the Generals had taken such good measures, they apprehended nothing, and the Souldiers seemed full of cou∣rage. All the retrenchments about the Camp were near finished, but being the 
Turks
 did frequently alarm them, the Duke ordered, that all the Foot that were not in the Approaches, should be placed in the Lines, and particularly in the Spurs. This morning, a Bomb from the Town falling unhap∣pily into a reserve of Granado's, fired them, kil∣ling 3, and wounding 13. This evening some 
Turks
 did again appear upon an eminence to the right behind the 
Bavarian
 Camp, towards which two Squadrons of them did move in good order, to brave the Besiegers, but some Voluntiers riding out to pickeer with them, they retired with the loss only of one man slain.


Aug.
 10. The Imperialists continued the finish∣ing of their Mine, the two others of the two other Attacks being ready. The Duke caused the 
Hun∣garian
 Foot to be posted along the Wall of the lower Town, from the Water Rondel to the very quarters of the 
Germans,
 where they intrenched themselves with a Ditch and a good Parapet to secure them against surprises; and as the 
Danube
 is deep there, they sunk two Barks full of stones, and made several Spurs of Palisado's along the brink of the River, to take away all hopes of the 
Turks
 relieving of the Town that way. This morning the Infidels gave another alarm on the 
Bavarian
 quarters, whereupon all the Cavalry was commanded to Horse, but the Enemy retired at the same time. It seems that their design was to make a passage that way, but the 
Bavarians
 were sufficient∣ly intrenched to hinder them. The Prince of 
Croy
 being recovered of his wounds, did reassume the exercise of his charge in the approaches. Four 
Hussars
 very well mounted, advancing against some 
Turkish
 Horse of the place, made as if they would charge them, but being come up with them they discoursed them and shook hands together, which being observed by the Musketiers of a neighbouring Redoubt, they sallied out and gave fire upon the 
Husssars,
 who ran away, hurt one, which they took, as also another of them, the third got away, and the fourth entered into the City. The Prisoners were examined, who said they did nothing but enquire of the 
Turks,
 if they would not yet surrender the place, but they were to be interrogated more strictly.


Aug.
 11. Some 
Turkish
 Troops did again shew themselves upon the Mountains on the 
Bavarian
 side towards the way of 
Alb-Royal.
 The precise number of the 
Turks
 is not yet known, some Spies certifie that there are 40000 
Ottomans,
 and 20000 
Tartars.
 In the mean time every necessary pre∣vention is put in practice to receive them, if they will attempt to force the Camp. Preparations are made for a vigorous assault upon the second wall, if the Mines will answer expectation.


Aug.
 12. All things being ready for the assault, the three Mines on the 
Lorrain
 attack were fired, which had no other success than the turning up of a few Palisades, the Miners not having pierced deep enough under the Wall of the second Ram∣part, which made it evident that they did not well understand their trade, although they had been sent for from all quarters, to have good ones, for they were the Mines that contributed the most to the reducing of this important place. The assault that was designed if the Mines had taken, was deferred, and new ones were gone in hand with, in hopes of more favourable success. In the skirmishes of this day, there was an Officer of the 
Turks
 killed, who doubtless had engaged himself to enter into the place, being they found Letters about him to the Bassa of 
Buda,
 marking the or∣der the Turks were to observe to relieve the be∣sieged; by which it appeared, that the Grand Vi∣sier's design was to force a quarter, and so put in a Supply into the place without hazarding a bat∣tel; and that 8000 
Tartars
 should harass the Coun∣try as far as 
Gran,
 to cut off provisions from the Besiegers, and infest them with continual courses. Upon this advice the Duke called a Council of War, where it was resolved, to leave part of the Army in guard against the Town, and to march with the rest of the Imperial and Auxiliary For∣ces against the Enemy, who according to the said Letters were above 60000 strong, although they had it from good hands, that they did not exceed 40000 Combatants.


Aug.
 13. The whole Army marched out of the Lines the night past, except 20000 left there for the Guard of the Works, and to hinder the Ene∣my from putting Supplies into the Place. Oats and Forage were distributed for three days for the Horse, and the 
Volunteers
 were formed into a

fine Body under good Officers. The Duke of 
Lorrain
 posted himself out of the Camp in sight of the Ene∣mies, 4000 
Hussars
 and 
Heyducks
 having the Avant∣guard. This night the 
Spies
 and some Deserters assured them, that the following night they would be attacked in Battel-array upon break of day, which obliged the Christians to dispose of all things for the Battel.


Aug.
 14. The 
Turks
 before Sun-rising formed a Bo∣dy of more than 8000 
Janizaries
 and 
Spahi's,
 the most brave and most resolute of the Army, who being di∣vided into divers Troops, marched from 6 in the Morning till 8 a clock, curvetting behind the Moun∣tains on the side of 
Alba Regalis,
 and entered into a Plain the better to approach the Camp by the favour of a Valley. The Duke of 
Lorrain
 having observed the Enemies countenance, commanded Count 
Dune∣wald,
 General of the Horse, to take possession of the ground to the left with nine Imperial Regiments, Cuirasiers, Dragoons, and Croats, to which he added some Companies of 
Hussars;
 and General 
Heusler
 had order to post himself with his Detachment upon the height on the right. The 
Hussars
 who were with Ge∣neral 
Dunewald
 charg'd first, and tho' they fought with all imaginable bravery, they were notwithstanding forced to give way, but seeing themselves supported by the 
Germans,
 they took heart and returned to the Charge again. The 
Turks
 seeing they had routed the 
Hussars,
 thought to have had the others as good cheap; upon these hopes, they advanced with great fury and horrible cries against the Christians, who received them without moving. 
Heusler,
 who had placed him∣self upon the height mentioned, charged them smart∣ly, so that the fight was rude and bloudy, and how∣ever the 
Turks
 saw themselves charged in their Flanks and Front, they did not desist to make use of several efforts to break through the Enemy, and have room to execute their design, but all was in vain, being eve∣ry time repulsed, until they were at length broke and forced to fly. The execution was bloudy. The Jani∣zaries being abandoned by the 
Spahi's,
 and environ∣ed by their Enemies, throwing away their Arms, sought to save themselves by flight, but were most of them slain. The 
Turks
 had above 3000 dead, most of them Janizaries, all chosen men, who had underta∣ken to force a quarter, and enter into the City, or pe∣rish. The 
Grand Visier
 had promised 20 Ducats to eve∣ry one that should enter into the City, whereof he gave each undertaker 5 in hand: every one carried besides his ordinary arms 3 Hand-Granado's, a Mat∣tock and Spade, to break the Retrenchments and fill the Ditches. The Prisoners were 500, there being also taken 30 Ensigns and Standards, 11 Pieces of Can∣non, and 10 Waggons loaden with Ammunition. This great action cost the 
Christians
 but little, the slain not exceeding 60, and the wounded but 33. After this fight the 
Turks
 made several movements, and drew up in a Plain which lookt towards the 
Bavari∣an
 quarter, and keeping their Wings upon heights, they made meen as if they would come to a decisive battel, or relieve the Place with all their Forces. Hereupon a Council of War was called, where it was resolved to follow the Enemy, which was done by the Elector of 
Bavaria
 in the head of his Army, but the 
Turks
 apprehending an Engagement, retired. The Generals 
Dunewald
 and 
Heusler
 pursued them be∣yond the Mountains, and the 
Hussars
 had another skirmish with a great Party of 
Turks
 which stayed behind to amuse the Christians, and favour the re∣treat of their Army. The booty the Christians got was considerable, for they had all the spoil of the Enemy, whereof there was not one that had not the 5 Duckets which the 
Grand Visier
 had given him be∣sides his own moneys. The Besieged thinking they were already relieved, made great fire upon them that kept the Approaches, and supposed they might ruine some of the Enemies works, but in vain, for they were so briskly received, that they lost the de∣sire of risking further. They however made a very furious sally on the 
Bavarian
 attack, which was fatal to them, for they were not only repelled by the Re∣giments of 
Baden
 and 
Aspremont,
 but the retreat be∣ing cut off, there was great slaughter made of them. The Turks being retired without coming to a deci∣sive battel, the Army returned into their Lines, and immediately dispatched young Count 
Palsi
 to the 
Emperour
 with the news of this great advantage, and to lay 28 Colours and Standards at his feet, that were taken in the late engagement. The rest, for some were taken in the pursuit, were planted upon the great Rondel, to make the Besieged comprehend the defeat of those Succours that they had expected with so much impatience.


Aug.
 15. The 
Germans
 and 
Hussars
 scouting abroad brought some Prisoners in, who all agreed in this, that the Grand Visier notwithstanding this check, would not desist making other attempts to put relief into the Town, tho' with the hazard of his whole Army. And in effect, however he was retired, he did not cease to alarm the Camp every night. This Afternoon a signal was made to the Besieged for a Parley, to inform them by the Janizaries Prisoners of the rout of their Succours; but whether they per∣ceived this within or not, they answered by the fire of their great and small shot.


Aug.
 16. The works of the three Attacks were pur∣sued with vigour, and in the Morning the Besieged's Palizadoes and Defences of Wood upon the Breach were fired in the 
Lorrain
 Attack, and partly consu∣med by the Flames, notwithstanding all the dili∣gence of the Turks to extinguish them. In this Acti∣on they threw a prodigious quantity of Stones, Gra∣nadoes, Sacks with Powder, and other combustible matters upon the Assailants, insomuch that four of them who fired them were burnt, twelve Crowns a man being given to each of those who engaged themselves in this Service as a recompence, and yet they could not clear the way for an Assault, the Be∣sieged having taken their time in the Night to plant other Palizadoes and repair their Defences. In the 
Bavarian
 Attack, the Castle and the great Tower were incessantly beaten, which were as it were overturn'd by the force of the Cannon.


Aug.
 17. All things were ready for the Assault in the 
Lorrain
 Attack, but the Besieged having repaired their Defences, and planted double rows of Paliza∣does behind those that were burnt yesterday, they were obliged to defer it. The Prisoners that the 
Hus∣sars
 brought to the Camp reported, that the Grand Visier was extreamly in choler against the Com∣mander of the 
Spahi's,
 for not having done his duty in the fight on the 
14th
 instant, by abandoning the 
Janizaries,
 and added, that of the ten thousand men which were appointed for that enterprise, but very few returned to the Camp.


Aug.
 18. The two great Mines in the 
Lorrain
 At∣tack were fired, but neither with that Success that the Miners had promised, which extremely retarded the Reduction of this important Place. The Duke seeing they advanced but little by Mining, resolved on Sapping, for which end, preparation of Faggots and Sacks of Earth were made to fill the Ditch, and certain Engines were devised to approach the Ene∣mies with less peril, and drive them from their Post. A new Battery was raised on the right to beat down the Besiegeds flanks of Palizadoes on the Breach; and to do it more effectually they were to shoot from the Battery on the Curtain with chained Bullets. A Fu∣gitive from the Turkish Army reported amongst other things, that the Grand Visier was encamped at present at 
Ertschin,
 4 Leagues from the City, but that he would not desist from attempting the relief of the Place, being only removed to that distance for want of Forrage. The 
Bavarians
 seized a Country Fellow who had swum the 
Danube,
 having Letters from the Governour to the Grand Visier and the Aga of the 
Janizaries,
 in which he 
conjures them by the

Law of
 Mahomet 
to succour him, adding he would expect the last extremity.


Aug.
 19. The Besieged defending themselves with obstinate Valour, spent this whole day in thundring with their Artillery upon the new 
Lorrain
 Battery, which had been raised to beat upon the flanks of the Palizadoes, and whereon they had mounted 4 great Guns, which they so ruined that it was rendred use∣less for the present. The Detachments from the Grand Visiers Army continued to alarm the Chri∣stians Camp every Night, who to prevent Surpri∣zes, were continually upon their Guard. General 
Scherfenberg
 was expected in few days with those Troops he commanded in 
Transilvania.
 As soon as this body was arriv'd, they pretended to go and at∣tack the Grand Visier in his Camp, who by report of Prisoners and Run-aways, did not exceed 46000 men, whereof half were new raw Fellows without Discipline or Order. Strong parties were every day sent out to observe the Enemies Countenance, who often shock with theirs, but always with Advantage.


Aug.
 20. The Grand Visier resolved to make ano∣ther attempt to introduce Supplies into 
Buda,
 would do it with fewer Troops than before, the better to pass undiscover'd, and be able to approach the Chri∣stian Camp. He chose for this purpose the bravest Officers in his Army, who promised to execute his order or perish. They began their march in the Night with 2000 
Spahis,
 and the like number of 
Janizaries,
 who were mounted for the greater Ex∣pedition, and this Morning at break of day they ap∣pear'd in the Valley of St. 
Paul,
 where having been put in order without being perceived, rushed, as their manner is, with great Cryes upon the first Guard, which they defeated easie enough, and forced upon two squadrons of Horse of 
Caprara
 and 
Heuslers,
 who received them courageously, giving others time to hasten to their assistance, and chase the Turks, who fled. The 
Janizaries,
 whereof part had quitted their Horses with design to traverse the Trenches, and get into the City, were ill treated, they were pursued by General 
Heusler
 to the very Gate, and met by the Guard of 
Bavarian
 Horse, who hastned to the allarm, so that their slaughter was there very great, and few had the fortune to enter into the Ci∣ty; and though some make them amount to 150, they were scarce 100 that got in, which may be easily judged by the abandoned Horses, which did not surpass the said number, so that this feeble sup∣ply was of no great use to the Besieged, and if those of the advanced Guard had done their duty, not one of them had passed the Trenches. The Turks had 400 slain, and the Christians not above 15; and 26 hurt. General 
Heusler,
 who behaved him∣self with his accustomed Gallantry, was hurt in the foot, but not dangerously. General 
Maigret
 was handled worse, being severely sabled, and Marquis 
Santini,
 a Knight of 
Malta,
 was taken Prisoner in the first heat of the fight. The Besieged, to testifie their Joy for the arrival of these Succours, flourished three red Colours in token of Victory, and fired three 
Sal∣vos
 with all their Artillery and small shot, which gave the Besiegers a guess at the smallness of their number, which the Renegadoes yet affirm surpass the number of 2000 serviceable men. During the late shock, some squadrons of those of the Grand Visier, who had followed the other to second them, ap∣pear'd in Battalia towards the 
Bavarian
 Attack, as if designing to try their fortune that way, but they re∣tired without engaging: and yet they returned about ten at night to the same place they had attempted the passage that morning, but they were repelled, and retreated in disorder. In the 
Bavarian
 attack there was a new Battery raised of four Pieces: and the besieged mounted a great Gun upon the high wall of the 
Castle,
 with which they beat all the covered way, as also the Battery of the 
Bavarians
 upon the great Rondel.


Aug.
 21. Notwithstanding the 
Grand Visier
 caused 5000 
Tartars
 to pass the 
Danube,
 who ravag'd the other side of the River, and incommoded the adverse For∣ragers by their courses; All things are in abundance in the Camp, and the Convoys arrive there securely by Water. General 
Scherfenberg
 is expected in 7 or 8 days with 10000 men, having orders to mount his Foot in Charets, for fear of tiring them with so long a march. Twelve hundred 
Suedish
 Foot are likewise expected, being the remainder of the Troops which the 
King of Sweden
 is obliged to send, to assist the 
Em∣perour
 against the 
Infidels,
 upon account of his 
quota
 for those Fiefs which he possesses in 
Germany.
 This morning a Redoubt was built in that place which the 
Turks
 forced yesterday; it was further fortified with two pieces of Cannon, and Troops capable to defend the passage. There was also another Redoubt built on the Mountain on the left, where the Regi∣ment of 
Lodron
 was camped. This day the Besieged did yet give some Volleys of rejoycing, whereof the reason is not known, unless it be some particular feast. The 
Sieur Rummel,
 General of the 
Bavarian
 Troops, being in the approaches, was slain there with a Mus∣quet bullet. He is much regretted, having distingui∣shed himself in all the occasions where he might ac∣quire glory.


Aug.
 22. The Elector of 
Bavaria
 caused the great Tower to be assaulted, which is in the middle of the Castle, and for the most part ruined by his Cannon. He took it with the loss of 73 Soldiers, and the like number wounded, amongst which, the Duke of 
Saxe-Mersburg
 was hurt in two places. Whilst this as∣sault lasted, there was a false alarm given on the 
Lor∣rain
 side to divert the enemy, and much firing there was with Cannon to ruine the Defences which they had made upon the breaches of the inner Wall. This evening about 10 a clock, a Turk, who had swum the River, was taken near the Isle of 
St. Margaret,
 he had thrown his Letters into the water, and yet confessed that he had been sent by the Bassa, to give advice to the Grand Seignior of the state of the place, and press for relief: adding, that another was also gone with the same condition.


Aug.
 23. The besieged made an attempt upon the 
Bavarian
 Attack, to recover the great Tower of the Castle, which they had yesterday lost by assault, but they were repelled and beat back to their Retrench∣ments. At the 
Lorrain
 Attack four pieces were plant∣ed upon the great old Battery, wherewith they be∣gan to batter the new Palisades upon the Breach of the inner Wall. The Night past the Besieged sallied upon the 
Saxon
's quarter, but they were so well recei∣ved and repulsed by Lieutenant Collonel 
Pletze,
 who was upon the Guard with 100 horse, that they had much to do to recover their second Wall, where this Officer was slain with two Musket-shot, and the 
Turks
 had yet the leisure to drag his Corps into the City.


Aug.
 24. The 
Turks
 appeared in two separate Bo∣dies, the one at the 
Lorrain,
 and the other at the 
Bava∣rian
 attack, but without attempting any thing, and retired about noon into their Camp, which they had advanced a League nearer the Christians than they were before. A Renegado out of Town reported, that the Besieged began to speak with more licentiousness against the Bassa, who endeavoured to keep them to their duty, telling them, that the 
Grand Visier
 expected one of the first Ministers of State from the Port, with full power from the 
Grand Seignior,
 to treat and con∣clude a Peace with the Generals of the Christians, and that upon his arrival there would be a suspensi∣on of Arms; exhorting them not to degenerate from the bravery and vertue of true 
Musselmen,
 whose glo∣ry they had hitherto so generously supported, but to expect yet some few days before they talked of sur∣rendring.


Aug.
 25. The Duke of 
Lorrain
 being advertised, that the 
Turks
 might contrive a passage on the 
Danube
 side, behind the hot Baths, to put Succours into the Town, ordered some Squadrons of Horse to second

the Guards, which were at the same time reinforced, and to the end the access might be rendred the more difficult for the 
Turks,
 he caused Palisado's to be plan∣ted in the most weak places, and caused some Squa∣drons and Battalions of 
Germans
 and 
Hungarians
 to be posted in such manner, that if the 
Turks
 would make some other attempt, they might easily be transpor∣ted and hasten to the Alarm. Some change was also made in two Batteries, the better to incommode the Besieged, and destroy their Parapets, Palisado's, and other defences which they had rais'd upon the breach of the inner Wall. In the 
Bavarian
 attack they got ground foot by foot, so that they will in a little time be Masters of all the Castle, notwithstanding the op∣position of the bravest Enemy imaginable, who never lose an inch of ground without disputing it, and endeavour to recover it by often reprisals, ma∣king use for this purpose of Bombs, Granado's, Stones, Sacks with Powder, Stink-Pots, and other arts which courage and despair are capable of inventing to break the measures of the Agressors, and obstruct their vio∣lence; and as they have made divers holes and caverns under the places, in possession of the Christians, by which they play these sorts of inventions, the other were constrained to fill them with earth, stones, and the very ruines of the Castle, to damp and hinder their operation, without which they could not main∣tain themselves, but with great difficulty.


Aug.
 26. The Prisoners brought in the Camp by Parties, and the Deserters which ran away reported, that one of those which was sent to the 
Grand Visier
 by the Bassa of 
Buda
 with Dispatches, in which he gave him an account of the state of the place, which he can no more defend at present, that the Castle is well-nigh all in the hands of the Christians, who on the first assault cannot fail to carry the place. That in the last assault of the Castle he had lost more than 100 of his best Soldiers, that the Recruits that were sent him were but little considerable, not mounting to 200 men, amongst which, more than half were wounded, and consequently unserviceable. That for his part he had acquitted himself of his duty, by let∣ting the Christians see, that after a defence so obsti∣nate, during so long a Siege, pushed on with so much fury and bravery both on the one side and the other, that the 
Musselmen
 knew well how to support the cause of their 
Sultan,
 in doing whereof he pretended to his share of glory, professing finally that the 
Grand Visier
 ought to give an account of the ill success of the Siege, and be responsible for a loss so considerable, which he could not avoid, if the Imperialists attem∣pted another assault, no more than the bloud of his valorous Soldiers, and his own, if he delayed their re∣lief any longer. The Bassa did further mark the pla∣ces in his Letter, which appear'd to him the most pro∣per to attempt the relief by, and if he took his mea∣sures well, that he would succeed in his enterprise. Upon this advice the Duke visited in person the place marked to the 
Grand Visier,
 and gave orders for every thing to hinder the introducing of supplies. The Spies which were sent to the Enemies Camp, reported, that the 
Grand Visier
 had again promised 40 Crowns a man to all them who would undertake to put themselves into the place, promising moreover that they should be exempt from the War during their lives, and en∣joy their ordinary pay without the obligation of any service. At noon advice was given that the 
Turks
 ad∣vanced with 12 great pieces of Cannon, and a while after they were perceived in sight of the Camp ran∣ged in order of Battel, but as the Duke of 
Lorrain
 dis∣posed his Army to fight, they retired.


Aug.
 27. The 
Lorrainers
 having finished their work in form of a Bridg, it was extended to the adverse Pa∣lisades to be made use of in the assault. It was covered with earth to secure it from the fire, as had been done the day before in the 
Bavarian
 attack, which had obli∣ged the said 
Bavarians
 to retire, but this morning they recovered their Post again, and to secure them from the fire, they made use of Planks covered with Tin, and yet when they thought themselves safe from this devouring Element, the Besieged, who want no indu∣stry to their valour, threw towards evening an im∣mense quantity of artificial and combustible matters with that success, that they pierced even to the said Planks, and reduced them to ashes; they also flung such a vast quantity of Granado's, Stones and Arrows upon the 
Bavarians,
 that they forced them to aban∣don this Post with the loss of twenty Souldiers.


Aug.
 28. In the 
Lorrain
 attack, they thundred with extreme violence from their Cannon upon the Flanks of the great Breach, as did also the 
Brandenburgers
 to overthrow the Besieged's defences. The 
Bavarians
 re∣gained their Post, and covered themselves so well in it, that the Enemy would be much troubled to dislodg them. Major 
Staben,
 who commanded the Assailants, was killed there, the slain and wounded not otherwise exceeding 20. Upon the Report of some Renegado's that the 
Grand Visier
 was resolved to come this Night with all his Forces, the Duke ordered all things for his reception, and all the Army stood in Battalia, but to no purpose, for no Enemy did appear.


Aug.
 29. Being the Decollation of St. 
John Baptist,
 and a day which the 
Turks
 have always superstitiously observ'd as fortunate to their Empire, 1000 
Spahi's
 and 2000 
Janizaries
 commanded by two Bassa's, and secon∣ded by 1500 
Tartars,
 came at break of day to make an∣other trial on the Water side, but seeing the Post too well provided on that quarter, having received a dis∣charge from the Musketeers that kept the Walls, they retreated, and judged it easier to try the passage by the same way that the last Supplies entred; they went by the Valley of St. 
Paul,
 and charged fiercely with their accustomed shouts upon the Regiments of 
Mer∣cy, Heusler,
 and 
Newburg,
 who received them with so much bravery, that they killed a great number of them, whereof some of the most determined were rash enough to push through to the very Lines, where they were all slain except 4, who were lucky enough to get into the City. The number of the dead in this action amounted to 600, besides the Prisoners, which were not many; and there were taken 25 Standards and Colours which were red, intimating thereby, that they would enter the City or perish. On the o∣ther side some 30 were killed and wounded, 
Mercy
 was of the number of the last, but without danger, and his Adjoutant of the first. During this Tentative the Besieged made a sally upon the 
Bavarians,
 but the 
Heyducks
 attacking them in Flank, they had much a-do to retire, leaving 17 dead upon the place. The 
Grand Visier
 shewed himself with his Army all day on the 
Bavarian
 side, ready to engage, but seeing 3 Regi∣ments of Cuirasiers, and two of Dragoons, being the Avant-Guard of General 
Scherfenberg
's Army, he quickly retreated back to his Camp.


Aug.
 30. 
Scherfenberg
 arrived this day with the rest of his Body, proper men, who seem'd eager to signa∣lize themselvs. The Deserters reported, that the want was great in the 
Grand Visier
's Army, and that the famished Soldiers had plundered some Barks which had brought Provisions, the Officers not being able to hinder them.


Aug.
 31. The 
Lorrainers
 took a new Post in the Ditch before the Breach in the inner Wall, but 3 fa∣dom distant from the Pallisade, and the place being very deep, the Turks could not much hurt them, where they had but 2 Soldiers wounded. This Mor∣ning the Duke of 
Lorrain
 went, accompanied with most of the Generals, to the Elector's quarters, where they held a Council of War, and having dined there, the Duke returned to his Quarters, after which, the Works were ordered to be enlarged and deepned for the easier ascent to the Assault, which was resolved upon in a day or two.


Sept.
 1. Three thousand 
Turks
 appeared before day by Moon-light on the 
Bavarian
 side, but seeing the Christians in good order and ready to receive them,

they retired without any Engagement. The Great Chancellor, Count 
Straatman,
 being arrived yester∣day at the Camp with a secret Commission, called a Council of War, in which the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 the Elector of 
Bavaria,
 and all the Imperial and Auxiliary Generals did meet. The Chancellor exposed his Com∣mission, which contained his 
Imperial Majestie
's desires to put an end to this bloody Siege, and that they should consult on the means the most proper and expedient for the terminating of it. Two points were chiefly de∣liberated upon, whether they should go with the grea∣test part of the Army, leaving a sufficient number to guard the Lines, to force the 
Grand Visier,
 or should make a General assault upon the place, and that with more Forces than had hitherto been employed. The later was approved by most of the Generals, and it was resolved to assault the place the next day, for which purpose every thing that was necessary was prepared, that the enterprise might not fail: and lest the Enemy might know it, it was given out, that they would the next day go and fight the 
Grand Visier,
 which caused great joy amongst the Officers and Souldiers, desirous of signalizing themselves. The Cannon of all the at∣tacks were in the mean time imployed to inlarge the Breaches, and cast down the Enemies fences.


Sept.
 2. All the Generals mounted on Horseback, and the Troops put themselves in order to quit the Lines, and go to their place of Arms, and march to∣wards the 
Grand Visier,
 making as if they would go and attack them in their Camp. The Duke of 
Lorrain,
 and the Elector of 
Bavaria,
 visited their Quarters, en∣couragaing the Officers and Souldiers to maintain the cause of God, and the Glory of the Emperour. The Infantry was ranged into Battalions whilst the firing in the three attacks was redoubled, and a vast quantity of Bombs and chained Bullets were shot against the besiegeds defences, which were for the most part thrown down; and as the Troops were put in order to march towards the 
Grand Visier,
 the motion of the Vanguard was instantly changed, and at three in the Afternoon the Infantry that composed the Rear-guard was commanded to mount to the as∣sault, which was done in the three differing attacks of 
Lorrain, Brandenburg,
 and 
Bavaria,
 besides which there were two false attacks to divert the Enemy. And however that all imaginary precautions were put in use to render the assault easie, they encountred so brave a defence in the besieged, that they had much ado to surmount them; they defended themselves for three quarters of an hour with Halbirds, Half-Pikes, Partizans, and threw such a vast number of Stones, Arrows, and Granades, that they repulsed the Assailants more than once, until the Christians, en∣couraged by the presence of their Generals, returning with greater force, rendred themselves at length Ma∣sters of the Breach in all the three attacks. The 
Turks
 defended themselves by retiring from Retrenchment to Retrenchment, so that the slaughter was very bloo∣dy; and to conclude, the besieged being beaten from all their fences, the Assailants entred by force into the City, ran thro' the streets, killed all they met with, sparing neither Sex nor Age, so that all was filled with the dead bodies of these Infidels. The 
Bavarians,
 in pursuit of their point, attack'd 1000 
Turks,
 who re∣tired into a Redoubt at the foot of the Castle, where they defended themselves with extream Obstinacy, until despairing of their safety, they hungout a white Flag, and demanded quarter; but as they had slain many of the Aggressors, and had resisted two whole hours without submitting, the Duke of 
Lorrain,
 and the Elector of 
Bavaria
 were of Opinion they should have no quarter given them; but considering their number, that they might yet do much harm, that the Night was coming on, and that the Souldiers were wearied, and ought to rest, that the 
Grand Visier
 was not far off with a formidable Army, and that the fire was in several parts of the City, reducing all to Ashes; it was resolved they should have their Lives given them; which being notified to them, they, miserable Bravos, threw down their Arms. There were about 1000 more, who being retired into Cellars and Ca∣verns obtained the same grace. The number of the slain amounted to 3000 besides the wounded, who were but few, so that the Garrison was stronger than it had been reported by the fugitives to have been.


Abdi
 Bassa died bravely in the Breach, where he fought valiantly with his Sable in his hand, without giving back or demanding quarter, not to degenerate from the glory and heroick Vertue of the antient 
Ot∣tomans,
 nor falsifie the Oath which he made to the 
Grand Seignior
 to preserve him the place, or to end his days gloriously in it. The 
Vice
 Bassa is also an Officer of great reputation, he had defended the Castle, and seeing that all was lost, retired fighting into the al∣ready mentioned Redoubt at the foot of the Castle, where he thought to hold it out, and give the 
Grand Visier
 liesure to come and relieve him; but seeing that all was desperate, he chose rather to implore the Cle∣mency of the Conquerours, than suffer himself and those that were with him to be massacred without any advantage to his party, and so he was made a Prisoner with those with him, by the 
Bavarians.
 The 
Aga
 of the 
Janizaries,
 and some chief Officers fell to the Duke of 
Lorrains
 share, so that the number of Pri∣soners did not exceed 2000, of 13000 brave expert Souldiers, and the very Nerves of the 
Ottoman
 Empire, which were in the place at the beginning of the Siege. The Christians loss in this assault was inconsiderable, not above 400 slain, and half as many wounded, in which number were many Voluntiers, but few Offi∣cers. Collonel 
Spinola,
 an Officer of good merit, was kil∣led at the head of the Assailants, and Baron 
Asti,
 who had been twice already hurt during the Siege, recei∣ved now a third, which was feared would prove fatal.


The plunder which the Souldiers got was extra∣ordinary, the riches of this City were vastly great, which those of the other Cities of 
Hungary
 under the domination of the 
Turks
 brought thither, as to a place of refuge and impregnable. There were found Am∣munition and Provisions sufficient for two Months longer. The Arsenal was full of all sorts of offensive and defensive Arms to arm 30000 men, Harnesses, Saddles, Boots, and other equipage for Horses, besides 400 pieces of Cannon and Mortars, whereof 170 were mounted, and no way prejudiced. It is impossible to particularize every thing, it may suffice to say, that a City could not be better furnished to support a Siege vigorously than this was, nor defended by a more brave Garrison. But if the opposition hath been sur∣prising, so much greater is the glory of those brave Officers, Voluntiers, and Souldiers that signalized themselves there in the forcing of it.


The Duke of 
Lorrain
 having put a stop to the slaughter, and ordered the Soldiers to return to their Colours, commanded the fire to be extinguished, gave the command of the place to Baron 
Beck,
 till the Em∣peror's pleasure was known, with a Garrison of 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse. He farther commanded 10000 Horse and Dragoons with 
Badiani's Hussars
 to pursue the 
Grand Visier,
 who having seen the taking of 
Buda,
 discamped instantly with all his Army, to go cover the rest of the Turkish Fortresses, put good Garrisons into them, and so secure the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 where it was resolved to go and attack him, if they could not overtake him, for which end the Infantry was imbar∣ked upon the 
Danube
 for their easier transport, whilst the Cavalry marched by Land.


And thus this great and strong City, after 145 years of Bondage under the Turkish Yoak, was now at length, after having been six times besieged in vain, taken, and restored to the dominion of the Emperor. It had been of great service to the 
Ottomans,
 as being their principal place of Arms, from whence they sent their Forces and Munitions of War into the other Cities and Fortresses of their obedience, for they still kept there a numerous Garrison of 8 or 10000 Jani∣zaries

and Spahi's, as in a Nursery, and ready upon all occasions.


BƲDa SeXto IneXpƲgnabILIs SeptIMo FIt CaesarIs.


A Detachment, as we said, of 10000 Horse being sent in pursuit of the 
Grand Visier
 by Land, and 12000 Foot, with 30 Cannon, Mortars, Ammunition, and all sort of Provisions, were sent down the 
Danube
 in large Boats, with order to fortifie themselves in some convenient Post near the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 whilst or∣ders were sent to the Forces in 
Croatia
 to joyn them, in order to cut off the Enemies retreat. The main Army did also follow, but the want of Forrage in a wasted Country forced them to separate, and to pass the Ri∣ver some 12 Miles below 
Buda,
 with design to besiege 
Segedin,
 whilst the rest continued their march to∣wards 
Esseck,
 and joyn with the 
Croatian
 Forces, a Party of which had insulted and burnt the Town of 
Quinque Ecclesiae,
 or five Churches, forcing the 
Turks
 into the Castle.


The Duke of 
Lorrain
 having caused a Bridge of Boats to be laid over the 
Danube
 at 
Paxi,
 several Par∣ties of Horse were sent out, who met with no Enemy, the Turks having abandoned the small places they were possessed of on both sides the River, after ha∣ving removed their Cannon and store, and laid these places in ashes. Count 
Caprara
 is designed to besiege 
Se∣gedin,
 but the design upon the Bridge of 
Esseck
 could not be executed at this time, the Countrey being so extremely ruined, that the Troops were not able to subsist in their march thither. The 
Turks
 had like∣wise abandoned 
Tuln
 and 
Hatwan,
 the Garrison of the last being removed to 
Erlaw
 or 
Agria,
 after it had been most miserably destroyed. The Duke, upon fresh ad∣vice that the 
Grand Visier
 had not passed the 
Bridge of Esseck
 as was reported, but had posted himself very strongly and advantageously on this side, with 20000 men, seemed to alter his mind, and to go and beat up his Quarters, before he were further recruited from 
Belgrade.
 He had put 8000 of his best men into 
Alba Regalis,
 having given a Horse to every Janizary, the better to make excursions upon the Christians in the Winter. Prince 
Lewis of Baden
 was detached from the main Army, with 12 Regiments of Horse and Foot, to go and besiege 
Five-Churches,
 but the mea∣sures were so taken, that he might joyn his Forces to the Duke's in case it were requisite, or that the 
Grand Visier
 might be brought to a battel. He was encamped near the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 having the Fortress of 
Darda
 behind him the 
Danube
 on his right, and the Hills on his left, and his Front covered with the River 
Sarwitz,
 over which the Duke of 
Lorrain
 had caused Bridges to be laid, to oblige the 
Turks
 to repass the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 or to stand a Battel. But the season being too far advanced, he encamped at 
Tuln,
 and passing no farther, leaving part of the Army under 
Caprara,
 to pass the 
Danube
 in order to the Siege of 
Segedin,
 he returned towards 
Buda,
 and being encamped with 10 Regiments not far from 
Pest,
 sent a Party to possess themselves of 
Hatwan,
 intirely ruined, tho' the 
Turks
 had left 17 Pieces of Cannon, which they wanted time and conveniencies to carry away. The residue of the Foot were put into 
Buda
 to reinfore that place, weakened by the departure of the 
Brandenburg
 and 
Saxon
 Troops, whilst the Duke himself after so glo∣rious a Campain returned into 
Germany.
 The remain∣ing Horse and Dragoons were sent under General 
Veterani
 to reinforce the 
Imperial
 Forces before 
Segedin,
 upon advice that 
Achmet Bassa
 was marching with a Body of 
Turks
 and 
Tartars
 to relieve it. General 
Wallis,
 who commanded the 
Imperialists,
 hearing the Infidels advanced towards him, ordered Major General 
Ve∣terani
 to march towards night with 7 Regiments of Horse, the 
Croats
 of 
Lodron,
 and the Dragoons of 
Ca∣stelli
 and 
Magne,
 which they did, and at break of day surprising the 
Tartars,
 easily routed them; nor did the 
Turks
 make any considerable resistance, the spirit of that People formerly so martial, being actuated by such a current of misfortunes into despondency. The Christians, being upon their return to their Camp with their spoil, were attacked by the 
Grand Visier
 himself at the head of above 12000 
Turks,
 but with equal success, these being likewise utterly defeated, without any extraordinary combating. Twelve pie∣ces of Cannon, and all their Baggage, with 3000 Hor∣ses were taken. The slain were estimated above 2000. 
Segedin,
 seeing their relief defeated, capitulated, be∣ing admitted to march with what they could carry, except their Arms, to 
Temeswar.


But the strong Castle of 
Five Churches
 had not so good quarters.
 They had quitted the Town upon the arrival of the Christians, and retired into the Castle, but after 4 days battery, surrendred it at discretion, the Women only and Children being conducted to 
Valpo,
 whilst the 
Bassa,
 600 Janizaries, and 2000 others fit to bear arms, were made Prisoners of War. The Prince of 
Baden,
 having put a good Garrison into the place, divided his Army into two Bodies, one march∣ed with General 
Scherffenberg
 towards 
Syclos,
 design∣ing, after having made himself Master of that place, to march towards the Bridge of 
Esseck.
 Nor did they of 
Syclos
 detend themselves much better than the rest, they only burnt the Town, not to keep the Castle scarce to terms of discretion. The Prince marched thence to 
Darda,
 which he, although it were strong, being seated upon the 
Danube,
 and covering the Bridg on one side, found abandoned, the 
Turks
 being retired into 
Esseck,
 leaving only a few Horse to observe the Enemy, who, upon their advance, fled immediately. The Prince, having taken possession of 
Darda,
 sent Parties out to burn the Bridg of 
Esseck
 with artificial fires, which they so happily executed, notwithstand∣ing the Turks played upon them all the time with their Cannon from 
Esseck,
 that they quite destroyed the Bridge from 
Darda
 to the 
Drave,
 as likewise the Bridg of Boats which the 
Turks
 had over that River.


The Prince of 
Baden,
 after this exploit,
 marched back towards 
Capeswar,
 with 1200 Prisoners of both Sexes and Ages, which place he purposed to possess, and had delivered upon demand, after which he re∣solved for his Winter Quarters. The 
Croats
 also that had hitherto joyned him, did likewise return home with Booty, and store of Prisoners.


And this was the end of this famous Campain in 
Hungary,
 so glorious to the 
Christians,
 and so unfor∣tunate to the 
Ottomans,
 so that these who used to give and sell Peace at pleasure formerly, became now earnest Sollicitors themselves for it, thinking them∣selves in such a condition, that nothing but a speedy Peace could restore them. The 
Grand Visier,
 being sen∣sible of this, made several efforts to effectuate it. He had lately made Overtures to General 
Caraffa,
 who commanded the Imperial Forces in upper 
Hungary,
 but now Letters are sent to Prince 
Herman of Baden,
 President of the Council of War, telling him how desirous the 
Port
 was of Peace, and with what ad∣vantage to the Emperour it might be concluded in this Conjuncture; proposing further, that a Place might be appointed for Plenipotentiaries on both sides to meet, and that Passports might be dispatch∣ed for that purpose.


And 'tis no wonder the Turks were so earnest for Peace, having been so unsuccessful in War, and the disorders it produced. 'Tis scarce imaginable what confusion and terror the taking of 
Buda,
 and the slaughter of that Garrison did produce through the whole Empire, especially 
Constantinople.
 The People began to murmur, and the Chief of them to 
Cabal,
 which so startled the 
Grand Seignior,
 that after having doubled his Guards, he sent to them to know the meaning of their unusual meeting; they answered, that seeing him and his Empire in such danger, they thought it their duty to consult together how they might preserve both. They blamed the 
Mufti
 as an ill man, who had fomented the War, not without some reflection upon his Highness himself, as too

intent upon his sports, and too little mindful of this his chief City. The 
Grand Seignior
 thought it best to comply with these Reformers, in order to which he immediately deposes and banishes the 
Mufti,
 chusing 
Hussan Effendi Codilisk
r
 in his Place; and putting off a general hunting which he had appointed, caused all his Grey-hounds, the best his Empire afforded, to be turned loose, a Prey to any that pleased; he daily now frequents the 
Mosques
 instead of the Campain, giving out that he will himself take the field next Spring against the 
Germans.
 This change, and the certainty of the 
Visier Azems
 coming to assist at the great Council for regulating the next Campaign, did at present qui∣et the discontents of the People, tho' their fears seem'd incurable. There was also a great Reform made in the Seraglio, with a Retrenchment of the falaries and perquisites of the principal Officers of it. There was also an extraordinary Council held in the pre∣sence of the 
Grand Seignior
 to consider of the way to put the 
Ottoman
 Forces, which are now extreamly broken, into a condition to oppose the further progress of the Christian Arms. And being Mony is the prin∣cipal ingredient, the 
Grand Seignior
 made offer of all his Treasure to be imployed in the War. The 
Sul∣tana
 Queen gave 4000 Purses of 500 Crowns each, and the chief Officers of the 
Seraglio
 presented great sums. And yet all this cannot cure their fears, nor re∣move the Plague, sweeping away 1000 a day in 
Con∣stantinople
 and 
Galata,
 to which Calamities the scarci∣ty of Provisions may be added, occasioned by the 
Cos∣sacks
 disturbing the Commerce of the black Sea, and the Christians that of the 
Alexandria
 and the Arches.


Nor was it with these hardships only that the 
Turks
 were to contend, they had yet no less powerful Ene∣mies, the 
Poles
 and the 
Venetians,
 whose Histories we have for method sake referred to their proper Clas∣ses. What they did the last year, is distinctly related, and we shall be no less particular in the actions of this, which are of more noise, and no less lugubrious con∣sequence to the 
Ottoman
 Empire, especially the lat∣ter.


The 
Poles
 were much earlier in the field this year,
 and stronger than the last. Their Forces consisted of 20000 
Poles
 15000 
Lituanians,
 and 10000 
Cossacks
 with a great train of Artillery, and being met at their gene∣ral 
Rendezvouz
 at 
Trembowla,
 marched toward the 
Nie∣ster
 with the King at the head of them. The 
Turks
 be∣ing inferior in their Preparations,
 had abandon'd 
Barr
 and 
Miedzibos,
 sending those Garrisons with all their stores to strengthen 
Caminiec,
 where the 
Tartars
 had likewise lately conducted a Convoy.


The King being come to the frontier of 
Moldavia,
 expected that the 
Hospodars
 of that Country and 
Wa∣lachia
 should,
 as they had promised, joyn their Forces to the Army of the Crown, which they were inclin'd enough to do, but that they dreaded the 
Turkish
 Pow∣er. The 
Poles
 having past the River, they advanced to the Forrest of 
Bucovina,
 where they had been enga∣ged with the 
Turks
 last year; but to secure their pas∣sages now, the King caused several Redoubts to be built to guard the avenues of the Forest, and conse∣quently secure his retreat. These being finished, he marched towards 
Jassi,
 the Capital City of 
Moldavia,
 to give the 
Hospodar
 an opportunity to joyn his Forces with him, as he had promised. But this Prince, think∣ing it too soon as yet to declare, retired upon the News he had of the 
Kings
 approaching, notwithstanding the assurances his Majesty had given him of his Friend∣ship and Protection. The King being come as far as 
Pererit
 in 
Moldavia,
 caused a Royal Fort to be built on the side of the River 
Prutti,
 to secure a Retreat, and the passage of Convoy, for it was very difficult to sub∣sist in those harrassed Countries, which the 
Turks
 and 
Tartars
 had near ruin'd. Whilst the Army was upon its march, the 
Hospodar
 sent Deputies to the King to excuse his retiring from 
Jassi,
 and his not joyning Forces with those of his Majesty, seeing he could not now openly declare without exposing his Children to certain destruction, having been forc'd to deliver them as Hostages to the 
Turks.
 The King replyed, that he could never meet with a more favourable conjun∣cture to shake off the 
Ottoman
 Yoak than now,
 being he was come in Person to deliver him from it; he ex∣pected now the performance of his reiterated Promi∣ses, which if he did not make good, he should be ne∣cessitated to treat him as a declared Enemy. The King continuing his march, came to 
Jassi,
 which he found not only abandoned by the Prince, but also the Garri∣son and principal Inhabitants. Those that remained opened their Gates to the Troops his Majesty sent thither, and furnished them with some Provisions.


Some 
Tartars
 taken by a party, reported, that the 
Seraskier
 had passed the 
Danube
 near 
Axiopolis,
 with 15 or 16000 men, that he expected 6000 more, which when come up, he intended to march towards 
Bessa∣rabia
 to joyn the 
Tartars
 commanded by Sultan 
Nura∣den,
 reported to be 30000 strong. The Armies ap∣proaching each other occasioned many encounters. The King continued his march on this side the Ri∣ver 
Prutti
 as far as 
Falfyn.
 The Court Marshal, who commanded the Vauntguard of the Army, encoun∣tring with a party of 
Tartars
 of 8000, engaged them, both fighting with great Courage, but the 
Tartars
 be∣ing stronger, pressed hard upon the 
Poles,
 and had worsted them if they had not been succour'd by some fresh Troops, who adding new Vigour to their Com∣panions, turned the Scales, forcing the 
Tartars
 to a dis∣orderly retreat, some hundreds of them were killed, and amongst others a near Relation of Sultan 
Nura∣dons,
 for whose body he offered the liberty of 3 
Polish
 Genlemen; some Prisoners were likewise taken, and one of the 
Chams
 Standards, nor was this success blood∣less, divers of the 
Polish
 Officers and Souldiers being killed and wounded.


The King having caused a Bridge near that Place to be laid over the River, passed it with his Army, ad∣vancing into a great Plain with a Resolution to enter into the Country of 
Budriac.
 But the Troops suffer'd much by excessive heat, which had caused a great drought, and burnt up all the Grass, so that the Hor∣ses were in great want of forrage. 
Chevalier Lubormis∣ki
 had likewise an advantageous on set against the 
Tar∣tars,
 but the News of the 
Moldavians
 having contrary to their promise joyned the 
Tartars,
 did not please. These were also reinforced with further Detach∣ments of 
Turks
 which had passed the 
Danube
 at 
Ken
 and 
Smil.
 These 
Tartars
 had likewise taken a Con∣voy of 200 Waggons that were going to the Army, and together with the 
Turks
 made an attempt upon the Christian Camp it self, but finding the Troops in a condition to receive them, they made what haste they could to retire, tho' not without some loss.


Octob.
 4. The 
Poles
 obtained a Victory against the 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 of whom some thousands were said to be killed upon the place, and 300 taken, with several of their principal Officers, for which success 
Te Deum
 was sung at 
Lemberg.
 The 
Poles
 also had 1500 slain, and amongst them divers Persons of Qua∣lity. After this, the King, weary of 
Moldavia,
 most commonly fatal to the 
Poles,
 repassed the Forrest of 
Buckovina,
 in order to put his Troops into Winter-Quarters. He had not only quitted 
Jassi,
 which had been in part destroyed by an accidental fire, but had also caused the several Forts which he had built to se∣cure the Passages of the Forrest to be demolished; from whence People concluded, that the King had no design to return in haste that way again, but ra∣ther attempt 
Caminiec,
 so ruinous to that side of his Kingdom, and into which the 
Turks
 had newly put 500 Waggons laden with Provisions, the Detach∣ment of Horse that was sent to obstruct their Passage coming too late. The Christians being gon to quar∣ters, the main body of the 
Tartars
 did so too, but some parties of them had lately made an incursion into the 
Ʋkrain
 and 
Podolia,
 where they did much mischief. The 
Turks
 who served this Campaign against the

Poles,
 repassed the 
Danube
 and the 
Hospodar
 of 
Molda∣via
 returned to 
Jassi,
 from whence he had fled.


The 
Poles
 had been highly animated with the League Offensive and Defensive which they had made the beginning of this last Campaign with the 
Muscovites,
 which, though it had been published with great solemnity on both sides, the 
Muscovites
 have not yet performed any one thing that was stipulated on their side. The Great Dukes were obliged by this Treaty to employ their Forces this last Summer against the 
Tartars,
 to divert them from joyning with the 
Turks;
 nor did they advance a step in it, though they now (the Campaign being past) send Ambassa∣dors to assure the King of their firm Resolution to observe the Treaty of Confederacy so lately conclu¦ded at 
Moscho,
 and yet they start new points which do so far perplex the Court, that they begin to have a great Jealousie that the 
Czars
 do not seriously mean to enter into the War.


Great were the Preparations the 
Venetians
 had made to carry on the War this Summer against the 
Ottomans,
 which they had been so successful in the last; and the fleet being now ready, sailed from 
Cor∣fu
 under the Command of General 
Morosini
 towards the 
Levant.
 In the mean time the 
Turks
 having got an Army together composed of 10000 foot and 1500 Horse, sat down before 
Chielefa,
 a Fortress of im∣portance, tho' tamely delivered by them last year to the menaces of the Christians. They now batter it with six great Guns, and had lain 10 days before it when the Army of the 
Venetians
 hastning to its relief landed at 
Porto Vitulo,
 not far from it, and sending a Detachment of 3000 Men, with 2000 Maynotes, the Garrison which consisted of 1200 having orders at the same time to sally in their favour; the Enemy, intimidated with the report of their advance, raised the Siege and marched silently away in the Night, yet not so, but that being pursued by the Christians, they left their Cannon behind them, the 500 men that conducted them being also most slain and taken Prisoners. After this Defeat General 
Morosini
 rein∣barked his Forces at 
Porto Vitulo,
 and sailed towards the Gulf of 
Calamata,
 and thence to 
Porto Clinno,
 where he was to joyn with General 
Koningsmark,
 Comman∣der of the Land Forces, lately arrived there with a great Convoy that went from 
Venice.
 They had ex∣pected the arrival of the Auxiliary Gallies to open the Campaign, which being at length come, and a review of the Forces taken by General 
Morosini,
 which were estimated at 25000 men, they sailed the 25 of 
May
 from 
Porto Trepana
 with a fleet of above 100 sail, consisting in 80 Ships, 14 Galeasses, and several Gallies and Galliots, taking their course towards 
Le∣panto,
 feigning a design to attack that Fortress, near which the General caused 1000 men to be landed to allarm the Country, and leaving some Ships there to countenance the feint, sailed the Night following towards 
Modon,
 then ill manned, the Turks having drawn most of their Forces towards 
Lepanto.
 But the Captain General thought fit to attack old 
Navarin,
 the 
Pylus
 of 
Ptolomy
 first, which he did, 12000 foot, and 1500 Horse being landed for that purpose. This Town is built upon a height, at the foot whereof the Haven is capable of any number of Ships. The Gar∣rison of this place was weak, not exceeding 200, so that affrighted with the Fleet, the numbers, and the summons of the Christians, they immediately surren∣dred, capitulating to march out with their Arms and Baggage, which they did, leaving behind them 20 pieces of Brass Cannon, 23 of Iron, and 7 Mortars, be∣sides 200 Christian slaves, who obtained their liberty.


Count 
Coningsmark
 marched from thence to New 
Navarino,
 seated on a Rock, and of very difficult ac∣cess. He circled it by Land as well as the place would permit, whilst it was beaten from Sea with 20 pieces of Cannon and 18 Mortas. The 
Seraskier
 of 
Morea,
 being sollicitous for this place, advanced with 10000 men for its relief, destroying all the Countries as he passed. The Christians, to prevent his advance, lea∣ving a body of men behind them to maintain the Works, marched to meet him, and endeavoured se∣veral times to engage him to a Battel, which he avoided by passing a River, and retiring to a very advantageous Ground. Count 
Koningsmark
 being re∣inforced thereupon to 14000, it was resolved they should pass the River in two Places, and charge the Turks in Front and Flank, which was performed accordingly. The Victory was obstinately contest∣ed for at least two hours, but then the Turks being disordered fled, leaving 1000 of their men slain, wounded, and Prisoners, with all their Tents, Can∣non, and Baggage. The Christians had scarce 100 killed and wounded. Triumphing with this Victo∣ry they returned to the Siege, where, upon a second summons, the Besieged seeing their hopes of Suc∣cour defeated, and their Bassa slain, being blown up,
 with 150 of the Garrison by a Bomb falling amongst Powder, they likewise being 1200 Foot, and 200 Horse, surrendred upon Conditions to march away with their Arms, Bag, and Baggage, which they did, leaving behind them 64 pieces of Cannon, and thirteen Mortars, with great store of Provisions.


After the taking of 
Navarin,
 the General resolved to besiege 
Modon,
 tho' he knew the 
Seraskier
 had re∣inforced the Garrison, and provided it with all things necessary for a just defence, with promise of certain Succours by a day. 
Modon
 is seated upon a Promon∣tory of the Sea of 
Sapienza,
 Art and Nature having concurred to make it strong, tho' it held out but a Siege of 13 days. It was indeed miserably torn with Bombs and Carcasses, and the relief not appearing at the day appointed, the Bassa thought fit to capitu∣late,
 and marched out with near 3000 men, which were to be transported to 
Alexandria.
 There were taken in the Castle and Town 90 Brass Guns, 8 Iron ones, with 13 Mortars, and a great quantity of Ammunition and Provisions.


Morosini
 having stayed some time at 
Modon,
 as well to repair the Fortifications as to refresh his wearied Troops, having held a great Council of War, it was resolved to besiege 
Napoli di Romania,
 the better to secure the conquests which the Republick had al∣ready made in 
Morea.
 All things being made ready for so important an Enterprise, the Captain Gene∣ral sailed from 
Modon
 with the 
Venetian
 Fleet and the Auxiliary Gallies, and at the same time sent orders to the Captain Extraordinary of the Ships to ap∣proach towards that Coast with the Squadron un∣der his command, that he may joyn the Fleet if there be occasion. As a prelude to this enterprise, 8 Turkish Ships that had carried Men and Provisions to 
Napo∣li de Romania,
 endeavouring to escape by night out of Port 
Malvasia,
 were taken.
 In the mean time the General landed his Army at 
Ciara,
 six miles from 
Napoli,
 the 
Nauplia
 of the Antients, and pos∣sessed himself the next day of the Hill 
Palemada,
 within Musquet shot of the Town. The 
Seraskier
 of 
Morea
 being encamped not far off with 8 or 10000 men, did put 300 Souldiers into the Town, the Gar∣rison before consisting of 2000 under the Command of 
Mustapha Bassa,
 and advanced himself towards the Christians Camp; upon notice whereof, General 
Co∣ningsmark
 marched with his Forces to meet him,
 lea∣ving some to guard the works against the Town; After some light Skirmishes the Bodies engaged. The Turks scarce standing their Ground, retired in much disorder, leaving 400 of their men behind them. The loss on the Christians side was inconside∣rable, not exceeding 50 men. General 
Koningsmark
 returning to the Siege, sent some Troops to force the Castle of 
Argas
 which they found abandoned, and had that of 
Tenioni
 delivered upon demand. In the mean time the Siege was vigorously carried on, the Bombs and Carcasses occasioning great Confusi∣on in the Town. But the 
Seraskier
 being reinforced with 3000 fresh men, raised their dejected minds,

who at the same time that the Seraskier approached the Christian Camp, made a great Sally upon the Besiegers, though they were beaten back with loss, and the Seraskier so warmly received by the Can∣non from the Hill of 
Polameda,
 that he retired with∣out making any attempt upon the Lines. The Be∣siegers by this were lodg'd in the Town-Moat, so that the Seraskier being reinforced out of the neigh∣bouring Garrisons to 12000, resolved to make an∣other attempt to relieve the place, by forcing the Camp. At the same time 1500 of their best men sallied out of the City, so that the Christians being hardly put to it, the 
Slavonians
 being overpower'd, were forced to give way, but General 
Koningsmark
 coming opportunely to their assistance with a strong Party, rallied them, and beat back the 
Turks.
 In that instant of time, General 
Morosini
 having landed 3500 men, charged the Enemy so seasonably in Front and Flank, that they disordered them, and forced them to retire, but they being much stronger in Horse, were not pursued far. The 
Turks
 lost in this action 1500 of their best men,
 besides 120 that were taken Prisoners, and on the Christians side near 400. The Garrison upon this defeat, upon consideration of the Mines and Breaches, and dan∣ger of standing out an Assault, surrendred upon the same terms as had been given to 
Navarino
 and 
Modon.


The Christians lost a great many Men by a Flux contracted by the heat, and eating too much fruit, and among others, a Nephew of General 
Konings∣mark,
 the Captain of his Guards, and Count 
Bernabo Visconti
 a 
Milaneze
 Collonel.


The Bassa of 
Napoli di Romania,
 whether out of a consciousness of not having done his duty in defence of the City, or out of a resentment that to be un∣happy is to be criminal, thought it securer to put himself into the protection of his Vanquishers, than to expose himself to the candor of his Compurga∣tors at home. He therefore, with about eighty 
Turks
 more, having obtained leave of the General, were shipt for 
Venice,
 where they were honourably recei∣ved by the 
Senate,
 presented, and permitted to take two fine Houses, with very fine Gardens belonging to them, where they and their Families live at pre∣sent. After the taking of 
Napoli,
 above sixty small Towns and Burghs put themselves under the pro∣tection of the 
Venetians;
 and the General having set∣led affairs there, and dismissed the Auxiliary Gallies with their shares of the Booty to return home, failed himself with the Gallies of 
Venice
 towards the 
Archi∣pelag
 to put those Islands, which he also in a great measure did, under contribution. The Garrison and Inhabitants of 
Napoli
 being numerous, exceeding 10000, besides the 
Jews
 and 
Greeks
 who were made Tributaries, were by Articles to be transported to the Isle of 
Tenedos,
 which was also done in 12 Ships, commanded by Seignior 
Venier.
 This Fleet did not only alarm those parts, but 
Constantinople
 it self, af∣frighted with the report of a 
Venetian
 Armada so near the 
Dardanels:
 But upon their return they were met, and fought by the Captain Bassa, who had 20 Gallies and 10 Ships, but seeing he could do no good upon them, was obliged to quit the fight. The Se∣raskier, in the mean time, was retired to 
Corinth,
 from whence he sent some Troops to reinforce the Garrison of 
Petrassa,
 and very strong Parties, who by their incursions, keep the 
Greeks
 in continual alarms, and hinder them from openly declaring for the 
Re∣publick.
 To this end, he hath seized upon divers of the Principal of them, keeping them as Hostages, but exercises all kinds of cruelty against such as he suspects to have any correspondence with the Chri∣stians.


Cara Ibrahim,
 the late Visier, being stript of his E∣state,
 was sent to 
Rhodes,
 where, within the compass of the year, he was strangled, by command of the 
Sultan,
 the 
Caimacan
 of 
Constantinople
 being at the same time put into the seven Towers,
 to satisfie the People.


Nor was the 
Venetian
 War confined only to 
Mo∣rea,
 and the 
Sea,
 though nothing extraordinary hap∣pened in the later, that wise 
Republick
 having sent 
Cornaro
 to command in 
Dalmatia,
 with such Forces as might endeavour to divert the 
Turks
 from sending Succours either to 
Hungary
 or 
Morea,
 which they also in some measure did. And yet scarce any thing worthy a place in History, which is only pleased with great events, did intervene, the Forces indeed of neither side being sufficient for great underta∣kings. Some inconsiderable Places were intercepted on both sides, and the incursions of Parties into each others Quarters were frequent; wherein the 
Mor∣laques,
 like the 
Tartars
 on the Frontiers of 
Poland,
 did signalize themselves. The Bassa of 
Scutari
 had drawn together 7 or 8000 Men, with a Resolution to at∣tack the City of 
Budna,
 but they were ordered to march towards 
Hungary,
 so that that design vanished. But General 
Cornaro,
 and the Prince of 
Parma,
 who was Lieutenant General of the Foot, having drawn together 1000 Horse, and 3000 Foot, and 5000 
Mor∣laques,
 commanded by the Chevalier 
Janco,
 with the Artillery and Ammunition necessary for a Siege, re∣solved to attack 
Sign,
 scituated upon a Rock,
 and for∣tified with a good Wall and strong Castle, but the Cannon opening a Breach, it was assaulted and car∣ried by force, the Garrison which consisted but of 250 
Turks,
 being cut in pieces. By taking of this place, the 
Venetians
 are become Masters of the fer∣tile Province of 
Zettina.


The 
Grand Visier,
 upon his repassing the Bridge of 
Esseck,
 had sent home the Troops of 
Bossina,
 so that the Bassa of the said Province, thinking himself with this reinforcement, in a condition to make some attempt upon the Enemy, was accordingly prepa∣ring for it, tho' watched narrowly by 
Cornaro.
 The Bassa of 
Erzegovina
 had likewise got a competent Army together, and having burnt some Villages, retired towards 
Clin,
 to put a Convoy of Provisions into that place, 
Cornaro
 at the same time having ta∣ken his march towards 
Zsbenico
 and 
Sardona,
 to cover those places. And thus this year, and the Campain, were finished, except the usual excursions, both here, in 
Morea,
 in 
Poland,
 and in 
Hungary,
 where the Par∣ties are always busie, and infest each other accord∣ing to their power.


The desires of the 
Port
 for Peace were great. It was against their Maxims to wage War with so ma∣ny powerful Adversaries at once, nor could they tell how to extricate themselves out of it. They had of∣ten attempted separate Treaties, but the Allies were not to be disjoyned, they therefore offer'd them Concessions they durst not have hoped for at the beginning of the War. They would yield to the Emperor all 
Hungary,
 as far as the 
Drave,
 to the King of 
Poland, Caminiec
 and all 
Podolia,
 and restore to the 
Venetians
 the Kingdom of 
Candia,
 on condition they would part with what they had gained in 
Morea.


FINIS.













