The model of the government of the province of East-New-Jersey in America and encouragements for such as designs to be concerned there : published for information of such as are desirous to be interested in that place.
Scot, George, d. 1685.
Approx. 370 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 141 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A58781




Wing S2036



ESTC R35166





ocm 15048909




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The model of the government of the province of East-New-Jersey in America and encouragements for such as designs to be concerned there : published for information of such as are desirous to be interested in that place.
Scot, George, d. 1685.
[6], 272 p.   


Edinburgh :


Printed by John Reid, and sold be [sic] Alexander Ogston ...,


1685.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
New Jersey --  Politics and government --  To 1775.
New Jersey --  Description and travel.
2013-11
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2014-01
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-02
Anne Simpson
Sampled and proofread
2014-02
Anne Simpson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






S2036


R35166


15048909


103110














THE MODEL OF THE GOVERNMENT Of the PROVINCE OF EAST-NEW-JERSEY IN AMERICA; And Encouragements for such as Designs to be concerned there.


Published for Information of such as are de∣sirous to be Interested in that place.


EDINBURGH, Printed by 
John Reid,
 And Sold be 
Alexander Ogston
 Stationer in the 
Parliament Closs.
 Anno 
DOM.
 1685.












TO JAMES Earl of
 PERTH, 
Lord
 DRƲMMOND 
and
 STOBHALL, 
&c. Lord High
 Chancellour 
of SCOTLAND.


JOHN
 Viscount of 
Mel∣foord,
 Lord 
Drum∣mond
 of 
Gilston,
 Secre∣tar of State for the King∣dom of 
Scotland,
 one of the Members of His Ma∣jesties most Honourable Privy Councill in both Kingdoms.


GEORGE
 Vis∣count of 
Tarbet,
 Lord 
M
c
cloud
 and 
Castle—Haven,
 Lord Clerk Regi∣ster of 
Scotland,
 and one of His Ma∣jesties most Honou∣rable Privy Council there.




My Noble Lords,


AS your Lordships concern in 
East-Jersey,
 makes it appear to all intelligent persons, that it is a 
Nationall interest
 to advance in generall the design of a Plantation, hence to 
A∣merica;
 so that in particular, 
East-Jersey


 is the most proper place; seeing your Lordships have chosen it among all the other parts of that continent, to settle your interest there; Yet my 
Lords,
 there are (to our shame) a parcell of people, who whether out of Ignorance or Malice, I cannot well determine, decry the design; I believe they have a share of both, and thereby weakens not a little the hands of a number of well meaning people, who would gladly promot the same effect∣ualy, were they not imposed upon by the false rumours, industriously spread abroad to stiffle any such inclinations.


I have been advised to consent to the publishing of the following sheets, at first collected, only for my own divertise∣ment, and more clear information in the affair; As what may tend some what to prevent any foolish misrepresentation when by the perusall of the accompts, from thence the least jealousie is removed of any cheat in the thing it self, so ad∣vantagious a Character of the place com∣ing from so many different hands.


I have had too many demonstrations, of your Lordships favour, to fear your displeasure upon accompt of my presum∣ing

 to send the same abroad under your 
Patrociny;
 yea, I dare further adventure, without the least apprehension of your dissatisfaction with me upon that head, to mind your Lordships that as you have laid the foundation of this design, as to any concern of this Countrey, in that place; so it is expected your Lordships will continue to encourage the same: in process of time your Lordships may render your Names and Families as con∣siderable in 
America
 as they are in 
Europ.


My Lords, having resolved to dedi∣cate my self, Family, and Fortune, to the promoting of this design; I should the more easily digest any frauns of Providence I have been trysted with; were I so fortunat as to find the opportunity, in 
Jersey
 of testifying my resentments of the favours I have received at your Lordships hands in 
Scotland,
 by notice∣ing any of your Lordships concerns there, and contributing what in me lyes to ad∣vance the same; nothing shall be want∣ing in me to testifie how much I am,


My Noble Lords,


Your Lordships most, humbly devoted Servant, 
George Scot.








Advertisement be the Printer to the Reader.


That whereas the Authors other pressing affairs hindered him from overseeing the Press, as other∣wayes he would; there is not that correctness re∣quisit in the following sheets; it is hoped the Rea∣der will upon this reason pardon the same, and with his pen help what he finds amiss. The pages 62, and 63, are misplaced: and are to be read ac∣cording to the number.












An Account of the Incouragement for promoting a Design of Planting; in 
East-New-Jersey,
 containing the Con∣stitutions, and Model of Government of that Province, in a Letter from a Gentleman at 
Edinburgh,
 concerned there; to his Correspondent in the Countrey.


Sir,


PErceiving by your last Discourse, that you not only appeared somewhat re∣solved to be your self concerned in
 pro∣moting the present Design of car∣rying on a Plantation in 
America,
 but to endeavour to engage several of your Friends in the same undertaking, when you found any probability of its taking effect. 
I find my self obliged for your more full Information 
 let you know at more length the Reasons, inducing me to be so much concerned in the promo
ing this Affair, submitting very willingly, the grounds promp∣ting me hereto, to your most narrow scrutiny, whether in so doing I act Rationally or not?


Having at
 London 
in the year
 1679, 
the opportunity of frequent converse with several

 Substantial and Judicious Gentlemen, concerned in the
 American Plantations, 
I had thereby the opportunity of understanding throughly the great advantage redounding to that City, from
 Undertakings of this nature, 
and rational grounds of Conjecture,
 That their Com∣merce with that place of the World, hath been one of the greatest Improve∣ments of that Trade, they have for ma∣ny years enjoyed, which hath rendered it now one of the most considerable Ci∣ties in 
Europe;
 the Customes thereof which in Queen 
Elizabeths
 time, were farmed at 
Fifty thousand pounds,
 paying now in to the Exchequer, near 
seven hun∣dred thousand pounds
 yearly, which great Improvement may be much attribute to their Trade with 
America,
 brought now in a great manner to Perfection, which at that time was but in its Infancy.


From that time I began to have strong in∣clinations, to be more fully informed in that Affair, and to be at all imaginable pains, to notice the same verie concernedly▪ and for my more full satisf
ction, I judged i
 requisit to trace the verie beginnings of all the
 English Plantations, 
and their gradual progresses ere they arrived at that perfection they presently

 are at; I could not rest satisfied with the first Methods I proposed to my self, in Order to this, of discoursing at large with such as had been in the several Plantations, by putting such in∣terrogators to them thereanent, as I judged most proper, for informing my self in all things relative to that knowledge, I judged requisit for my own clear information, and for being a foundation to a Design I then began to frame, of being therein my self some way interested; And tho I found one and the same accompt given me in Solution of the most material Questions I proposed; Yea, from several hands, who were such, whose knowledge in other things with the good Character they generally went under, obliged me to notice their infor∣mation as truth without the least jealousing the verity of the accompt they gave me; yet for my more full satisfaction, I proposed what I judged would contribute more clearly to my full understanding that affair, to wit, the perusal of all the Geographicall descriptions of these places in
 America 
inhabited by the
 English.


The first thing which offered to my view, in this search, was a question in it self, both pleasant and material,
 What way the continent of 
America
 came first to be in∣habited after the Flood, it being a World

 wholly unknown to the 
Europeans, Asia∣ticks
 and 
Africans,
 till the late discovery thereof by 
Americus Vesputius,
 and 
Cristo∣phorus Columbus,
 since by all ci
cumstan∣ces, it is apparent that it hath been long inhabited: 
Laetius in his discourse anent the Original of the
 Americans, 
Declaring,
 That the 
Spaniards
 destroyed thirty mi
lions of them in these parts of 
America,
 usurped by them, which is not the 100 part of that continent. 
And since it is by all a∣greed, that after the Flood,
 Noah and his three Sons had their habitations in some parts of 
Asia; there being no probable eviden∣cies that any of their Descendants led out the first Collonies thither, being so divided from the rest of the World,
 to wit, 
from the
 West∣ern 
coast of
 Europe, 
and
 Africa, 
by the vast
 Atlantick Ocean, 
from the
 North parts 
of
 Europe, 
by the great frozen Seas lying be∣twixt it and
 Green-land, 
appearing to be the
 Northern Coast of America, 
from the
 Northern part of Asia, Tartaria 
and
 Ca∣that, 
by the
 Fretum Annium, 
from the
 Fast part of China, 
and the
 Philippine Islands, 
by the
 Oceanus Pacificus, 
above
 2000. 
Leagues in breadth, and divided from the great lately discovered Island
 Delphago,

 
by the Straits of
 Magellan; 
and that Island divided again from the uttermost
 Southern Continent 
(if any be) by a great Sea not formerly known to the
 Europeans, 
and
 Asia∣ticks, 
being divided from
 Asia 
and
 Africa, 
by the great
 Indian Ocean, 
lately discove∣red by
 De La Mers Navigation; 
the only probable means of such a Migration, being of a far later perfection, than what could answer such a population of so great a continent.


To this apparently difficult question I find a very satisfying answer given verie fullie by the Learned
 Hales, 
his Assertion, to wit,
 That notwithstand∣ing these apparent difficulties, a Migrati∣on unto 
America
 from the Descendants of 
Adam,
 and 
Noah,
 was not onely possible, but probable, that the samine was suc∣cessive, that tho the time or manner of these Migrations cannot certainly be de∣fined, yet many of them were long since, some thousand of years; Yet after the universal Deluge, that the means of this Transmigration of the Descendents of 
Adam
 and 
Noah,
 from 
Asia
 unto 
Ame∣rica,
 hath been both by Sea and Land. That the readiest means of the Migra∣tion of Colonies unto the 
Western World,


 from the 
Eastern,
 was by the help of Na∣vigation, whereof much might be cas∣ual by Tempests, or contrary Winds. 
But the more Principle from design, he judging it probable,
 that the use of Ships was not unknown to the Old World before the Flood, tho not in that perfection that af∣ter; But that the Ark of 
Noah,
 being an exact piece of 
Arihitecture,
 did give a patron for Vessels of a greater burden, that from that time the skill of making and navigating Ships had been certainly improved. 
Heathnish Histories giving us accompt, that Navigation was ancient among the
 Grecians, 
especiallie among the
 Pheni∣cians, Tyrians, 
and
 Carthaginians Pliny 
in his Natural History, relating,
 That the Navigation of the 
Argonauts
 to 
Colchis
 for the 
Golden Fleece,
 happened about 1000. years after the Flood; And that 200. years before that, 
Danaus
 sailed out of 
Aegypt
 unto 
Greece. And tho there be no ex∣press mention of the
 Pixis 
Nautica for ma∣nie years, after the mention of the use of Navi∣gation, yet the same Author relates,
 That the 
Phenicians
 steered their Course by obser∣vation of the Stars.


But the
 Sacred Scripture 
gives a better

 accompt of the Antiquitie of Navigation,
 Ja∣cob 
died
 600. 
years 
 the Flood, yet he mentioned
 Ships and Havens for shipping, 
as things well known; and particularlie
 Si∣don, as a great Port for shipping, where 
Zebulons
 Lott was to be cast, Gen. 49.13. Balaam 
in the time of
 Moses 
mentions,
 the Ships of 
Chittim,
 or 
Grecians,
 as a known thing, Numb. 24.24. 
In the Reign of
 Solomon, 
the
 Tyrians 
are noticed as expert Seamen, he having a Navie upon the Coast of the
 Red-Sea, 
from thence making Voyages with the
 Tyrans 
to
 Ophir, 
and
 Tarshish, 
places apparentlie in the
 East Indies, 
thence bringing Gold and other Commodities,
 1 Chr: 8.18.9.21.


The Histories of all succeeding Ages of the
 Grecians 
and
 Persians, 
of the
 Tyrians, Phenicians 
and
 Carthaginians, 
of the
 Ro∣mans, Aegyptians 
and
 Chinenses; 
And in the latter times of the
 Venetians, Sicilians 
and
 Rhodians, Spanish, Dutch, French, 
and
 English, 
give us a full accompt, how Sedulous and Industrious all Maritim Coasts have been in advancing of Navigation in mul∣tiplying of Shipping, in Merchandizing and Trading in searching out and subduing For∣raign Countries, when either afflicted at home

 by war, or otherway
 
 or growen over po∣pulous.


And therefore sayes the forecited Author, as latter years, hath given us of this Age witness of the Transplantations to
 America, 
from
 Spain, France, Portugal, England, Scot∣land, 
and
 Holland, 
and some Ages before that have given instances of Transplantations f
om
 Norway 
unto
 Green-land, 
and
 Ise∣land; 
So it appears not onely possible, but pro∣bable, that either by Casuality or Tempest, or by Intention and Design, either for Lucre of Gold, or for disburthening of the Countries sur charged with multitudes of Inhabitants, or by greatness of mind, affecting Noble Ʋn∣dertakings, or by Reason of Hardships, Oppres∣sion, and Warrs at home, or by some of all these wayes, several parts of this great Conti∣nent, at several times have been planted with Inhabitants, which through process of time, have multiplied unto these many Nations, and have forgot ther Original, and the Manners, Re∣ligions, and Customes of these People, from whom they descended in
 Asia, Europe, 
or
 Africa.


His Judgement is,
 That the Countries in 
Asia
 and 
Europe,
 which with greatest probability, have first Peopled 
America


 appear to be the 
British,
 the 
Norwegians,
 the 
Tartars,
 or 
Scythians,
 the 
Phenicians, Carthaginians,
 or the 
Chineses; Not men∣tioning the late Migrations of the
 Spanish, French, Portuguize, Dutch, English, 
or
 Scottish.


Doctor
 Powels 
relates,
 That 
anno
 1170, 
Madoch
 one of the Sons of 
Owen Guineth,
 went over twice unto the Northern coast of 
America,
 and made there a 
British
 plan∣tation; 
This is at large prosecuted by
 Lae∣tius 
in his second Observation.


Grotius 
hath some Observations touching the Migrations of the
 Norwegians. Laetius 
grants, that
 Iseland, 
and some part of
 Green-land, 
were planted by
 Ericus Rufus, 
anno
 928. 
that probably from hence Collonies were brought over unto the Northern parts of
 Ameri∣ca, 
over the
 Fretum Anian, 
in respect of the easiness and shortness of that passage, from
 Nova Zembla, 
and the farthest
 North-east 
part of
 Tartary, 
over that narrow Sea, and partly by Reason of the congruitie of the Bar∣barous customs of the
 Americans 
and
 Scy∣thians.


Hornius 
thinks the Migration of the
 Phe∣nicians 
and
 Carthaginians, 
especially unto the
 South-east 
part of the continent of
 Ame∣rica,

 
as
 Mexico 
and
 Brasile, 
very probable upon many accompts,
 1: 
Ʋpon the great skill and long practise of Navigation, and the mul∣titude of Shipping of the
 Phenicians 
and
 Car∣thaginians. 2: 
Ʋpon the Accommodation of the Port of
 Carthage, 
and other
 African 
ports bordering upon the
 Mediterranean Sea, 
to make their Voyages
 West-ward, 
and the great advantage of the constant
 Easterlie 
Windes which makes the Voyage to
 Mexico, 
and
 Brasile 
more easie.
 3. 
Ʋpon some an∣cient Histories, intimating the progress of the
 Phenicians 
and
 Carthaginians 
Fleet unto some Islands, or Continents in or near the
 At∣lan ick Ocean.


And lastlie, he findes much of the
 Origina∣tion of the Americans attribute to the Migration of the 
Seni
 or 
Sinenses
 from the 
Eastern
 parts of 
China,
 and the 
Philippine
 Islands, from the Islands of 
Borneo,
 and the 
Moluccas
 and 
Japan,
 through the 
Mare Pacificum,
 unto the 
Western
 parts of 
Ame∣rica,
 which tho it be a large Ocean of a∣bove 2000. Leagues betwixt the 
Philip∣pine
 Islands, and the West of the 
American
 Continent, and the passage hither dif∣ficult, in respect of the constant 
Easterly
 Windes betwixt the 
Tropicks;
 yet many

 reasons appear to the liklyhood of a plan∣tation, from thence, 1: in respect of the Peopling of 
China,
 which Mr. 
Web,
 sayes, 
Was first Peopled after the Ʋniversal Deluge; Sem
 the son of 
Noah,
 first set∣tling here, it being the most ancient and primitive Language, that by means of the Antiquity and Settledness of this 
Mo∣narchie,
 having continued ever since the Universal Deluge: It is most probable, the 
Western
 continent of 
America
 was Peo∣pled hence. 2: Because they were the greatest Masters of Shipping, and best skilled in Navigation of any part in the World; The 
Pixis Nautica
 being there known, and used long before the know∣ledge thereof in 
Europe.
 3. The many Islands upon the 
South,
 and 
South-east
 part of 
China,
 as 
Borneo, Javae, Gilolo, Ce∣lebes,
 and others near the 
Aequator
 are disjoyned, but by very narrow Seas, not much broader than between 
England
 and 
France,
 from the neck of Land, cal∣led 
Terra de Papes,
 or 
Nova Guinea,
 and 
Nova Hollandia
 new discovered; to be at least in some parts disjoyned from the more 
Southern Continent,
 by a great Sea, but anciently thought to have been a

 part of the 
Southern Continent.


Ʋpon these and the like Probabilities, Judge
 Hales 
thinks it reasonable to conclude that the
 Americans 
had their Original from the Inha∣bitants of
 Europe, Asia, 
and
 Africa, 
that Transmigrated into that Continent, either in∣tentionally or Casuallie, or both.
 2. 
That these Migrations were not of one single People, but of manie and diverse Nations.
 3. 
That these Migrations were not altogether, or at one time, but successivelie in several Ages, some earlier, some later.
 4. 
That therefore it is impossible to determine the time of such Migrations, onely that they have been all since the Flood, now above
 4000. 
years ago; some Migrations
 2, 3, 
or
 400. 
years after the Flood; some later according to various Accidents; but that is no wayes probable that the earliest Mi∣gration hither was above
 4000. 
years since, for of one hundred pair they might easily pro∣pagat a number competent to People all that Continent.
 6. 
That it appears that since the last of these ancient Migrations, suppose that of
 Madoch 
and his
 Brittons, 
untill our late Migrations by the
 Spaniards, French, Eng∣lish, Dutch 
and
 Scottish; 
there probably interceeded an interval of, at least
 4. 
or
 500. 
years; in all which Interval the Commerce

 and Communication between
 Europe 
or
 Asia, 
and
 America, 
hath as it were slept and been forgot both by them and us.
 7. 
That in this interval of
 500. 
years or there abouts in all parts, but in some parts far greater; there must in all Probability happen a great forget∣fulness of their Original; a great Degenerati∣on from the Primitive Civilitie, Religion, and Custome of these p
aces, from whence they first derived a Ferine and necessitous kind of Life, by a conversation with these that having been long there, were fallen into more barba∣rous habit of Life and Manners, would easily assimilate; at least the next Generation to bar∣barism or ferinn
ss; where a Colony comes and keeps it self in a Body as the
 Roman 
Colonies did; and the Plantations in
 Virgi∣nia, 
and
 New England 
do; and the
 New Accessions 
incorporat and joyn thems
lves un∣to that Body, Custom, both Religious and Civil, And the Original Language are kept intire, but where the
 Accessions 
are but thin, and spairing and scattered among the Natives of the Countrey, where they come, and are dri∣ven to conform themselves unto their Customs, f
r their very subsistance, safety and intertain∣ment; it falls out that the very first
 Planters 
doe soon degenerate in their
 habits, customs,

 
and
 Religions, as a little wine poured into a great veshell, loseth it self; 
but if they es∣cape a totall
 assimilation 
to the country where they thus are mingled; yet the nixt
 Genera∣tion 
in such a mixture, is quicly assimilated to the
 corrupt 
manners, and customs of the peo∣ple, among whom they are thus planted; so that it is no wonder, if 
 such kind of small
 Ac∣cessions, 
successively from one and the same, or severall Countries, The
 third Generation 
for∣got their
 Ancestors, 
and the
 Customs, Religi∣ons 
and
 languages 
of these people, from whom they were first derived; and assume
 various temperaments 
in their
 language 
and
 cus∣toms 
according as the places of their
 habita∣tation, 
and the
 Company 
among whom they live, obtain. But there remains yet a great dif∣ficulty, touching the noxious untameable Beasts, as
 Lyons, Tigers, Wolves, Bears, 
which that continent abounds with; how they come to be conducted over the seas, to be preserved in the
 Ark, 
and after to be transported again thither, it not being probable that they could be trans∣ported by shipping, seing no man would be at the
 pains, charge 
and
 hazard, 
with such Beasts, which would doe more harme than good: And altho possibly, the Frozen Northern Seas might be a
 Bridge 
for their Passage; yet that appears

 unlikly in respect of the great Snows which ac∣company such frosts; and the impossibility of sup∣ply of food in so great and troublesome a journey and as to swimming tho the Seas between
 Tar∣tary 
and
 Cathay, 
and some parts of
 Ameri∣ca, 
be not so wide as the
 Atlantick, 
or
 Paci∣fick Ocean; 
yet they are too large to afford a passage by Sea for
 Tygers 
and
 Lyons 
not apt to take the water; and it is not yet certainly dis∣covered, tho conjectured, that there is any neck of Ground or passage by Land from any part of
 Europe, 
or
 Asia, 
unto any part of the conti∣nent of
 America.


The only thing then remaining to accommodat this difficulty, is to suppose, that tho it should be granted there is no such Land passage extant, yet within the
 compass 
of
 4000. 
years elapsed since the
 Flood, 
there have been some such jun∣cturs or land passages between the Northern parts of
 Asia 
or
 Europe, 
and some Northern parts of the continent of
 America; 
or between the South cast part of
 China, 
or the
 Philipine Islands, 
and the Southern continent, tho latly there be dis∣covered an interposition of
 Sea, 
between the Isle∣and
 Delfago, 
& that Southern continent, where∣by either from
 Asia 
to
 Greenland 
in the North; or from
 China 
to
 Terra-Australis incogni∣ta 
on the South, a land passage might be from


 Asia 
to
 America 
for men and beasts, tho for some ages past either by the violence of the wa∣ter or by floods, or earthquakes, which hath made great alterations in the Globe of the Earth and Seas that Bridge or Line of communication be now broken or obliterat; and truely such as observe the infinite number of Islands lying be∣tween the continent of
 China 
and
 Nova Gui∣nea, 
almost contiguous to each other, hath pro∣bable reason to believe that these have been all formerly one continent joyining
 China 
and
 No∣va-Guinea 
together, tho now by the eruption of the Seas crumbled unto smal Islands; hence there is ground to believe there hath been an∣tiently necks of land which mantained passage of communication by land betwixt the two con∣tinents.
 Pliny 
tells us of the great
 Atlantick-Island 
mentioned by the Aegyptian Priest, in
 Platos, Timeus, 
almost contiguous to the western part of
 Spain 
and
 Africa, 
now wholly swallow∣ed up by that
 Ocean; 
which if truth for ought we know might affoord a passage from
 Africa 
to
 America, 
by land before that Submersion.






BƲT to return from this, I hope not
 un∣pleasant digression, 
having serious∣ly considered the advantages which may be rationally conjectured, to redound from the right managment of a concern in
 Ameri∣ca. 
I resolved to lay my self out wholly for the promoting such a
 design 
in this Countrey, as what
 I 
was convinced, would in the end not only tend to the
 Honour 
and
 Advantage 
of
 Our Nation 
in
 General, 
but to the
 Par∣ticular Interest 
of such as would resolve to be therein
 effectually concerned; 
tho I am aboundantly sensible; there are not a
 few who take upon them to censure this under∣taking, who have not the capacity to pry unto the advantages, which may rationally be proposed in prosecuting thereof: 
the strong
st argument they are able to bring against it, being taken from the pra∣ctise of our
 Ancestors, 
altogether innocent of any such
 design, 
tho reputed aboundantly wise in their generation; that therefore in their Children it can be no less then folly, to intro∣duce such a novelty, the same appearing to thuart the verity of some of our old
 Scottish Proverbs, that ill Bairns are best heard at home. Fools are fain of flitting; And a Bird in hand is better then two in the

 bush; 
esteemed no less by them, then sometimes were the
 Oracles of Apollo, 
at
 Delphos. Yes sir, 
I have heard some whose pretensions,
 to wit, 
were so great that they were upon the borders of
 Commensing Vertuosi, 
snarling at this
 intention, 
who having been ingaged in the debate bewrayed their ignorance so far in the affair, as to inquire,
 whether the places treated anent, as the proper seats for a Collonie, from thence were Islands, or on the continent, if such so little-versant in 
America,
 be competent Judges of a matter of this import? 
I leave it to your determination, and therefore judging them al∣together unworthie of being otherwayes noticed, then to pity their ignorance, not envying them; the satisfaction of their own
 Opinions. 
I proceed more at length to acquaint you with the
 grounds I walk upon, 
in resolving to be so effectually concerned in
 promotting this de∣sign, 
as to hazard my self, Family, and Fortune, in Prosecuting thereof, submitting very chearfully the consideration thereof to your narrowest and most exact scrutiny; whether the
 motives 
prompting me hereto be founded upon
 solid Reason 
or not?


I find the most brutish of
 Mankind 
propos∣eth some end to himself, whereby he is actuated,

 the
 Voluptuous seeks after his ple
sure, the Ambitious his preferment, the Co∣vetous his treasure: 
whence it is apparent, that all the
 intentions 
of man, how unratio∣nal soever, are actuated by one of these three great engins of
 Jucundum Honestum, 
and
 Utile; 
In the effectual promotting this
 design 
I judge a man may rationaly have a prospect to all these three.


I must confess, there is in the generality of
 Mankind 
a natural inclination to love the Land of their own Nativity, beyond other places, tho upon several Considerations, every way preferable, according to that of the
 Poet,

Nescio quo natale solum dulcidine cun∣ctos.


Tangit & immemores non sinit esse sui.


Yet we see, it hath been frequently so order∣ed in
 providence, 
that severals upon different
 motives, 
have been brought to quit th
i
 Native Soyl, 
and inclined to make choise of
 strange and remot Countries, 
for their
 ha∣bitation: 
and it is clearly seen, that this the
r removal hath tended both to their honour an
 outward more plentiful accommodation, hen
 the
 Northern Climats, tho barren as
 their Soyl have been observed to pro∣duce bodies of Men, in greater aboun∣dance,

 more stronge, and vivid than the more 
Southern
 and fertile places of the World, whence great multitudes of peo∣ple 
pinched with the straits of their own Coun∣trey,
 have ishewed forth to more agree∣able and 
fertile places.
 Thus the 
Goths, Vandals,
 and 
Hunns
 overspead the 
Roman Empire,
 seating themselves in 
Italy
 and 
Spain,
 and a great part of 
Africa;
 hence the eruption of the 
Franks
 from the 
Rhine,
 upon the more pleasant Vallies of the 
Loire S
in,
 and giving thus rise to most flowrishing Kingdoms.


I grant that upon the first view, it may appear somewhat of a 
Novelty,
 and that upon this consideration, the 
Ʋndertakers
 may be lyable to the censure of such, as prye not further into the Affair; Yet I am ready to believe that the more s
ri∣ous and Judicious will have other sen∣timents of this 
Design,
 when they consi∣der, that not only is this practise warran∣ted by the 
Scripture,
 but that the effect∣ual prosecuting thereof, will be made clearly to appear, to be contributive as well to the 
honor
 of the 
Ʋndert
kers
 as to their 
particular Interest,
 and l
kewise to the general 
advantage of the Nation.




The placing of a People in this or that Countrey, is from the 
appointment of GOD,
 the Apostle speaks of it 
as grounded in Na∣ture, Acts
 17.26. 
GOD hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of our habitation, Deut.
 2.8.5. and 9. 
GOD would not have the
 Israelites 
meddle with the
 Edomites 
or the
 Moabits, 
because he had given them the land for a possession.


I do not find any taking upon them to define what particular summons the first 
Ʋndertakers of planting Collonies had,
 whe∣ther from the 
mouth of GOD immediately,
 (as 
Abraham
 first and the Children of 
Is∣rael
 thereafter,) or from the 
advice and Counsel of Men;
 Yet that the 
Wisdom of GOD directed them in this course is evident from
 Moses, his testimonie, affirming, 
that he separated the Sons of
 Adam, 
and set the bounds of their habitation, Deut.
 32.8. So that whoever set on the work, 
GOD ac∣knowledgeth it as his own;
 we read also in the 16 of the 
Acts,
 verse 12. 
Of a Collony,
 (which is a company of People agreeing to remove out of their Countrey, and settle a City or Commonwealth else∣where) 
which GOD blessed and prospered ex∣ceedingly, and made it a glorious Church.




That
 Collonies 
as other
 States 
in
 Hu∣mane Societie, 
have their Warrand from
 GODS direction 
and
 Command, 
is appa∣rent to all. No sooner was Man created, then he was commanded
 to replenish the Earth, and subdue it, Gen. 1.26. 
by these words, and the repetition of them to
 Noah, Gen. 9. 
verse
 1. 
We see a promise exprest (as the title of a
 Benediction, 
and thereto prefixed) So it may also be perc
ived, that they include a di∣rection or command.
 Calvine 
say
s upon these words,
 Jubet cos crescere & simul bene∣dictionem suam destinat; 
And
 Junius, pro ut vim intus indiderat sic palam mandatum, dedit curandae propagati∣onis & dominationis exercenda
. 
And
 Pa∣raeus, Jubet igitur replere terram, non solum generatione & habitatione, sed cum primis potestate cultu & usu, etsi vero nonullae orbis partes manent inha∣bitales, habemus nihilominus totius do∣minium, Jure Divino licet non habea∣mus totius orbis usum culpa & defectu nostro.


If it be alledged, that tho it must he granted, that the words have the force of a
 Precept, 
yet it was but to continue during the
 Worlds infancy 
and no longer; upon dew considerati∣on

 it will be found, that there is no ground here for such a
 Limitation; 
For tho some Commandments founded upon, and respecting some present State and Condition of Men, re∣ceived end and alteration, when the condition was ended; yet
 Precepts 
given to the body of
 Mankind, 
as these to
 Adam 
and
 Noah, 
receive neither alteration in the substantials, nor determination, while Men and any void places of the Earth continue; so that allowing this Commandment to bind
 Adam, 
it must bind his
 Posterity; 
and consequently our selves in this Age, and our Issue after us, as long as the Earth yeelds empty places to be re∣plenished.


Where there is an empty vacant place, there appears hence to be Liberty for the
 Sons of A∣dam, 
or
 Noah, 
to come and inhabit;
 Abra∣ham 
and
 Isaac 
sojourned among the
 Phili∣stins. 
Yea, I do not see that either they bought or asked leave of the
 Inhabitants; 
By
 so∣journing, 
is meant a
 constant residence 
there, as in a
 possession of their own; 
al∣though it be so termed, as if
 they had been Strangers, 
because they neither pretended to the
 Soveraign Government of the whole Countrey, 
neither did incorporate themselves unto the
 Common-Wealth of the Na∣tives,

 
to submit themselves to their
 Govern∣ment; 
they did not buy that land to feed their Catttle, because they said,
 there is room enough, 
intimating,
 that the Natives were no wayes injured by their Neighbour∣head; 
and so did
 Jacob pitch his tents by, Schem, Gen. 34. 
verse
 21. Hamor 
said,
 there is room enough, therefore let them sit down among us, 
yea we see that in case the people who were former
 Inhabitants, did disturbe them in their possessions, they complained to the King, 
as of
 injury 
done to them, as
 Abraham 
did, because
 they took away his well, Gen. 21.25. 
for his right thereto, he pleaded not his
 im∣mediat call from GOD, 
for that would have seemed frivolous among the
 Heathen, 
but his own
 industry 
and
 culture in dig∣g
ng thereof, 
yea, we see the
 King does not reject his Plea, with what had he to do to dig wells in their Soil? 
but admitteth it as a
 principle of Nature, 
that in a va∣cant
 soyl 
he who taketh
 possession 
thereof, and bestoweth
 Culture 
and
 Husbandry 
there∣upon his right it is; the ground hereof being from the
 Grand Charter 
given to
 Adam 
and his posterity in Paradise,
 Gen. 1.28. Multiply and replenish the Earth, and

 subdue it, 
which Charter was renewed to
 Noah, Gen. 9.1. fill the Earth and mul∣tiply. 
In the next place, the gift of the Earth, is to the
 sons of Men, Psalm 115.16. 
this necessarly enforceth their duty to people it. Were it not an injury done to the most High, to think,
 He does ought in vain? 
or that
 He tenders a gift to Mankind, 
which He never meant should be enjoyed; And what way can Men make benefit of the Earth but by ha∣bitation and culture? Neither do I judge it a rational answer to this,
 that GODS in∣tention is satisfied, if some part of the Earth be replenished and used; 
tho the rest he wast, because we are still urged with the same difficulty, that the rest of which we receive no fruit, was never intended for us, because it was never GODS Mind,
 we should possess it. 
If it be then granted,
 that it hath been the mind of GOD, that Man should possess all the parts of the Earth; 
it must be acknowledged that we neglect our duty, and cross His Will, if we do it not when we have Occasion and Opportunity, and do little less than undervalue His blessing.


Does not also that Order which GOD an∣nexeth to Marriage, in His first institution,
 viz. That married Persons should leave Fa∣ther

 and Mother, and cleave to other, 
warrant this practise; seeing frequently there is a necessity
 that young married People should remove out of their Fathers Fa∣milies, to live apart by th
mselves; 
whereby new Families are erected. Now what are new Families, but pettie Colloni
s? and so at last removing further and further, they over∣spread the whole Earth; so long therefore as there shall be use of Marriage, there will be a warrant for deducing of Collonies from one place to another.


We find that GODS directions have a double scope,
 Mans good, 
and
 His own Honour, 
that this Commandment of GOD is directed to Mans good,
 Temporal 
or
 Spiritual 
is more apparent; for it is most certain, that the
 life of Man is made comfortable, afford∣ing a more plentiful supply in a large scope of ground, 
which moves them to be so unsatiable in th
ir desi
s,
 to joyn house to house, and land to land, till there be no more place. 
Exce
ding I grant therein the measure and bounds of Justice, and yet build∣ing upon a principle suggested b
 Nature, that a
 large place best secures sufficiency, 
as we see by Nature, Trees flowrish fair, prosper well, and wax fruitful in a large Orchard,

 which would otherwayes decay, if they were straitned in a little Nursery; These that are stronger Plants and better rooted, would in∣crease, overtop, and at last starve the weaker sort. Do we not see it thus fall out in our Civil State, where a
 few Men flowrish best, furnished with Abilities, or best fitted with Opportunities, 
and the rest wax
 weak, 
and
 languish, 
as wanting
 room and means to nurish them. 
Now that the Spirits and Hearts of Men are kept in better Temper by
 spreading wide, 
will be evident to any Man who considers,
 That the Husbanding of unmanured ground, and shifting unto emptie lands, enforceth Men to Frugali∣ty, and quickneth invention; and the setling of new Estates requireth Justice, and affection to the Common Good; and the taking in of large Countries, presents a natural remedy against covetousness, fraud and violence, when every man may enjoy enough without wrong or injury to his Neighbour. 
Whence it was that the
 First Age, 
by these helps were re∣nowned for
 golden Times, 
wherein Men be∣ing newly entered into their Possessions, were enforced thereby to
 Labour, Frugality, Sim∣plicity 
and
 Justice 
having neither leasure nor

 occasion to decline to
 Idleness, Ryots, Wan∣tonness, Fraud, 
or
 Violence; 
the ordinar fruits of well Peopled Countries, and of the abundance and superfluities of long setled E∣states.


But that which should most stay our hearts, is the respect unto GODS Honour, which is much advanced by this work of
 replenishing the Earth, 
whereby the largeness of his boun∣ty is tasted hy setling of men in all parts of the World, whereby the extent of
 His munifi∣cence to the sons of Men 
is discovered; the
 Psalmist 
tells us,
 that GOD is much magnified 
by this, that
 the whole Earth is full of His Riches; 
yea,
 and the Red sea too, Psalm 104.24. 
And GOD when he would have
 Abraham 
know what he had be∣stowed on him, when he gave him
 Canaan, 
wills him,
 to walk through it, in the length of it, and the breadth of it, Gen. 13.17. GODS Honour 
is hereby advanced, when together with Mens Persons, Religion is conveyed to several parts of the World, and all the quarters of the Earth,
 sound with His Praise, and CHRIST JESUS takes in the Nations for his inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for His Possession; 
according to GODS Decree and Promise,
 Psal. 28.




Seeing then it must be acknowledged, that even those Collonies which have been under∣taken upon the desire either of disburthening full states of unnecessary multitudes, or of re∣plenishing wast and void Countries, have a clear and sufficient Warrand from the
 Mouth of GOD 
as immediately concurring with a spe∣cial end that GOD aimed at in the first insti∣tution thereof, when GODS Honour and Glo∣ry, and next Mans Salvation is his own proper scope in this and all his wayes; it must be more necessarly acknowledged, that the desire and respect unto the publishing his Name where it is not known, and reducing men who live without GOD in this present world, unto a form of Piety and Godliness, by how much the more immediately it suits with the mind of GOD, and is further carried from private respects, by so much the more it advanceth this work of planting Coll
ies above all Civil and Humane ends, and deserves Honour and Ap∣probation above the most
 glorious con∣queasts 
or most
 succesful interprises, 
which ever were undertaken by the most renowned men which the
 Sun 
hath seen, and that by how much the subduing
 of Satan is a more glo∣rious Act, than a Victory over Man; 
and the
 inlargements of CHRISTS King∣dom,

 than the adding unto Mens domi∣nions; 
and the
 saving of Mens Souls, than the provision for their Lives and Bodies.


It appears, this end in Plantation hath been specially reserved for this latter dayes of the World,
 seing before CHRIST, the De∣cree of GOD that suffered all Nations to walk in their own wayes, Acts 14.16. 
Shut up the Church in the narrow bounds of the promised land, and so excluded men from the propagation of Religion to other Coun∣tries. And in the Apostles times, GOD af∣forded an easier and speedier course of
 con∣verting Men to the Truth by the gifts of the Tongues, seconded by the power of Miracles, 
to win the greater credit to their Doctrine, which most especially and first pre∣vailed upon Countries civilized, as the Histo∣ry of the
 Acts of the Apostles 
makes mani∣fest; As for the rest it is not questioned, but GOD used the same way to other
 barbarous Nations, 
which he held with these whom he first civilized by the
 Roman Conquests 
and mixture of their Collonies, with them that Re∣ligion, might be afterwards brought in, see∣ing it cannot be imagined that Religion should prevail upon these who are not subdued to the rule of
 Nature 
and
 Reason. 
It may be

 rationally conjuctured that GOD did especially direct this Work of
 Erecting Colonies, 
unto the
 planting 
and
 propogating 
of
 Religion 
in the
 West-Indies, 
and that for diverse reasons, which ought to be taken unto serious consideration, as affoording the strongest motives which can be proposed to draw on the hearts & affections of men to their work: There are men of Note, both for Place and Learning in the Church, that
 conceive the course held by GOD from the beginning, in the pro∣pagation of Religion, falls in the last age, upon the Western Parts of the World. It is most certain that from the first Planting of Religion among Men, it hath alwayes held a constant way from East to West, and hath in that Line pro∣ceeded so far, that it hath extended to the uttermost Western bounds 
of the for∣merly known World, so that if it make up any further passage upon that point of the Compass, it must necessarly light upon the
 West-Indies, 
And it is conceived with all, that our Saviors Prophesie,
 Matth. 24.27. 
points out such a progress of the Gospel, its true that the compa∣rison there used, taken from the
 lightning, 
aims at the sudden dispersing of the knowledge of CHRIST by the Apostles Ministery but

 whereas it is known, that the
 Ligthning shins from diverse places of the Heaven, 
shew∣ing it self indifferently, sometimes in the
 West, 
sometimes in the
 North 
or
 South; 
Its judged probable that our
 Saviour 
does in this simili∣tude, choice to name the
 lightning that comes out of the East unto the West, 
to express not only the
 shining out of the Gospel, 
but withall the
 way 
and
 passage 
by which it pro∣ceeds from one end of the World to an other, that is from
 East 
to
 West.


But passing by that onely as a probable ar∣gument, the following seems to carry greater weight, the knowledge of CHRIST must cer∣tainly be manifested to all quarters of the World, according to diverse predictions of Pro∣phets ratified and renewed by
 Christ 
and his Apostles; but that the knowledge of
 Christ 
hath been never as yet fully discovered to these
 Western Nations 
is clearly demonstrated, se∣ing till the time that the first Planters went over from
 England, 
not many years since, no Historie for
 500. 
years before
 Christ, 
ever mentioned any such Inhabitants upon earth; much less l
ft any record of passage to them or com∣merce with them; so that unless we should conceive a miraculous worth of conceiving know∣ledge without means, it cannot be imagined,

 how these Nations should have once heard of the
 Name of CHRIST?


But further▪ what shall we think of that almost miraculous opening the passage unto, and discovery of these formerly
 unknown Nations, 
which must needs have proven impossible to
 former Ages, for want of the Knowledge of the use of the Load-stone, 
as wounderfully found out as these
 unknown Countreys 
by it. It were little less then im∣piety to conceive,
 that GOD, whose Will concurrs with the lighting of a Sparrow upon the ground, 
had no designe in di∣recting one of the most
 difficult and observ∣able works of this Age, 
and as great folly to imagine,
 that He who made all things, 
and consequently,
 Orders and Directs them to his own Glory, had no other scope, but the satisfying of Mens greedy appe∣tites, who thirsted after the riches of that new World; 
And to tender to the bloody and cruel
 Spainard 
the objects of such
 barba∣rous cruelties, 
as the World never heard of. We have then ground to conceive,
 that GOD in that great Discovery, 
aimed at this,
 that after he had punished the Atheism and Idolatry of these Heathens, and brutish Nations by the Conquerours

 cruelty; 
and acquainted them by
 mixture 
with some other
 peoples civility, he 
might at length
 cause the Glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST shine out to them as it did to other Nations, after the sharp times of the bitter dissolations thereof be∣twixt the 
Romans
 and them. 
That this
 Nation 
is able and fit to send out
 Collonies 
unto
 forraign parts 
will evidently appear to any who considers our overflowing multituds, this being admitted for a received principle, that
 Countries superabound in people, when they have mo then they can well imploy, 
seeing we know men are not ordain∣ed to
 live only, 
but withall and specially to
 serve one another, 
throw love in some pro∣fitable and useful calling; and tho it be grant∣ed,
 that this Land by GODS ordinary blessing yeelds sufficiencie of Corn and Cattle, for moe then the present inhabi∣tants; 
yet that we have moe people, then we do or can profitably imploy, will appear to any man of understanding, willing to acknowledge the truth, and to consider that many among us live
 without imployment 
either wholly or in the greatest part.




We have as much
 opportunity 
as any
 Nation 
to transport our
 men, 
and
 necessar provisi
ns 
b
 Sea unto these
 countries, 
with∣o
t which advantage they cannot be peopled fro
 
a
 part of the World; from this
 Chri∣stian part 
at least, and how useful a
 Nigh∣bour the Sea is to the furthering such a work, 
th
 xample of the
 Graecians 
and
 Phenicians, 
who filled all the bordering coasts with
 
ol
o
es, 
doe sufficiently prove unto all the wo
ld 
ither is it to be doubted, but the
 first 
, 
wanting this conveniencie, as
 Abraham 
n his removing to Charan first, 
 to
 Canaan afterwards; 
must needs h
ve
 sp
 much time, 
and indured much trouble in 
ssing their companies and provisions by land, 
ver Rivers, and throw Woods, and Thick t
 h unbeaten paths.


I k
ow it will be asked,
 what call or war∣rand a m
n hath to remove, when he is w
ll where he is? Or, what warrand particular men have to engadge their Persons, and Estates, in this imployment of planting Collonies.


As for he first of these, we find we may remove for the gaining of knowledge, our
 Saviour commends it in the Queen of the South, that she came from the

 uttermost ends of the Earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, Matth. 12.24. 
And surely with him she might have continued for the same end, if her Personal Calling had not recalled her home. We find it also allowable to remove, and travel for
 Merchandise, 
and
 Gain-sake; Daily Bread may be sought from a farr, Prov. 31.14: 
Yea, our
 Savi∣our approveth travel for Merchants, Matth. 13.45. 
when He compareth a
 Chri∣stian to a Merchant man seeking Pearls; 
for he never fetcheth a Comparison from any unlawful thing, to illustrate a thing Lawful; the comparison from the
 unjust Steward, 
and from the
 Thief in the night, 
not being taken from the
 unjustice of the one, 
or the
 Theft of the other, 
but from the
 Wisdom of the one, 
and the
 suddenness of the other, 
which in themselves are not unlawful.


We find from
 Scripture, 
its lawful to
 re∣move to plant a Collonie, 
that is,
 a Com∣pany agreeing together to remove out of their own Countrey, and settle a City or Common Wealth elsewhere; 
of such a Collony (as is already mentioned) we read in
 Acts 16.12. which GOD blessed and prospered exceedingly, and made of it a glorious Church. 
Nature teacheth
 Bees 
to

 do so, when as the Hyve is too full, they seek abroad for new dwellings; so when the Hyve of a Kingdom is so full, that
 Tradesmen 
cannot live one by another, but eat up one an∣other, in this case its lawful to remove.


But further, GOD alloweth a Man to re∣move, when he may imploy his
 Talents 
and
 Gifts 
better elsewhere, especially when he is not
 bound by any particular ingadge∣ment to the place where he is; 
thus GOD sent
 Joseph before to preserve the Church, Josephs 
Wisdom and Spirit was not fit for a
 Shepherd, 
but for a
 Counsellour of State, 
and therefore GOD sent him to
 Egypt.


Where people find themselves straitned in point of their opinion, no reasonable man will question their call to go, whereby Law they are allowed that Freedom, in this point which they themselves would desire; this is one great incouragement to any so circumstantial, to re∣move to any of the new Plantations; the in∣terest of which oblidgeth to lay this as a fun∣damentall, that no man shall be any way im∣posed upon in matters of principls, but have their own freedom without the least hazard.


It will certainly be allowed by all that in the present circumstances of the
 Protestants 
in


 France, 
where the free exercise of their
 Reli∣gion 
is denyed to them, it is very allowable for them to remove where without hazard they may live in the free exercise of their own prin∣ciples, being upon that accompt obnoxious to no hazard as guilty of the breach of the Law.


I believe some may object,
 that no man undertakes this task without an extraor∣dinary warrand, such as 
Abraham
 had from GOD, to call him out of Mesopo∣tamia to Canaan; 
their opinion appears to be founded upon this argument, that the
 plan∣ting of Collonies is an extraordinary work; and therefore these who under∣take it, must have an extraordinary call. 
In answer to this, I think it cannot be granted, that the planting of Collonies is an extraordina∣ry work this argument lying strongly against it.


That duty which is commanded by a perpetual law, cannot be accomp∣ted extraordinary.


But the sending out of Collonies is com∣manded by a perpetual Law.


Therefore it is no extraordinary duty.


Now that the
 commandment is perpe∣tual,

 
hath been proved, first, because it was
 given to Mankind. 2. 
Because it hath a
 ground 
which is
 perpetual, 
to wit,
 the emptiness of the earth, 
which either is so, or may be so, while the World endures, for even these places which are full, may be emp∣tied by
 Wars, 
or
 sickness, 
and then an argu∣ment passeth as strongly the contrary way, the undertaking of an
 ordinar duty 
needs no o∣ther then an
 ordinary warrant, 
but such is planting of a Collonie as being undertaken by Vertue of a
 perpetual Law, 
therefore the undertaking to
 plant a collonie 
needs no ex∣traordinary warrant.


I must grant
 Abrahams 
undertaking was in many things extraordinar, and therefore need∣ed an
 immediat direction from GOD, 
he was to go alone with his Family and Brethren, to such a certain place far distant, possest already by the
 Canaanits 
who were to be expelled, that land was to be wholly appropriat to him∣self and his Issue, he was not to plant it at present, but only to Sojourn in it, and walk thorow it
 for a time; 
Now none of these circumstances fit our ordinary collonies; & conse∣quently
 Abrahams 
example is nothing to this

 purpose, because the case is different, tho in some other things alike.


It may be further objected,
 that tho Men may adventure upon the Work, upon an ordinary Warrant, yet none can give that but the State; therefore it may be judged that a Command from the 
High∣est Authority
 unto such as ingadge them∣selves in this Affair is necessary; That the State hath power over all her Mem∣bers to command and dispose of them within the bounds of Justice; 
is more evi∣dent then can be denyed; but this power is di∣versly executed, sometimes by
 Command, 
sometimes by
 Permission, 
as in preparations to Warr; sometimes Men are compelled to serve, sometimes they are permitted to go Volunteers; sometimes the
 Supream Power 
takes care of the whole business; sometimes as in
 Musters 
commits it to
 Delegats. 
If the
 Govern∣ment 
then proclaim
 Liberty 
to such as will go about such a design, and
 commit the care to themselves, to associat whom they think fit. 
It cannot be denyed, but the State hath given a
 sufficient Warrand, 
as will ap∣pear by your perusal of the
 Advertisement 
published thereanent, adjoyned to the close here∣of.




Neither does it appear that any State did more; the
 Romans 
use was to proclaim,
 That they intended to plant a Collonie of such a number in such a place, and as many as would give in their names, should receive so many Acres of ground, and enjoy such other priviledges as they thought fit to grant them; 
which they then expressed, these who gave in their names were enrolled till the number was full: and then they had certain Commissioners appointed; to see all things ordered accordingly, and every Man put in possession of his Inheritance; Nei∣ther did the State interpose their Authority, in assigning and choising out the Men, but left it free and voluntar to every Man to take or leave, seing nothing can bear out the Hazards and inconveniencies of such undertakings,
 but a willing mind; 
Men can disjeast any thing which themselves do choice or desire, but a Commandment makes a pleasant thing harsh; how much more harsh things intollerable!


By what is above written, I apprehend you will find it sufficiently cleared, that the
 pro∣secuting this Design is warranted from the Word of GOD; 
it remains for your further satisfaction, as to the reasonableness thereof, to be made no less apparent, that the


 effectual carrying on thereof will contri∣bute to the advantage of the Nation in general, and to the honour and particu∣lar interest of these who are active Un∣dertakers 
herein; 
and I am much in a mis∣take, if I make not that appear as clearly as the other, but before
 I 
begin to condescend upon particulars, I judge you will not find it im∣proper in the first place, to offer to your consi∣deration, a general Survey of the present cir∣eumstances of the Nation, whe
eb
 you will the more easily be satisfied of some particulars properly to be noticed, for your more clear con∣viction of the truth of this assertion.


Tho there be some particular parcels of
 Our Countrey 
here and there to be found, which both for the
 nature of the Soil, 
and other pleasant and agreeable accommodations are in themselves sufficiently desirable, yet where I have the general prospect thereof in my view, I find my self oblidged to acknowledge, it is not among the most
 fertile places of the world, 
to say no worse, but tho we cannot com∣pate with
 Our Neighbour Nation, 
as to the fertility of the Soil in general, or the flou∣rishing of trade; in some things it will be ac∣knowledged we are comparativly nothing infe∣riour to them, this kingdom hath plenty of Inha∣bitants,

 whereof yearly it may
 cast a Fleece, 
without the least prejudice of the
 general in∣terest of the Nation, 
as actually it hath done since the year
 1618. 
that the warrs be∣gan in
 Germany; 
it is suffici
ntly known what
 multitudes of People have gone hence yearly since that time, 
the truth of this well appear to these who consider, that in the
 Swedish Army 
at one time there were
 27. Scottish Collonies 
and that
 Douglas Re∣gim
nt in France 
hath since His
 Majesties Restauration, taken hence upwards of thirty thousand men, besides what num∣ber have during all that time gone to 
Flanders,
 and 
Holland,
 where there have been three Regiments of 
Scots Men,
 of standing Forces constantly till this day kept in pay; and are at present yet standing; 
whereby is occasioned the transport of a considerable number of men yearly for their recruits.


Sir, you may easily consider, what an interest
 Scotland 
might have had in
 Ameri∣ca, 
had all these who have gone from their na∣tive Countrey in queast of Honor and Fortunes, to these places, steered their course to this Airth; there is hardly any noble family in
 Scot∣land, 
or Gentlemen of any note, but ere this time

 should have had some interest in
 America; 
If these had all settled in one place, it should have been a very considerable Collony ere this time;
 Women also of our own Nation would not have been wanting to these Men, 
by which the foundation of a very flow∣rishing Collonie should have been laid; You know as well as I, that
 Our Countrey Peo∣ple want not their Sagacity in Countrey Affairs, they know abundantly well how to manage their own Business, ac∣cording to their Capacities, they are pain∣ful and laborious, inured to hardship; 
these who know how to make a Lively-hood in this Countrey, will certainly know much better how to live in a more Fertile Soil, where their Pains and Industry would be more
 plentifuly rewarded, 
than can be expected from the
 na∣tural barrenness of our Native Soyl, 
when compared with the Fertility of these pla∣ces in
 America.


It is on the other hand sufficiently known to all, who are in the least acquainted with
 Our Scottish Histories, 
That,
 Our Gentry who have ordinarly the advantage of Educa∣tion, whereof our Commonality are de∣prived, are in nothing inferior to any Gentry in Europe; 
by this I mean not only


 Our Nobility 
and
 Gentry, 
and the
 Eldest Sons, 
their Representatives, but the
 younger of both, 
to whom it is observed;
 Nature 
gives no less
 Vivacity of Spirit than to the Elder, (if not more.) 
Though by Our Law they are deprived of being
 proportionably sharers in their Fortune; 
Whence it is, that these of them who have any Spirit, sensible of this disadvantage,
 choice rather to go a∣broad upon their own Purchase, than to be oblidged to a slavish dependance upon the elder Brother for a Livly-hood, 
which by the custom of the Countrey, these of no Spirit are frequently ingadged to, how insig∣nificant so ever he may be.


I desire to know,
 if a more easie or ho∣nourable way could be proposed? 
Or a
 more probable mean to expect a comfor∣table Livly-hood, than with what small Fortune will be allowed by their Parents, (from the elder Brothers Estate) to be setled in such a place of 
America,
 as shall be judged a proper seat for these who go upon such a Design from this Nation? 
Their Parents can alwayes with ease provide them with a convenient number of the Common∣ality, as Servants who in this Countrey can never be wanting to Gentlemen. Our Common

 People will quickly come to understand their
 particular interest in this affair, 
se
ing af∣ter their
 four years service, they may ra∣tionaly propose to live more plentifully & more at ease▪ after a very l
ttle mode∣rat pains and labour, then they can do at home, when they have spent their whole time, aft
r the ordinary m
thod of this countrey, according to their ac∣custome
 slavish toyl they are used to.


I am ready upon very good ground to be∣lieve that within a few years, the elder bro∣thers left at home intan
led in the ordinary debts of the Family; and so in a mann
r
 what by that, and what by the other publick burthens, 
ingadged in a most
 slavish life, when he is every morning in the reve∣rence of hie Creditors; 
will quickly come to envy the happiness of the 
unger brothers in
 America, 
when th
y come to be informed 
n what plenty they live, recreating themselves with no less pleasant, then
 harmless diver∣tisements that Coun
rey in great plenty affoords, and divertising primative re∣creations, where every one shall have 
such a competent suff
cien
 or 
mself, as h
 shall not have the least occasion of
 envying his Neighbor upon accompt of his or 
ne;

 each having for himself what in reason can be judged a comfortable accom∣modation.


But however, weighty this consideration may be, I leave the
 further prosecuting 
thereof to offer to your
 serious thoughts, 
a point of no less moment, as being in my weak judgment more
 ma
erial, 
and of greater
 weight 
in thir times, then the other,
 are not the distracti∣ons of this Kingdom, anent matters of Opinion, in reference to Church Govern∣ment, come to that hight that the sad and fatal consequences thereof, are a∣stonishing to all sober persons; many who upon some scruple, cannot comply with the present Model of Government, are yet confounded and ashamed, to consider the unwarrantable practises of some, who give themselves out, as own∣ing their principles, while their inhu∣man and barbarous practises are a scan∣dal not only to the Protestant Religion, but inconsistant with Christianity. Yea, 
Humanity
 it self! what the fur∣ther result of these differences shall be, I will not take upon me to determine,

 
onely the consequencies are like to be not a little prejudicial to the
 Protestant Religion; 
each of the Parties endeavour to blame the other, without any design of Accommodation, or yeeld∣ing one to another. There is nothing impossible to the
 Omnipotent Power; 
But a
 recon∣siliation of the differences among our Church-men appears improbable in the highest degree; 
So fixed both Parties do seem to be in their
 own Principles. 
If
 Mackquare 
and
 Broun 
vent publicklie the
 justification of their Tenets, for the fur∣ther incouragem
nt of their own Party, in opposition to the other.


The Bishop of
 St. Asaph 
will not be behind with them, seeing rather as not to have the occasion of reaching them a blow, he choiceth
 affrontedly in the face of the World, to cut off from his Native Prince, Fourty of his Royal Ancestors. 
I desire not to re∣flect upon any of his Lo: Character, but I may be allowed without giving offence, to say,
 what∣ever demonstration his Lo: hath given in that piece, of reading, he hath evidenced smal sence of his gratitude to so bountiful a Prince, to whom he owed so much, to have so treated him; as his malice a∣gainst our Nation, is thereby made suf∣ficiently

 apparent, so you now see his gross ignorance in that particular laid o∣pen to the world, 
by a very
 ingenious Pen, (
Sir
 G. M
c
K.) 
which probably may have that effect upon his
 Lo. 
as to oblidge him for the future to treat in matters wherein he is more versant, and which are more becoming a
 Gown∣man, 
then so publickly to endeavour to affront a
 Nation, by injuring their King, and his own.


But to return from this digression, you see so it is now judged the interest of the
 Govern∣ment 
altogether to suppress the
 Presbiterian Principles; 
and that in order thereto, the whole force and bensill of the
 Law 
of this King∣dom, are levelled at the effectual
 bearing them down, 
that the rigorous putting these
 Laws 
in execution, hath in a great part ruined ma∣ny of these, who notwithstanding thereof find themselves in conscience oblidged to retain these principles; while in the other hand
 Episcopacy 
is by the same Laws supported, and protected; I would gladly know what other
 rational medium 
can be proposed in thir circumstances then either to comply with the
 Government, 
by going what length is required by Law, in conforming, or to retear; where by Law a
 To∣leration 
is by His
 Majestie 
allowed; such a

 retreat doth at present offer it self in
 America; 
and is no where else to be found in His
 Ma∣jesties Dominions. 
I would be informed if such as cannot comply with the
 present Laws 
would not act more rationally, to bestow what is yet left them in making an interest in that place, transporting themselves thither where they are by Law allowed,
 the free exercise of their principles, 
beside what other accommodations they may upon just grounds pro∣pose to themselves, rather then by still living where they are resolved not to comply with the
 Government, 
expose themselves wholly to ruine, which appears absolutely inevitable, otherwayes then by a full compliance, with the Laws, whereby may be obviated the penalty; such will otherwayes be lyable to the exacting, whereof will certainly tend to their ruine in the close.


And to conuclude you will find no smal ground of further incouragement to such as are resolved effectually to bestirr themselves in carrying on this
 design, 
from the consideration of the great success of the only undertaking of this Nature this Kingdom was ever concerned in, whereby 
s made clearly evident that we want not peo∣ple for managing such
 design, 
it was but a∣bout the latter end of
 King James the sixth,

 
his dayes, that we began to be concerned in sending some people to
 Ireland, 
and yet the small beginning that design had, from the un∣dertaking of a very few
 Gentlemen, 
hath come this length that I am informed by
 Credi∣table Authors, that Kingdom this day could bring to the fields an hundred thou∣sand of our countrey men; 
Yea, I had an accompt thence lately from an
 acquaintance 
of mine, who was serious in advancing this de∣sign, That the
 Province of Ulster, where most of our Nation are seated, could spare Fourty thousand Men and Wo∣men, to an 
America
 Plantation, and be sufficiently Peopled it self. 
The Gentle∣man who gave me this Information, is since setled in
 Mary-land, 
the accompt he sends of that Countrey is so encouraging, that I hear a great many of his Acquaintances are making for that Voyage; one thing is considerable in this to be observed,
 That the difficulties of such an undertaking were far more ter∣rifying at that time, then now to our Countrey Men, seing a Voyage from the 
West of Scotland
 to 
Ireland,
 not 16. hours sailing, was then more formidable gene∣rally to People, who otherwise would have undertaken willingly the Voyage,

 then now from 
Lieth
 to 
America,
 whe∣ther several Ships have gone without the least discouraging accident.


But now to come to the Answer of your most ma∣terial Question, to wit,
 What I judge the 
most
 proper place in 
America,
 for a seat to these who would resolve to go hence upon such a Design 
For your satisfaction in this, I shall very freely, tell you my own Opinion, that hav∣ing for some time made it my work to consider all the
 Coast 
of
 America, 
from the River of
 Canada, Northerly, 
to the River of
 May, Southerly, 
in that part of
 Flonda 
now cal∣led
 Caralina; 
having in my search had the opportunity of informing my self of the different nature of the Soils, the temperature of the Climats, the healthfulness of the places, the Constitutions of the several Governments, the conveniences of Access, the advice given to
 Phaeton, 
appears very apposite,
 medio tutis∣simus ibis, 
and so
 East-Jersey, 
upon the Ri∣ver of
 Hudson, 
is the place I find my self ob∣lidge to preferr to any other of the
 English 
Plantations upon that coast, upon some or other if not most of the above named considera∣tions.


That you may be convinced of the truth of this, I here send you what discription I have

 of that place, as it is narrated in a Treatise thereanent, emitted lately by the
 Scots Pro∣prieters; 
I send you also the doubles of several letters from thence all agreeing in one, to the advantage of that place, confirming all spoken in the said Treatise, after your perusal of what does follow, you will see whether I have ground or not to make this choise.


It is time now to show how some of our Countrey-men, in order to so advantagious a Project, have already purchased an considerable Interest in a Plantation, which is justly e∣steemed not Inferiour, if not beyond any place, upon the whole continent of
 America, 
belong∣ing to the
 English 
Dominions, called
 East-New-Jersey. 
The deduction of the right of it is thus;


The KING by Patent to the Duke of
 York 
granted a great tract of Land lying betwixt
 Virginia 
and
 New-England, 
It was for∣merly in the hand of the
 Dutch, 
and conside∣rably improved by them, and called
 New-Ne∣therlands, 
And by treaty after the first
 Dutch 
Wars, Surrendered to the King that part of it, lying betwixt
 Delaware 
and
 Hudsons River, 
called
 New-Cesaria, 
or
 New-Jer∣sey; 
which is betwixt the
 39. 
and
 41. 
De∣gree of
 Northern Latitude: 
was by the


 Duke 
of
 York, 
granted to
 John Lord Barkley, 
and Sir
 George Cartwright. 
That part, which belonged to the Lord
 Barkley, 
being assigned to
 Edward Billings. 
Afterwards by a deed of Partition betwixt the said
 Edward Billings 
and Sir
 George Cartwright, 
The West Part lying upon
 Delaware River, 
was allotted to
 Edward Billings 
for his share; and the
 East 
part lying upon
 Hudsons 
River, nearest to the Province of
 New York, 
was ap∣pointed to Sir
 George Cartwright 
for his share. Which part, now called
 East-New-Jersey, 
is from Sir
 George Cartwright 
con∣veyed to twelve Persons in and about
 London, 
who have since conveyed an half to other twelve, so that as well the Right of Government as the Soyl, standeth now in
 24. 
Proprietors, in favours of some of whom the
 Duke of York 
has been latey pleased to make a new
 Grant of Confirmation, 
both of Soyl and Government to the twenty four
 Proprietors, 
with the same Power and Priviledges, he has in his Patent from the King, which are as large as any other Plantation hath, for the Words of the
 Dukes 
Patent are as followeth;










The Patent from the King, to 
James
 Duke of York, 
&c.


CHARLES
 the Second, by the 
Grace of GOD,
 King of 
Scotland, England, France
 and 
Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
 &c. To all Men to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting, Know ye that WE, for diverse good causes and considerations, Us hereunto moving, have of Our special Grace, certain Know∣ledge, and meer Motion, Given and Granted, and by these presents for Us▪ Our Heirs, and Successors, Do give and grant unto 
Our dearest Brother JAMES Duke of York,
 his Heirs and Assignes, All that part of the 
Maine-Land of New-Eng∣land,
 beginning at a certain place, called or known by the name 
Saint Croix,
 next adjoyning to 
New-Scotland
 in 
America,
 and from thence extending along the Coast, unto a certain place called 
Pamaquin,
 or 
Pemaquid,
 and so up the River thereof, the farthest Head of the same as it tend∣eth 
Northward,
 and extendeth from the River 
Kenbequin,
 and so upwards by the shortest course, to the River of 
Canada

 Northward;
 and all that Island or Islands commonly called by the several name or names of 
Mattawax,
 or 
Long-Island,
 scitu∣ate and being towards the 
West of Cape-cod,
 and the narrow 
Heggansets,
 abutting up∣on the main Land between the two Ri∣vers, there called or known by the se∣veral names of 
Conectecute
 and 
Hudsons
 River, together also with the said River called 
Hudsons
 River, and all the Land from the 
West-side of Conectecute
 River to the 
East-side of Delaware Bay;
 And also all those several 
Islands
 called or known by the name of 
Martins-Vineyard,
 and 
Hantucks,
 alias 
Hantuckett,
 together with all the 
Lands, Islands, Soyls, Rivers, Har∣bours, Mines, Mineralls, Quarries, Woods, Marshes, Waters, Lakes, Fishing, Haukings, Huntings,
 and 
Foulings,
 and all other 
Roy∣allities, Profits, Commodities, and Heredi∣taments
 to the said several Islands, Lands and Premisses belonging and appertain∣ing, with their and every of their 
Ap∣purtenances,
 and all 
Our Estate, Right, Title, and Interest, Benefit and Advantage, Claime and Demand
 of, in or to the said Islands or Premisses, or any part or parcel there∣of, and the Reversion and Reversions,

 Remainder and Remainders together with the Yearly and other Rents, Re∣venues and Profits of the Premisses, and every Part and Parcel thereof; To have and to Hold all and singular the Lands and Premisses, with their, and every of their 
Appurtenances
 thereby given and granted, or herein before mentioned to be given or granted, unto Our said 
Dear∣est Brother, James Duke of York,
 his Heirs and Assignies for ever. To be Holden of Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, as of 
Our Manner of East-Greenwich
 in the Coun∣ty of 
Kent,
 in free and common 
Soccage,
 and not in 
Capite,
 or by Knights Service, Yeeld and Rendering. And the same 
James Duke of York;
 for himself, his Heirs and Assignes, DOTH Covenant and Promise to yeild and render unto US, Our Heirs, and Successors, of, and for the same yearly, and every year, Fourty 
Beaver skins,
 when the same shall be de∣manded, or within ninety dayes after such Demand made. And WE do fur∣ther of Our special Grace, certain Know∣ledge and meer Motion, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, give and grant unto Our said 
Dearest Brother, James Duke

 of York,
 his Heirs, Deputes, Agents, Commissioners and Assignies, by these Presents full and absolute Power and Authority, to Correct, Punish, Pardon, Govern and Rule all such Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successours, or any other Person or Persons, as shall for time to time adventure themselves into any the Parts or Places aforesaid; Or that shall or do at any time hereafter inhabit within the same, according to such 
Laws, Orders, Ordinances, Directions,
 and 
Instructi∣ons,
 as by Our said 
Dearest Brother,
 or his 
Assignes
 shall be 
Established,
 and in defect thereof in cases of necessity according to the 
good Directions
 of his 
Deputie Commissio∣ners, Officers
 or 
Assignes
 respectively, as well in cases and matters 
Capital,
 and 
Criminal,
 as 
Civil,
 and others; so alwayes as the said 
Statutes, Ordinances
 and 
Proceedings
 be not contrary to, but as near as may be agreeable to the 
Laws, Statutes,
 and 
Government
 of this Our 
Realm
 of 
England; AND Saving
 and 
Reserving
 to 
Ʋs, Our Heirs,
 and 
Successors,
 the 
Receiving, Hear∣ing,
 and 
Determining
 the Apeale, and A∣peales of any Person or Persons, of, in, or belonging to the Territories or Islands

 aforesaid, or touching any Judgement or Sentence to be there made, or given: And further, that it shall and may be Lawful to and for our said Dearest Bro∣ther, His Heirs, and Assignes, by these Presents, from time to time, to No∣minate, Make, Constitute, Ordain, and Confirm such Laws, as aforesaid, by such Name, 
or
 Names, Stile 
or
 Stiles, 
as to him or them shall seem good: And like∣wise to
 Revoke, Discharge, Change, 
and
 Alter, 
as well all and
 singular Gover∣nours, Officers, 
and
 Ministers, 
which here∣after shall be by him or them thought fit, and needful to be in, or used within the aforesaid
 Islands and Parts: And also to 
Make, Ordain,
 and 
Establish all manner of
 Laws, Orders, Directions, Instru∣ctions, Formes, 
and
 Ceremonies of Go∣vernment 
and
 Magistracy 
fit and necessar for, and
 concerning 
the
 Government 
of
 Territories 
and
 Islands 
aforesaid. So al∣wayes as the same be not contrary to the
 Laws 
and
 Statutes 
of this
 Our Realm 
of
 Eng∣land, 
but as near as may be conformable there∣unto, and the same at all times.
 hereafter to put in Execution 
or
 Abrogate, Revoke, 
or
 Change, 
not only within the
 Precincts 
of

 the said
 Territories 
or
 Islands, 
but also upon the
 Seas in going and coming 
to and from the same, as he or they in their
 good Discretion 
shall think fittest for the good of the
 Adventurers 
and
 Inhabitants. AND We do further 
of Our special
 Grace, 
cer∣tain
 Knowledge, 
and meer
 Motion, Grant, Ordain, 
and
 Declare, 
that all such
 Gover∣nours Deputes, Officers, and Ministers, as from time, to time, shall be Authoriz∣ed, and appointed in manner and form aforesaid, shal and may have full power, and Authority within the Territories a∣foresaid, to use 
&
 exercise 
Martial Law,
 in cases of Rebellion, Insurrections, 
&
 Muti∣ny, inas large and ample a manner as our Leiutenents in our Countries within Our Realm of 
England,
 have or ought to have, by force of their Commissions of Leiute∣nency, or any Law, or Statute, of this our Realm. And We do further, by these presents for us our Heirs and Suc∣cessours, grant unto Our 
Dearest Brother James Duke of York,
 his Heirs and Assig∣nes, that it shall and may be Lawful to and for the said 
James Duke of York,
 his Heirs and Assignes, in his or their Discretions, from time to time, to ad∣mit

 such & so many person or persons, to Trade & Traffique into 
&
 within the Ter∣ritories and Islands aforesaid, to every and any part & parcel thereof, & to have, pos∣sess, and enjoy any Lands, and 
Heredita∣ments
 in the part and places aforesaid, as they shall think fit according to the Laws, 
Orders, Constitutions, and Ordinances,
 by our said 
Brother,
 his 
Heirs Deputies, Commissi∣oners
 and 
Assignes,
 from time to time, to be made and established, by vertue of, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, and under such 
Conditions, Reservations,
 and 
Agreements,
 as our said 
Dearest Brother,
 his Heirs and Assignes, shall set down, Order, Direct, and appoint; and not otherwise, as afore∣said. And We do further, of Our spe∣cial Grace, certain Knowledge, and meer motion, for US, Our Heirs, and Succes∣sors, Give and Grant, unto Our said 
Dearest Brother,
 his Heirs and Assignes, by these presents, that it shall and may be Lawful to, and for him, them, or any of them, at all and every time or times hereafter, out of any of our Realms, or Dominions whatsoever, take, load, carry, and transport, in, and unto their Voyages,

 for and towards the Plantations, of our Territories and Islands aforesaid, all such and so many of our loving Subjects, or any other Strangers, being not prohibi∣ted or under restraint, that will become our loving Subjects, and live under our Allegiance, and shall willingly accom∣pany them in the said Voyages, together with all such Cloathing, Implements, Furniture, or any other things usually Transported, and not Prohibited, as shall be necessary for the Inhabitants of the said Islands, and Territories, and for the use and defence thereof, and Mannaging, and carrying on the Trade, with the people there. Yeelding and pay∣ing unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, the Customes and Duties thereof, due and payable, according to Laws and Customes of this our Realm. And we do also for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto our said Dearest Brother JAMEs Duke of York, his Heirs and Assignes, and to all and every such Go∣vernour or Governours, or Deputies, their Officers, or Ministers, as by ou
 said Brother, his Heirs or Assignes shall be appointed, to have Power and Autho∣rity

 of Government, and Command in, and over the Inhabitants of the said Territories, and Islands, that they and every of them, shall, and may lawfully, from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter For their several Defence and safty, Encounter, Repulse, Expel, and Resist, by force of Armes, as well by Sea, as by Land, and all wayes and means whatsoever, all such person and persons, as without the special Licence of our Dearest Brother, his Heirs and Assignes, shall attempt to In∣habit within the several Precincts, and Limits, of our said Territories and Isl∣ands; and also all, and every such per∣son, and Persons whatsoever, as shall Enterprize, and Attempt, at any time hereafter, the Distruction, Invasion, Detriment, or Annoyance, to the parts, places, or Islands aforesaid, or any parts thereof. And Lastly, our will and pleasure is, And We do hereby de∣clare, and grant, that these out Letters Patents, or the Inrollment thereof, shall be good and effectual, in the Law, to all intents, and purposes whatsoever, notwithstanding the not well, and true

 Receiting, or mentioning of the premis∣ses, or any part thereof, or the Limits, or Bounds thereof: or of any form, or other Letters Patents, or Grants what∣soever made, or Granted of the premis∣ses, or of any part thereof, or the Limits or bounds thereof, or of any former, or other Letters Patents, or Grants, whatso∣ever made, or Granted, of the Premis∣ses, or of any part thereof, by US, or any of Our 
Progenitors,
 unto any 
Person,
 or 
Persons,
 whatsoever bodies, 
Politique,
 or 
Corporate,
 any other 
Law
 or other 
restraint, in certainty, or imperfection,
 whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding, Al∣though, express mention of the true year∣ly Value, or certainty of the Premisses, or any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants by Us, or by any of our Proge∣nitors heretofore made to the said 
James Duke of York,
 in these presents is not made or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provi∣sion, Proclamation, or Restriction here∣tofore had, made, enacted, or provided, or any other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever to the contrary, in any wise notwithstading: 
In witness whereof,
 We caused these Letters, to be made Patent,

 Witness our self, at 
Westminster,
 the 29. day of 
June,
 in the 16. Year of Our Reign.


The SCOTS Proprietors are the Earl of
 Perth, 
Lord High Chancellour of
 SCOT∣LAND, 
his Brother, the Viscount of
 Met∣foord, 
Secretar of State for this Kingdom, and the Viscount of
 Tarbit, 
Lord Register,
 Five hundred thousand Acres, 
being seven parts of the
 24. 
belongs to these three, and some other Gentlemen.


This Province or Collony lyes betwixt
 39. 
and
 41. 
Degrees of Latitude, being about
 12. 
Degrees more to the
 South, 
then the
 City of London. 
It is in the same Climate with the Kingdom of
 Naples, 
and
 Montpelier 
in
 France. 
The Summer is hotter, and longer then in
 England, 
and the Winter colder and shorter, the dayes about an hour longer in Win∣ter, and as much shorter in Summer. Is bounded
 South-East 
with the Maine Sea,
 East 
by that vast Navigable Stream, called
 Hud∣sons 
River, which divides this from the Pro∣vince of
 New-York, West 
by a Line of Division, which separates this Province from
 West-Jersey, 
and
 North 
upon the Maine-Land. And extends it self in length upon the Sea-coast and alongst
 Hudsons River, 
one

 hundred
 English 
myles and upward.


The scituation of this Countrey is just, as it were, in the Center of the
 English plantati∣ons 
in
 America, 
betwixt the South parts of
 Carolina, 
which is over hot; and the North parts of
 Pemaquitte, 
next
 New Scot∣land 
which are coldest; so that its convenien∣cie of scituation, temperature of the Aire, and fertility of the Soyl is such, that there is no less then seven Towns considerable already,
 (viz.) Shretsburry, Midletonn, Berg∣hen, New-wark, Elizabeth-town, Woobridge, 
and
 Piscataway, 
which are well inhabited by a sober and industruous peo∣ple, who have necessary provisions for them∣selves and families, and for the comfortable entertainment of Travellers and Strangers.


And the Quit-rents, or Fewes (as they are called) of these Towns and other plantations, already in the Countrey, yeelds to the
 24 
Pro∣prietors above
 500. lib. sterling, 
yearly Re∣venue, and the Air of this Collony, is experi∣mentallie found generally to agree well with
 English 
Constitutions, and consequently with Ours.


For Navigation it hath these advantages, not onely to be scituate along the Navigable

 parts of
 Hudsons River, 
but lyes also fiftie myles along the Main Sea, and near the midest of this Province is that notted Bay for ships within
 Sandy-Hook, 
very well known, not to be inferiour to any Harbour in
 Ameri∣ca, 
where ships not only harbour in greatest storms, but there Ride safe with all Winds, and sail in and out thence as well in
 Winter 
as
 Summer. 
For Fishery the Sea-banks are very well stored with variety of Fishes, not only such as are profitable for Exportation, but such as are fit for Food there; There are
 Whales, Coad-fish, Colling, 
and
 Hake-fish, 
and large
 Mackeril, 
and also many other sorts of smal
 Flate-fish; 
The Bay, also, and
 Hudsons River, 
are plentifully stored with
 Sturgeon, 
and other
 Scal-fish, Eills, 
and
 Shel-fish, 
as
 Oysters, 
in abundance.


This Countrey is also plentifully, supplied with Lively-springs,
 Rivolets, Inland-Ri∣vers, 
and
 creeks, 
which fall into the Sea, and
 Hudsons-River, 
in which also there is varietie of Fresh-fish, and water Fowl.


There are little hills from
 Rariton-River, 
which is about the middle of this Province, that go to the verie
 North-West-bounds 
of

 it, in which are aboundance of good Mill-Stons to be had, and there is many, both
 Corn, 
and Saw-milnes set, and setting up already, also on the other side of these Mountains, there is brave fresh
 Rivolets, 
fit for setting of
 In-Land-Towns, 
and a great deal of Meadow-ground upon the banks thereof, So that there is abun∣dance of Hay to be had for Fodering of Cattle in the Winter time, and these Meadows shows the Countrey is not altogether covered with timber.


Its true, the first difficulty meets People in Planting there, is the cutting down Wood (Tho having some Meadow intermixt already well covered with Hay, is a great ease) yet the trouble is compensed by the advantage, which the timber being cut down, yeelds, being good Oake, fit for Shipping and Masts; and also Chesmite. Walnut, Poplar, Cdar, Ash, Fir; And also, by the fertility of the Soyl, being cleared, which yeelds a vast increase not only of
 Indean 
Corn, which is a very wholsome Food, but of
 English 
grain, as Wheat and Barley, where∣of it usually yeelds betwixt the
 20. 
and
 30th. 
fold, and with far less labour (the timber be∣ing once removed) then in
 Britan. 
And to show the labour of the cutting down the Trees, and clearing the ground, is not so great as

 some may Imagine; It is known by experience, that two men arriving there in
 September, 
or
 October, 
may clear as much ground, as usually brings by Harvest following twenty Quarters, that is ahout
 40. Scots Bolls 
of grain.


This Countrey also, produceth good Flax, and Hemp, which they now spine, and Manu∣facture into Linnen Cloath, & the very Barrens there (as they are called) are not like most in
 Britain, 
but produceth Grass fit for Graz∣ing Cattle in Summer time; There is also u∣pon Ground (already cleared) store of good
 English Claver Grass 
growing; the Countrey is well stored with wild Deir; Connies, and wild Fowl of several sorts; As Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges, Plevers, Quaills, wild Swans, and Geese, Ducks in great plenty; It produceth variety of good and delicious Fruits; as Grapes, Plumes, Mulberries, and also Appricocks, Peaches, Pears, Apples, Quin∣ches, Water Millons; which are in
 England 
planted in Orchards and Gardens; but grow there with fare less labour; and many more Fruits, which come not to perfection in
 Eng∣land, 
are the more natural product of this Countrey. It is thought Olives would grow well there; and being store of

 Mulberrie Trees, Silk-worms would do well there; for they were tryed in
 Virginia, 
and proved very well, if the laziness of the Peo∣ple, and there being wholly set upon Tobacco, and the Interest of Merchants, who were a∣fraid it might spoil their Silk-Trade from the
 Straits, 
had not hindered.


To shew how Fruit-Trees do advance in that Countrey, it is credibly reported, that about
 Burlingtoun, in West Jersey, 
which is
 Northernly 
then the greatest part of this Pro∣vince, from an Apple-tree-Seed in four years, (without grafting) there sprung a tree, that in the fourth year bore such a quaintitie of Apples, as yeelded a barrell of Syder.


There is there also, great store of Horses, Cowes, Hoggs, and some sheep, which may be bought at reasonable prices with
 English, 
money, or
 English 
Commodities, or mans labour; where goods and money are wanting.


For Minerals, It is thought there are not wanting of several sorts, For there is an Iron-work already set up, where there is good Iron made; And also, there is discovered al∣ready abundance of Black-Lead.




It is exceeding well furnished with safe, convenient Harbours, for shipping, which is of great advantage; and affords already for Exportation, great plenty of Horses, and also Beef, Pork, Pipstaves, Bread, Flow∣er, White, Barley, Rye,
 Indian 
Corn, But∣ter, and Cheese, which they export for
 Bar∣badoes, Jamaica, Mevis, 
and other adja∣cent
 Islands; 
As also to
 Portugal, Spain, 
and the
 Canaryes, 
their
 Whale Oyl, 
and
 Whale-Fins, Beaver, Mink, Racon, 
and
 Martine-skins 
(which this Countrey pro∣duces) they transport for
 England.


The
 Indian Natives 
in this Countrey are but few, comparative to the Neighbouring Collony; And these that are there, are so far from being Formidable, and injurious to the Plan∣ters and Inhabitants, that they are really serviceable and advantagious to them, not only in hunting, and taking the Deer, and all other wild Creatures, and catching of Fish, and Fowl fit for food, in their seasons; But in the killing and destroying of Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and other Vermine, whose Skins and Furs they bring the
 English, 
and sell them at less price, then the value of the time,

 that people must spend to take them. Like as, that this Collony may be founded in Justice, and without any thing of Oppression, as all that is already Planted; is is truly Purchased from the
 Indians, 
so there is a great deal more of the Province cleared by their consent; and all is intended by paction with them to be obtained; so that whoever Purchase; or Plant under the Proprietors; shal be fred of that incumbrance; and if there were any hazard from the
 Indians 
as really there is none; yet this Province could hardly be in any danger; In respect that to the
 North, 
upon the
 Main-Land; 
from whence the hazard; if any must come; the Province of
 New-York 
comes betwixt it and them, and
 20. miles 
and more, above upon
 Hudsons 
River, there is a Fort called
 New-Albany.


There were Constitutions of Government made by the Lord
 Barkley, 
and Sir
 George Cart∣wright, 
in which such provision was made, both for Liberty of Religion, and Propertie, that the Province hath been considerably Peopled and many resorted there from the Neighbour∣ing Collonies, so that the Planters are able al∣ready to Muster
 500. 
well Armed Men.








The Concessions and Agreement of the Lord Proprietors of the Province of 
New-Caesarea,
 or 
New-Jersey,
 to and with all and every the Adventurers, and as such as shall settle or plant, there granted by Lord 
John Barclay,
 and Sir 
George Cartwright
 the then Lord 
Proprietors
 upon their sending thir peo∣ple to Plant, 
Anno
 1664.


IMprimis,
 We do consent and agree, that the Governour of the said 
Province
 hath power by the advice of his 
Council
 to depute one in his place and Authority, in case of death, or removeall, to continue untill far∣ther order, unless we have Commissionated one before.


2. Item,
 That he hath (likewise) power to make choice of, and take to him 
six Coun∣sellors
 at least, or 
twelve
 at most, or any even number betwixt 
six
 and 
twelve;
 with whose consent and advice, or with at least 
three
 of the 
six,
 or 
four
 of a greater number, 
(all being summonded)
 he is to Govern ac∣cording to the 
Limitations
 and 
Instructions
 following, during 
Our Pleasure.


3. Item,
 That a 
Chief Secretary
 or 
Regi∣ster,
 which we have chosen or shall choice, 
we
 faillieing that; he shall choice, shall keep, exact entries in fair books of all publict affaires; and to avoyd 
Decreets
 and 
Law Suitts,
 shall 
re∣cord
 and 
enter
 all grants of Lands, from the 
Lords
 to the Planters, and Conveyances of Lands houses or from man to man, as also all 
Leases
 for Land house or hous
s made or to be made by the Land-Lord to any tennant, for more then one year, which Conveyance or Lease shall be first acknowledged by the Gran∣ter or Leaser, or proved by the each 
two wit∣nesses,
 to the Lease or Conveyance before the 
Governor,
 or some cheif Judge of a Court for the time being, who shall under his hand upon the back side of the said 
deed
 or 
Lease, attest the acknowledgement or Proof as aforesaid;
 which shal be a war∣rand for the 
Register
 to record the same, which 
conveyance
 or 
Lease
 so recorded shall be good and effectuall, in the 
Law,
 notwith∣standing any other 
conveyance, Deed
 or 
Lease,
 for the said Land, house or houses, or any part thereof, although dated before the 
Conveyance, Deed
 or 
Deed,
 or 
Lease
 so recorded as aforesaid. And the said 
Re∣gister,
 shall do all other thing or things, that

 we by 
our Instructions shall direct,
 and the 
Governor, Counsel,
 and 
assemblie
 shall ordaine for the 
good and wellfaire of the said Province.


4ly. 
Item,
 That the 
Suerveyour generall,
 that we have chosen or shall choice such fail∣lieing, that the 
Governour
 shall choice, shall have power by himself, or deputie to Survey 
Lay out
 and 
bound all such Lands,
 as shall be granted from the 
Lords
 to the 
Plan∣ters;
 and all other Lands within the said 
Province,
 which may concerne particular men as he shall be desired to doe. And a particular thereof certified to the 
Register
 to be recorded as aforesaid. Provided, that if the said 
Register
 and 
Surveyer,
 shall so 
mis-behave themselves as that the Go∣vernor and Counsellor, Deputie, Governour or Counsellor, the Major part of them, shall find it reasonable, to Suspend their actings in their respe∣ctive employments; It shall be Lawful for them so to doe untill further order from us.


5ly. 
Item,
 That the 
Governour, Coun∣sellors, Assemblie Men, Secretarie, Sur∣veyer,


 and all other 
Officers
 of Town shal Swear or Subscribe in a book to be provided for that purpose, That they will bear true 
alle∣giance to the King of England,
 his 
Heirs
 and 
Successors.
 And that they will be faith∣full to the interest of the 
Lords Propietors,
 of the said 
Province,
 and their Heirs exe∣cutors and Assignes and endeavor the peace and wellfair of the said 
Province,
 and that they will truelie and faithfullie discharge their 
respective
 trusts in their 
respective officses,
 and doe equall 
Justice unto all men accord∣ing to their best skill, and Judgement; without corruption, favour, or affection.
 And in the names of all that have Sworne to Subscribe to be entered in a book; 
And who∣soever shall Subscribe and not Sweare, and shall violate his promise in that Subscription, shall be lyable to that same punishment, that the Persons are or may be that have Sworn and brok∣en their Oaths.


6ly. 
Item,
 That all persons that are, or shall become Subjects to the 
King of England,
 and Swear and Subscribe 
allegiance to the King;
 and faithfulness to the 
Lords,
 shal be admitted to plant and become a 
Free man
 in

 the said 
Province;
 and enjoy the 
Freedomes
 and 
Immunities
 hereafter exprest untill some stop or contradiction be made by us the 
Lords,
 or els the 
Governor, Council
 and 
Assem∣blie,
 which shall be in force untill the 
Lords
 see cause to the contrarie. Provyded, That such stopes, shall not any wayes prejudice the right or continuance of any person that hath been received before such Stop; or order come from the 
Lords
 or 
Generall Assemblie.


7ly. 
Item,
 That no person as aforsaid within the said 
Province
 at any time shall be any wayes molested, punished, Disquyeted, or called in question for any 
Difference in Opi∣nion,
 or 
Practise in matters of Religious Concernments,
 who doe not 
actuallie disturb the Civil peace of the said Pro∣vince.
 But that all and every such person and persons may from time to time, and at all time freelie and fullie, have and enjoy his and their 
Judgement
 and 
Consciences in matters of Religion
 throughout all the said 
Province,
 They behaving themselves peace∣ablie and quyetlie and not useing this 
Liberty to Licentiousnes
 to the 
civil injurie or out∣ward disturbance of others;
 Any Law, Statute, or Clause contained, or to be contain∣ed

 Ʋsage or Custome of this 
Realm of Eng∣land
 to the contrarie thereof, in any wise not∣withstanding.


8ly. 
Item,
 That no pretence may be taken by us, our 
Airs,
 or 
Assignes;
 for or by rea∣son of our right of 
Patronage
 and power of 
Advousone
 granted by his 
Ma
esties Let∣ters patents,
 unto his 
Royall Highness, James Duke of York,
 and by his said 
Royall Highness,
 unto us thereby to in∣fringe the 
Generall Clause,
 of 
Libertie of Conscience
 aforementioned. We doe hereby grant unto the 
Generall Assemblie,
 of the said 
province
 power by Act to 
Constitute such and so many Ministers or Preach∣ers, as they shall think fit, and to establish their Maintainance, giving Libertie besides to any person or per∣sons to keep and Maintain what Mini∣sters or Preachers they please.


9ly. 
Item,
 That the Inhabitants being 
Free men
 or 
chief Agents
 to others of the 
province
 aforesaid, do, as soon as this our 
Commission
 shall arryve, by vertue of a Writ, in our names by the 
Governor
 to be for the present (untill our Seall comes)

 Sealled and Signed; make choice of twelve 
De∣putes
 or 
Representatives,
 from among them∣selves, who being chosen are to joyne with the said 
Governor
 and 
Council
 for the making such 
Laws, Ordinances
 and 
Constitu∣tions
 as shal be necessarie for the pr
sent 
good
 and 
welfare
 of the said 
Province.
 But so soon as 
Parishes, Divisions, Tribes,
 and o∣ther Distinctions are made, that then the 
In∣habitants
 or 
Free holders
 of the several and respective 
Parishes, Tribes,
 or 
Dominions
 and 
Restrictions
 aforesaid, (do by Our Write under Our Seal, which we engage shall, and be in due time issued,) 
annually
 meet on the first day of 
January,
 and choise Free-holders for every respective 
Division, Tribe
 or 
Parish
 to be the 
Deputies
 or 
Re∣presentatives
 of the same; which body of 
Representatives
 or the major part of them, shall with the 
Governour
 or 
Counsel
 afore∣said be the 
General Assemblie
 of the said 
Province,
 the 
Governour,
 or his 
De∣pute
 being present unles they shall wilfullie re∣fuse, In which case, they may appoint themselves, a President during the absence of 
the Governour, or Depute Governour.






Which ASSEMBLIES are to have Power,


1.
 To appoint their own time of meet∣ing, and to adjourne their 
Sessions
 from time to time, to such times and places as they shall think convenient; As also, to as certaine the number of their 
Quorum;
 Provided, the said number be not less then the 
36.
 part of the whole, in whom (or more) shall be the full power of the 
General Assemblie,
 viz.


2ly. To Enact and make all such 
Laws, Acts,
 and 
Constitutions;
 As shall be ne∣cessarie for the well 
Government
 of the said 
Province,
 and them to repeall; Provided, 
That the same be consonant to Reason, and as near as may be Convenientlie agreeable to the Laws, and Customes of his Majesties Kingdom of England;
 Prvided also, 
that they be not against the Interest of us the Lords Proprietors, our Airs, and Assignes, or any of these our Concessions; Especially that they be not repugnant to the Article for Libertie of Conscience
 abovementioned; which 
Laws,
 &c.

 so made shall receive 
Publication from the Governour
 and 
Councill
 (but as the 
Laws
 of us, and our 
General Assemblies
) and be in force 
for the space of one year and no more,
 unless contradicted by the 
Lords Proprietors,
 within which time they shall be presented to us, our Heirs, 
&c.
 for our ratification; And being confirmed by us, they shall be in continual force, till expyred by their own 
Limitation,
 or by 
Act of Repeal,
 in like manner to be passed (as aforesaid) and confirmed.


3ly. By 
Act
 as aforesaid, to 
constitute all Courts,
 together with the 
Limits, Powers
 and 
Jurisdictions
 of the same; and also the several Offices, and number of the Officers be∣longing to each Court, with their 
respective Salaries, Fees,
 and 
Perquisits,
 their 
Appel∣lations
 and 
Dignities,
 with the 
Penalties
 that shall be due to them, for the breach of their several and respective Duties and Trusts.


4ly. By 
Act
 as aforesaid, to lay equal 
Taxes
 and 
Assesments
 equally to raise 
Mo∣neys
 or 
Goods
 upon all Lands, (except us the 
Lords Proprietors
 before settling) or Persons within the several precints, 
hundreds,

 Parishes, Manours,
 or whatsoever other 
Divisions
 shall hereafter be made, and esta∣blished in the said 
Province,
 as oft as necessi∣ty shall require; and in such manner as to them shall seem most equal and easie, for the said 
Inhabitants
 in order to the better sup∣porting of the 
publick Charge
 of the said Government, and for the mutual 
Safety, Defence
 and 
Security
 of the said 
Province.


5ly. By 
Act
 as aforesaid, to erect within the said Province such and so many 
Ma∣nours,
 with their necessary 
Courts, Juris∣dictions, Freedoms
 and 
Priviledges,
 as to them shall seem meet and convenient. As also to divide the said Province into 
Hundreds, Tribes, Parishes,
 or such other 
Divisions
 and 
Districtions
 as they shall think fit, and the said Divisions to distinguish by what man∣ner we shall Order or Direct; And in default thereof, by such names as they please; As also within the said Province to 
creat
 and 
ap∣point
 such and so many 
Ports, Harbours, Creeks
 and other places, for the convenient Loading and Ʋnloading of Goods and Mer∣chandise out of Ships, Boats, and other Ves∣sels; and shall be expedient with such 
Juris∣dictions, Priviledges
 and 
Franchises
 to

 each Ports, 
&c.
 belonging, as they shall judge most conducing to the general good of the said 
Plantation
 or 
Province.


6ly. By their enacting to be confirmed as a∣foresaid, to 
Erect, Raise
 and 
Build
 within the said 
province,
 or any part thereof, such and so many 
Forts, Fortresses, Castles, Ci∣ties, Corporations, Burrows, Towns, Villages,
 and other places of 
Strength
 and 
Defence,
 and them or any of them to incor∣porate with such 
Charters
 and 
Priviledges
 as to them shall seem good, and the Grant made unto us will permit; And the same or any of them to fortifie and furnish with such provisions and proportions of 
Ordnance, Pow∣der, Shot, Armour,
 and all other 
Wea∣pons, Ammunition,
 and 
habiliments of War,
 hoth 
Offensive
 and 
Defensive
 as shall be thought necessary, and convenient for the Safety and Welfare of the said Province; But they shall not at any time Demolish, Dismantle, or Disfurnish the same without the consent of the 
Governour
 and the 
Major part of the Councill
 of the said 
Province.


7ly. By 
Act
 as aforsaid, to Constitute, 
Train-bands,
 and 
Companies
 with the

 number of 
Souldiers,
 for the 
Safetie, Strength
 and 
defence
 of the said 
Province,
 and of the 
Forts, Castles, Cities,
 To Suppresse all 
Munities
 and Rebellions, to make war, 
Offensive
 and 
Defensive
 with all 
Indian Strangers,
 and 
Forrainers,
 as they shall see cause. And to pursue an enemie by Sea, as well as by Land, (if need be) ou
 of the 
Li∣mitts
 and Jurisdictions of the said 
Province,
 with the particular cons nt of the 
Gover∣nour
 and under his conduct, or 
of our Com∣manders in chief or whom he shall ap∣point.


8ly. By 
Act
 as aforesaid to give unto all Strangers, as to them shall seem meet, a 
Naturalization
 and all such 
Freedomes
 and Priviledges within the said 
Province
 as to his 
Majesties Subjects
 do of right belong, they Swearing or Subseryving as afores
id, said Stranger so 
Authorized
 and 
Privi∣ledged
 shall be in all respects accounted in the said 
Province
 as the 
Kings naturall Sub∣jects.


9ly. 
Item,
 By an 
Act
 as aforesaid, to prescrive the quantities of Land, which shall be from time to time allotted to every Head, free, or servant, 
Male
 or 
Female;
 and to

 make or ordain Rules, for the casting of 
Lots for Lands,
 and the laying out of the same; provided, 
That they do not in their pre∣scriptions exceed the several proportions, which are hereby granted by us, to all persons arriving in the said Province or adventuring thither.


10ly. The 
General Assembly
 by 
Act,
 as aforesaid, shall make provision for the Main∣tain
nce and support of the Governour; And for the defraying all necessary Charges of the Governm
nt; As also, the 
Constables
 of the sa
d Province shall collect the 
Lords Rents,
 and shall pay the same to the Receiver, that the Lords shall appoint to receive the same, un∣less the said 
Gene
al Assembly
 shal pre∣scrive some other way, whereby the Lords may have their Rents duely collected without charge or trouble to them.


11ly.
 And Lastly, To 
Enact, Constitute
 and 
Ordain,
 all such other 
Laws, Acts,
 and 
Constitutions,
 as shall or may be neces∣sarie for the 
good, property, and setle∣ment of the said Province
 (excepting what by these presents is excepted,) and conforming to the 
Limitations
 herein exprest.








The Governour with his Council be∣fore exprest, is,


First, 
To see that all
 Courts 
established by the Laws of the
 General Assembly, 
and all
 Ministers 
and
 Officers, Civil 
and
 Milita∣ry, 
do and execute their several
 Offices 
and
 duties respective, 
according to the Laws in force; and to punish them for swerving from the
 Laws, 
or
 Acting contrary to their Trust, 
as the nature of their Offence shall re∣quire.


Sccondly, 
According to the constitutions of the
 General Assembly, 
to nominate and commissionate the severall
 Judges, Members 
and
 Officers of Courts, 
whether
 Magistra∣tical 
or
 Ministerial, 
and all other
 civil Of∣ficers, Coroners, &c. 
And their
 Com∣missions, Powers 
and
 Authorities to re∣voke at pleasure; 
provided,
 That they appoint none but Free-holders in the Province aforesaid, unless the General Assembly consent.


Thirdly, 
According to the constitutions of the
 General Assembly, 
to appoint Courts

 and Officers in cases
 Criminal; 
And to im∣power them to
 inflict penalties upon Offen∣ders against any of the Laws in force in the said Province, as the saids Laws shal ordain, whether by Fine or Imprison∣ment, Banishment, Corporal punish∣ment, or to the taking away of Member, or of Life it self, if there be cause for it.


Fourthly, 
To place Officers and Souldiers for the safety, strength, and defence of the Forts, Castles, Cities, &c. according by the number appointed by the
 General Assembly, 
to nominat, place & Commissionat all
 Military Officers 
under the dignity of the said Gover∣nour, who is Commissionated by Ʋs,
 over the several Trained Bands, and Com∣panies constituted by the General Assem∣bly as Collonels, Captains, &c. And their Commissiones to revoke at plea∣sure. 
The Governour with the advice of his Counsel (unless some present dangers will not permit them to Advise,)
 To Muster and Traine all the Forces within the said Province, to prosecute War, pursue an Enemy, suppress all Rebellions and Mu∣
inies, as well by Sea as by Land, and to exercise the whole Militia, as fully as we

 by the Grant from his 
Royall Highness
 can impower him or them to do; 
provided,
 that they appoint not Militia Forces, but what are Free-holders in the said Province, unless the 
General Assembly
 shal consent.


Fifthly, 
Where they see cause after
 Con∣demnation, 
to
 reprive 
until the cause be
 presented, 
with a copy of the whole
 Tryal, proceedings 
and
 proofs 
to the
 Lords, 
who will accordingly either
 pardon or command execution of the Sentence on the Offen∣der, who is in the m
an time to be kept in safe Custodie till the pleasure of the Lords be known.


Sixthly, 
In case of
 Death, 
ot other
 re∣moval 
of the representative, within the year to issue summonds by write to the
 respective di∣vision or divisions, 
for which he or they were choosen,
 Commanding the Free-holders of the same to choose others in their stead.


Seventhly, 
To make warrands, and to
 seall grants 
of Lands, according to these our
 Con∣cessions; 
And the
 prescriptions 
by advice of the
 General Assembly, 
in such forme as shall

 be at large sett down in our
 Instructions 
to the
 Governour 
in his
 Commission, 
and which are hereafter exprest.


Eightly, 
To
 Act 
and do all things, that may conduce to the
 Safety, peace, 
and
 well Government 
of the said province, as they shall see sit, so that they be not contrare to the
 Laws 
of the said province.






For the better security of the 
Pro∣vince
 of all the 
Inhabitants.


First, 
They are not to impose, nor suffer to be
 imposed, 
any
 tax, custome, subsidie, tal∣ladg assesmant, 
or any other duty whatsoever upon any collour or pretence, upon the said
 pro∣vince, 
and
 Inhabitants 
thereof, other then what shall be imposed by the Authority and con∣sent of the
 Generall assembly, 
and then only in manner as aforesaid.


Secondly, 
They are to take care that Land quietly held, planted and possessed seven years, after its being first duely surveyed by the
 Sur∣veyor 
or
 General, 
or his order, shall not be subject to any
 review, resurvey, 
or
 altera∣tion of bonds, one what pretence soever

 by any of us, or any Officer or Minister under us.


Thirdly, 
They are to take care, that no man, if his cattle stray, or range, or graze on any ground within the said
 Province 
not actually appropriat, or sett out to particu∣lar persons shall be lyable to pay an
 trespase for the same to us our
 Heirs, &c. 
provided,
 that custom of Commons be not there∣by pretended to, 
nor any person hindered from
 taking up 
and
 appropriating any Lands so grazed upon; 
And
 that no per∣son do purposely suffer his cattle to graze on such lands.






And that the planting of the said 
Province,
 may be more speedi∣ly Promo
ed.


First, 
Wee doe hereby grant unto all persons who have already adventured unto the said pro∣vince of
 New Cesarea, 
of
 New-Jersey, 
or shall transport themselves, or Servants before
 the 1. of January 
which shall be in
 the year of our Lord 1665. 
these following proportions;


 viz. To every freeman that shall go with the first Governor from the poart where the Embarks (or shall meet him at the rendezvous he appoints) for the setle∣ment of a plantation, there Armed with a good musket, bearing twelve bullets to the pound, with ten pounds of powder, and and twenty pounds of Bulletts, with ban∣deliers and match convenient, and with six months provision for his own person arriving there, One hundreth and fifty Acres of Land 
English
 measure. 
And for every able Man Servant, that he shall carrie wi
h him
 armed and provyded as aforesaid, 
and arryving there; the like quantitie of
 150. Acres of land English measure. 
And who soever shall send servants at that time shall ha
e for every able man servant, he or she shall s
nd so
 Armed, 
and
 provided 
as aforesaid and ar∣ryving there, the like quantity
 of 150. Acres. 
And for every weaker servant or slave,
 male 
or
 female, 
exceeding the age
 of 14. years, 
wh
 h any one shall send or carrie, arryving there
 75 Acres of land. 
And to every
 Christian Ser∣vant, 
exceeding the age aforesaid after the ex∣piration of their time of service
 75. Acres of Land for their own uses.


2ly, Item, 
To every
 Master 
or
 Mistris, 
that go before the
 first day of January, 
which shall be in the
 years of our Lord 1665. One hundreth and twenty acres of Land, 
and for every able man servant that he or she shall carrie, or send
 Armed, 
and pro
yded as afore∣said and arryving within the time aforesaid, the like quantity
 of 120 Acres of and. 
And for every weaker Servant or slave,
 male 
or
 fe∣male, 
exceeding the age
 of 14. years, 
arryving there,
 60 acres of Land 
and to every
 Chri∣stian servant to their own use and behoof 60 acres of Land.


3ly, Item, 
To every
 Free-man or ree-woman 
that shall arryve in the said
 Province armed, 
and provyded as a aforesaid within the
 second year, 
from the
 first day of Ja∣nuary 1665, 
to the
 first day o
 January 1666. 
with an intention to pl
nt
 90. acres of Land English measure; 
and for every
 able man servant 
that 
he or she shall carrie or send
 armed 
and
 provided 
as aforesaid,
 90 acres of Land 
of like measure.


4ly, Item, 
For every weaker servant or Slave, aged as aforesaid, that shall be so carri∣ed, or sent thither within the
 second year a∣foresaid,

 45 acres of Land 
of like measure. And to every
 Christian Servant- 
that shall arrive th
 second
 year 45, acres of Land 
of like measure, after the expiration of his or their time or service, for their own use and behoove.


5ly. Item, 
To every freeman and free wo∣man armed and provided as aforesaid, That shall go and adventure with an intent to plant within the third year from
 January 1666, 
To
 January 1667, 60 Acres of Land 
of like measure. And for every
 able man-ser∣vant, 
hat he or they shall carrie or send over, within the said time,
 Armed 
and
 provided 
as aforesaid, the like quantity of
 60. Acres of Land. 
And for every
 weaker Servant 
or
 Slave aged, 
as aforesaid, that he or they shall carrie, or send, within the third year,
 30. Acres of Land, and to every Christian Servant so carried, or sent, thirty 30. Acres of land, of like measure after the expiration of his or their time of ser∣vice. 
All which land and all other that shall be possessed in the said Province, are to be held on the said Terms and Conditions, as is beforementioned; and as hereafter in the fol∣lowing
 Paragraphs 
is more at large exprest: Provided alwayes,
 that the fore∣mentioned land, and all other whatsoe∣ver

 that shall be taken up, and so settled in the said Province, shall afterwards from time to time, for the space of 13. years from the date hereof, be held up∣on the conditions aforesaid, containing one able man servant 
or two such
 weaker servants, 
as aforesaid, on every
 100 acres, a Master 
or
 Mistress 
shall possesse, besides what was granted for his or her own person. In failȝie of which on
 notification, 
to the p
es
nt
 occu∣pant, 
or his assignies there shall be
 3 years gi∣ven 
to such for their compleating the said num∣ber of persons, or for their sale, or other dispo∣sure of such part of their Lands as are not so peopled, within which time of
 three years if 
any persone holding any Lands,
 shall fail by himself, his agents, executors, 
and
 assig∣nies, 
or some other way to provide such number of persons, unless the
 General Assembly 
shall without respect of partie, Judge
 it was impos∣sible, for the party so failing to keep or procure his or her number of servants to to be provided as aforesaid. 
In such case we the Lords, to have power
 of disposing of somuch of such lands as shal not be plant∣ed with its due number of persons as afor∣said, to some other that will plant the same 
Provided alwayes, that no persons arryving in∣to

 the said
 province, with purpose to settle (
they being
 Subjects 
or
 naturalized 
as a∣foresaid, be denyed a grant of such
 proporti∣ons of Land, 
as at the time of ther arryvall, there are due to themselves, or servants,
 by concession from us, as aforesaid. 
But have full licence to take up and settle the same in such order and manner, as is granted and prescrib∣ed. All Lands (notwithstanding the powers in the
 Assemblies 
aforesaid
) shall be taken up by warrand from the Governor, and Confirmed by the Governor and Coun∣cil, under a Seal to be provided for that purpose in such order and method as shal be set down in this declaration, and more at large in the Instructions to the Gover∣nor.




And that the Lands may be the more regu∣larly laid out, and all persons be better ascer∣tained of their titles and
 possessions. 
The
 Go∣vernor 
and
 Council, 
and
 General Assem∣bly 
(if any be) are to take care and direct that all Lands be divided
 by General Lots, 
none less then
 Two thousand one hundreth acres, 
& no more then
 twenty one thousand acres in each Lot. 
Excepting
 Cities, Towns, &c. 
And near Lots of Township, and that the

 same be divided into
 seven parts, 
one seventh part by Lot to us our
 Heirs 
and
 Assignies, 
The remander to persons as they shall come to plant is such proportions as is allowed.


2ly, Item, 
That the
 Governour 
or whom he shall depute, in case of
 Death 
or
 absence, 
if some one be not before Commissionated by us as a∣forsaid; doe give to every person to whom Land is due,
 a warrant signed and sealed by himself, and the Major part of his Coun∣cil; and directed to the 
Surveyor generall
 or his Deputie, Commanding him to Lay out, Limit, and bound Acres of Land 
(as his due proportion)
 for such a person in such Alottment, accor∣ding to the warrand. 
The
 Register 
having first
 recorded 
the same, and
 attested 
the
 re∣cord 
upon the
 warrand; 
The
 Surveyor Generall 
or his
 Deputie, 
shall proceed and certifie to the
 Chief Secretary 
the name of the person for whom he hath Laid out Land, By vertue of what
 Authority, 
and the
 date of the Authority or warrand, 
the number of
 Acres, the bounds, 
and on what point of the
 Compass 
the severall Limits thereof Lye which certificate the
 Register 
is likewayes to enter in a book to be prepared for that purpose,

 with ane
 Alphabetical table 
referring to the book, that so the
 certificat 
may be the easier found, and then to fill the
 certificats, 
and the same to keep Safelie. The
 certificat 
be∣ing entered, a warrand comprehending all the particulars of Land mentioned in the
 Certifi∣cat 
aforesaid, is to be signed by him, and his
 Council, 
or the
 Major part of them 
as aforesaid, they having seen the
 entrie, 
and
 direction 
to the
 Register, 
or
 Chief Secretarie, 
for his preparing a grant of the Land, to the partie to whom it was laid out, which grant shall be in the form follow∣ing, viz.


The 
Lords Proprietors
 of the 
Province
 of 
New-Cesarea
 or 
New-Jersey,
 do hereby grant unto A: B: of the 
 in the Province aforesaid, a Plantation Containing. 
 Acres 
English Measure
 bounding (as in the certificat) To be holden to him (or her) his or her Airs and Assignes for ever: Yeelding and paying yearly unto the saids 
Lords proprietors
 their Airs or Assignes, every five and twenty day of 
March
 the 
English accompt
 of 
 Lawfull money of 
England
 for every of the said Acres: to be holden of the 
Man∣ner


 of 
 in free and Common Soc∣cadge. The first payment of which Rent to begine the five and twenty day of 
March,
 which shall be in the year of our Lord, one Thousand Six hundreth and seventy, according to the 
English
 ac∣compts. Given under the Seal, of the said province the 
 day of 
 In the year of our Lord 1666.


2ly. 
To which
 Instrument 
the
 Gover∣nour 
or his
 Deputie 
hath hereby full power to put the Seal, of the said
 Province, 
and to Subscribe his name; also, the
 Council, 
or
 Major part 
of them, and subscribe their names, And then the
 Instrument 
or
 grant 
is to be by the
 Register 
recorded in a book of records for that purpose, All which being done according to the
 Instructions; 
We hereby declare the same shall be
 effectual in Law 
for enjoyment of the saids
 Plantations, 
and of all the benefits, and profits of, and in the same (except the half part of mines of gold and Silver paying the rent as aforesaid. Provid∣ed, that if any
 Plantation 
so granted shall by the space
 of 3 years 
be neglected, to be plant∣ed, with a Sufficient number of Servants, as is before mentioned: That then it shall and

 may be Lawfull for us, otherwayes to dispose thereof in whole or in part, this grant not∣withstanding.


2ly. Item, 
We do also grant convenient
 Proportions 
of Land for Highwayes and Streets, not exceeding one
 hundreth foot, 
in breadth
 Cities, Towns, 
and
 Villages, 
&c. And for
 Churches, Forts, Wharfes, Keys, Harbours; 
and for publict houses, and to each parish, for the use of their
 Mini∣sters, 
two
 hundreth acres 
in such as the
 Generall Assemblie 
shall appoint.


4ly. Item, 
The
 Governour 
is to take notice that all such Lands laid out for the uses and purposes aforesaid, in the next proceeding,
 Articles 
shall be free and exempt from all
 Rents, Taxes, 
and other charges and duties whatsoever payable to us,
 our Aires 
and
 Assignes.


5ly. Item, 
That in laying out of Lands for
 Cities, Towns, Villages, Burghs, 
or others
 Hamiletts, 
The said Land be de∣vided into
 7 parts, 
one
 seventh part 
whereof to be Laid out by
 Lott for 
us, and the rest to be devided, to such as shal be willing to build

 thereon they paying after the rate of
 one pen∣nie or half pennie per Acre 
(according to the value of the Land)
 yearly to us; 
As for their other Lands aforesaid, which said Lands in
 Cities, 
and
 Towns, 
&c. is to be assured to each
 Possessor 
by the
 same way; 
and
 Instrument 
as is before mentioned. That all rules relating to the building of each street, or quantitie or ground to be
 alloted 
to each house within the said
 respective Cities, Burghs, and Towns, 
be wholly l
ft by
 Act 
as a∣foresaid to the
 Wisdom and discretion of the Generall Assemblie.


6ly. Item, 
That the
 Inhabitants 
of the said
 Province, 
have free Passage through or by any
 Seas, bounds, Creeks, Rivers, 
&c, in the said
 Province; 
through or by, which they must necessarily pass to come from the
 Main Ocean 
to any part of the
 Province 
aforesaid.


7ly. Lastly, 
It shall be lawfull for the
 Representative 
of the
 Free-holders, 
to make any address to the
 Lords 
touching the
 Governour or Council, 
or any of them, or concerning any grievance whatsoever, or for ny other thing they shall desire, without the

 Consent of the
 Governour, 
and
 Council 
or any of them. Given under our Seal of our said
 Province the tenth day of January 
In the year of our
 Lord, one Thousand six hundreth sixty and four.




John Barclay,


G. Cartwright.










By this
 Constitution of Government 
by the Lord
 Barclay, 
and Sir
 George Cart∣wright, 
such provision is made both for
 Li∣berty of Religion, 
and
 Property, 
that the
 Province 
hath been considerably peopled; many resorting thither from the
 Neighboring Collonies, 
beside what have gone from
 Eng∣land, 
and this Kingdom, within this few years, so that the planters are able to
 mu∣ster 600 well Armed Men.


The
 Proprietors 
have framed a new
 Schem of Government, 
which is not yet fully concluded on, but it is intended rather to be an enlarging; than an abbreviating of the former, and making more easie, and advantagious for the
 Inhabitants, 
the chief parts of it are.


That the
 24. Proprietors 
shall chuse a


 Governour, 16. 
of them has a Conclusive Vote in it, after the death of him now chosen, he shall continue but for
 3 
years, and be lyable to the
 Censure of the Proprietors, and great Council, 
and punishable if he trans∣gress, There is a
 great Council 
to meet once a year (and sit, if they see meet, for
 three Moneths) 
consisting of the
 24. Proprietors, 
and
 28. 
chosen by the
 Planters, 
and
 Inhabi∣tants, 
two thirds Conclude, the one half of the
 Proprietors 
assenting;
 and no money can be raised, or Law made, to touch any mans Libertie or Property; but by this Council. 
There is a Common Council to sit constantly, Consisting of the
 24. Proprie∣tors, 
or their
 Proxies, 
and nine chosen out of the
 Representative of the Planters, in all 33. 
to be divided into three
 Commities; 11. 
to each one for the Publick
 Policie: 
One for the Treasurie and
 Trade, 
and one for
 Plantations.


To aviod
 Lording over one another, 
No Man can purchase above the
 24th. 
part of the Countrey; And on the other hand, least any should squander away their Interest, 
nd yet re∣tain the
 character of the Government, 
that belongs to
 Property, 
and thence be cap∣able to betray it, as not being bound by Interest,

 there must be a suteable quantity retained, o∣therwise the Title in the Government extin∣guishes in him, and passes to another, to be Elected by the
 Proprietors, 
that
 Dominion 
may follow
 Property, 
and the inconveniency of a
 Beggarly Nobility, 
and
 Gentry 
may be avoided.


No man can be judged in any cause, either
 Civil, or Criminal, 
but by a
 Jury 
of his
 Peers, 
and to avoyid in that all
 Caballing, 
the names of all the County or
 Neighbour∣hood, 
Capable to be Chosen; are to be write in little pieces of
 Parchement, 
and the num∣ber of the
 Jury 
to be taken out by a Child
 un∣der 10. years of age, 
And the
 Proprietors 
as well as others are to be
 lyable to the like tryall, and not under any Exception.


Libertie 
in matters of
 Religion 
is esta∣blished in the fullest manner. To be a
 Planter 
or
 Inhabitant, 
nothing is more required but
 the acknowledging of One Almighty GOD, and to have a Share in the Go∣vernment, A simple profession of faith of Jesus Christ, without descending into any other of the differences among Chri∣stians, only that Religion may not be a cloak for disturbance, who ever comes into the Magistrature, must declare,

 they hold not themselves in conscience obliged, for Religions sake, to make an alteration, or to endeavour to turn out their partners, in the Government, because they differ in Opinion from them, 
and this is no more then to follow that great Rule,
 To do as they would be done by.


These are the
 Fundamentals, 
which are not alterable by any Act of the great
 Council, 
as other things, by the voices
 of 2 thirds, 
but only by an universal agreement; so it is hoped, that this hint will satisfie all sober and understanding people, what Encouragement such a Government may give.


For Husband-men that hes a Stock, able to transport themselves and Families, with a few Servants, and to have but a
 100. pound Scots, 
or a
 100. Merks more, 
to carry over in Commodities, they shall have upon their arrivall
 100 Acres of good ground, 
mea∣sured out to them, or above, not exceeding
 500. Acres: 
And for their encouragement, shall for the first
 7. 
years pay nothing, and then have what they please, not under
 100. 
nor exceeding
 500. Acres, 
confirmed to them, and their heirs for ever, paying half a Crown an
 Acre, 
never to be raised upon them: And

 for the Charge of the first year, they may easily Calculate, carrying over as much
 Oat-meal, 
as will serve them
 Bread, 
and the fraught will be inconsiderable, and they will get flesh enough in the Countrey for killing, without charge, and will be able to clear more ground the first winter, then will▪ double serve their Families after the first harvest, so that they will only have to buy with the Commodities they carry over with them, Seed, and Beasts.


The Charge of
 transportation, 
is, for every
 Man or Woman 5. 
lib. starling, pas∣sage and intertainment, for
 children un∣der 10. years of age, 50. shilling, 
and
 Sucking children nothing, 40. shillings for the tunn of goods, 
and often under.


The Voyage is judged lesse
 Sea hazard 
then either to
 Holland, 
or
 London, 
and if there be any tollerable winds, it is easily made in
 6. 
weeks, There went a ship last harvest to
 West Jersey, 
from the Road of
 Aberden: 
and they came to
 Delaware-River-mouth 
in
 8. 
weeks, though they had great Calmes, and of betwixt
 30. 
and
 40. 
Passengers that went out of
 Aberdeen 
several
 women, 
and
 children, 
not above
 4. 
of them had been at Sea before, not one dyed, nor was sick
 by the way.




For
 Ordinary servants, 
who are willing to go over,
 after 4. Years service 
from the time of there
 arryvall there, 
during which time they shall be well entertained in
 meat and cloathing) 
they shall have set out
 to each 25. Acres to them and theirs for ever, paying 2. pence an Acre, as much Corn as will sow an Acre, and a Sute of now cloaths; Now, 
Considering that there is
 5. pound Sterling payed 
for their Passage, this is good termes; and that after the terme of their Service is expired, they will gain more in one year there, then they can do in two at home, towards the gaining of a Stock to their land, and it may be easily conceived that they will be well treated by their Masters, since it is their Interest to do so there more then here, for that they would be Considerable Lo∣sers, either by their Death, or sicknesse, be∣ing out so great an advance for them, if, by any hard-ship, they shall be disabled to serve out their times.


All Sorts of Tradesmen may make a brave
 Livelyhood 
there, such as
 Carpenters, Ship-wrights, Rope-makers, Smiths, Brick-makers, Taylors, Tanners, Cow∣pers, Mill-wrights, Joyners; Shooe∣makers, &c. 
and any such like, who are

 willing to go serve the four years, not having to transport themselves,
 shall in considera∣tion 
of their Trade, have (after the expir∣ing of their Service)
 30. Acres, 2. pence the Acre, 
as much Corn as well
 sow 2. A∣cres, a cow and a Sow: 
And for the in∣couragement of any such Trasdmen, who are willing to go over and transport themselves, they shall have the like quantitie of Land, at the same rent, and the
 Proprietors 
will ob∣lidge themselves to find them work for a year, after their arryval, at as good Rates as they can have here, untill they furnish themselves with some Stock to make better advantage up∣on the
 Place.


We will not encourage any to go there in ex∣pectation of
 Gold and Silver mines; 
yea, tho there were such in the Countrey, we should not be curious nor industrous to seek them out: being besides the Toyl, and Labour, but oc∣casions envy, and Emulation: Nor yet is their
 Suggar or Indigo 
there, or
 Cotton, 
nor any store of
 Tobacco, 
tho it grows there very well. But We consider it not our in∣terest to imploy much ground on it; The
 Riches 
of this Countrey Consists in that which is most Substantial and necessar for the use of men,
 to wit, 
Plenty of Corn and Cattle (and they have

 besides Vines, and Fruits in abundance, as be∣fore has been said) so that who dwell here, need not to be oblidged to any other
 Plantati∣on, for any thing necessar for Life; 
and all other Plantations are beholden to them for necessaries, without which, their other Curiosities would little avail them: This with the Province of
 New-York, 
being the
 Granary 
or
 Store-house 
of the
 West-In∣dies, 
without which
 Barbadoes 
and the
 Lee∣wards Islands▪ 
could not subsist; Yea,
 New-England 
is forced to come there every year for Corn, this, with the advantage of Fishe∣ry, being considered, will easily induce Sober and industrious People, to prefer a Plantation here to most other places.








The Duke of 
Yorks
 grant of 
East-New-Jersey,
 to the twenty four Pro∣prietors.




THis Indenture made the fourteenth day of
 March, 
in the five and thir∣tieth year of the Reign of our Sove∣raign Lord
 CHARLES 
the Second, by the Grace of
 GOD, 
of
 
ngland, Scotland, France 
and
 Ireland 
King,
 Defender of the

 Faith, 
&c.
 Anno Domini, 1682. 
be∣tween His Royal Highness, the most Illustri∣ous Prince,
 James Duke of York, 
and
 Al∣bany, 
Earl of
 Ulster, &c. 
only Brother to our Soveraign Lord the King, of the one part, And the Right Honourable
 James 
Earl of
 Perth, 
of the Kingdom of
 Scotland, 
the right Honourable
 John Drummond 
of
 Lundin, Scotland 
Esquire,
 Robert Bar∣clay 
of
 Urie 
in the Kingdom of
 Scotland, 
Esquire, on the other part, &c. Whereas our said Soveraign Lord the Kings Majestie, in, and by Letters Patent, under the Great Seal of
 England, 
bearing date the twelfth day of
 March, 
in the sixteenth year of His said
 Majesties 
Reign, did amongst several other things therein mentioned, Give and Grant unto His Royal Highnes
 James Duke of York, 
his Heirs and Assignies, all that tract of land adjacent to
 New-England, 
in the parts of
 America, 
and lying, and being to the
 Westward of Long-Island, 
and
 Man∣hattas Island, 
and bounded on the
 East part 
by the Main Sea, and part by
 Hudsons Ri∣ver, 
and extendeth
 Southward 
to the Main Ocean, as far as
 Cape May, 
at the mouth of
 Delawar Bay; 
and to the
 Northward 
as far as the Northern-most branch of the said Bay,

 or River of
 Delawar; 
Which is one and fourtie Degrees, and fourty Minuts of Lati∣tude; and crosing over thence in a straight line to
 Hudsons River, 
in one and fourty De∣grees of Latitude; Which said tract of Land was then after to be called by the name of
 New-Cesaria 
or
 New-Jersey, 
with all the
 Lands, Islands, Soylls, Rivers, Har∣bours, Mynnes, Minerals, Quareries, Woods, Marishes, Waters, Lakes, Fish∣ings, Hauckings, Huntings, and Fowl∣ings, 
and all other
 Royalties, Profits, Commodities, 
and
 Hereditaments, 
unto the said
 premises 
belonging, and appertain∣ing with their and everie of their
 appertain∣ances. 
And all his said
 Majesties Estate, Right, Title▪ Interest, Benefite, Ad∣vantage, Claime, and Demand 
of, in and to the said
 Provinces, 
or any
 part or parcell 
thereof, and the
 Reversion, 
and
 Reversions, Remainder 
and
 Remain∣ders, 
together with the yearlie, and other
 Rents, Revenues, 
and
 profits 
of the same; And of every part and parcel thereof. To hold unto his
 Airs Royall Highness, 
the said
 James Duke of York, his Airs, and Assignes 
for ever: To he Holden of his said
 Majestie his Airs, and Successors, 
among

 other things therein granted as of his
 Majes∣ties Manour of East Greenwich, in his Majesties County of Kent, in free 
and
 Common Soccage, 
and not in
 Capite, 
or by
 Knight 
Service, under the yearly-rent therein mentioned. And whereas,
 His Roy∣all Highness, 
The said
 James Duke of York, 
Did theretofore by Severall good and Sufficient Conveyances, and assurances under his hand, and Seall duely executed, and daited the
 Twenty third, and Twenty fourt dayes of June, 
in the Sixteen year of his said
 Majesties Reign, 
for the Considera∣tion therein mentioned; Grant, and Convey the said Tract of Land, and Premisses before mentioned, to
 John Lord Barclay, Baron 
of
 Stratton, 
and one of His
 Majesties 
most
 Honourable Privy Council, 
And sir
 George Cartwright 
of
 Saltram 
in the
 County of Devon, 
Knight and Barronet, and one of His
 Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, 
and their Heirs, the said Tract of land, and premisses particularly be∣fore mentioned. And the
 Reversion 
and
 Re∣versions, Remander 
and
 Remanders 
of the same, to hold unto the said
 John Lord Barclay, 
and sir
 George Cartwright 
their Heirs and Assignies for ever, under the year∣ly

 Rent of
 twenty Nobles Sterline, 
payable as the same is therein reserved to be paid. And whereas his said
 Majestie 
did by others his Letters Patents, dated the twenty ninth day of
 June, 
in the six and twentieth yea
 of his said
 Majesties Reign, 
grant and convey unto his said
 Royal Highness 
and his Heirs for ever; aswell the said tract of Land, and premisses herein before recited, to have been granted, and conveyed by his said
 Royall Highness, 
unto the said
 John Lord, Barclay, 
and Sir
 George Cartwright 
as aforesaid: As all other the Lands and
 Hereditaments, 
in, and by the said herein first before recited
 Let∣ters, Patents, granted, or mentioned 
to be
 granted. 
And whereas His said
 Royall Highness 
by his
 indentures of Lease 
and
 re∣lease 
bearing date the 
 dayes of
 July, 
in the six and twenty year of his said
 Majesties Reign. 
Did
 grant 
and
 convey 
the said tract of Land, and premisses to the said Sir
 George Cartwright, 
his Airs and Assignes as by the said
 Indentures, Relati∣on 
being thereunto had may appear. And whereas, upon a partition made of the said whole and
 entire premisses 
between the said Sir
 George Cartwright, 
And
 Wil∣liam penn of Worminhurst 
in the Countrey

 of
 Sussex Esquire, Gavin Lawrie of Lon∣don 
Merchant,
 Nicolas Lucas 
of
 Hertford, 
in the Countey
 of Hertford 
Malster, &
 Ed∣ward Billing of West-minster, in the 
Countey of
 Midlesex, Gentleman; In 
whom the Fee Simple of the said
 John Lord Barclays undivyded Moyeties 
of all and Singular the premisses, by good and sufficient conveyance was then vested. The said
 Wil∣liam Penn, Gavin Lowrie, Nicolas, Lucas, 
and
 Edward Billing, 
did bargian sell, release, and confirm unto the said
 Sir George Cartwright 
his
 Heirs 
and
 Assignes, 
all that Easterly part share and portions and and all these Easterly parts, shares & portions the said whole and entire Tract of Land, and
 Premisses 
beforementioned, Extending
 East∣ward, 
and
 Northward 
alongst
 the Sea-Coasts, 
and the said River, called
 Hud∣sons River, 
from the
 East-side 
of a certain place or harbour, lying on the
 Southren 
part of the same tract of Land, and commonly called, or kn
wen in a
 Mape 
of the said tract of Land by the name of
 Little Egge harbour, 
to that part of tho said
 River, called Hud∣sons-River, 
which is in
 fourty one de∣grees of Latitude 
being the farthermost part of the said Tract of Land, and Premisses; which is bounded by the said
 River, 
and cros∣ing

 over from thence in a Straight Lyne, ex∣tending from that part of
 Hudsons-River, 
aforsaid to the most
 Northermost 
branch of the aforementioned River, called
 Delawar River, 
And to the most
 Northerly 
point and Boundarie of the said
 entire Tract of Land and premisses, 
now called the
 North-par∣tition Point. 
And from thence (that is to say)
 from the North partition point. Extend∣ing Southward, unto the more Sou∣therly point, by a straight and direct Lyne, drawen through the said tract of Land from the said North partition point, unto the said South partition point; 
by the consent and agreement of ohe said
 par∣ties, 
now called
 the Lyne of partition, 
And by them intended for the dividing and making a partition of the said
 Easternly 
part, Share and portion from the
 Westernly 
part, Share, and portion of the said
 tract of Land, and premisses; 
And all and every the
 Isles, Islands, Rivers, Mynnes, Mineralls, Woods, Fishings, Hawkings, hunt∣tings, and Foullings, and all other Roy∣alties, Governments, powers, Forts, Franchises, Harbours, Profits, Com∣modities, and Hereditaments, 
whatso∣ever unto the said
 Easternly 
part, Share,

 and portion, of the said
 Tract of Land and premisses 
belonging, or in any waves apper∣taining, with their and every of their apper∣tenances; And all the
 Estate, Right, Tittle, Interest, Property, Claim, and De∣mand 
whatsoever, of them the said
 Wil∣liam Penn, Gavin Lowrie, Nicolas Lucas, 
and
 Edward Billing, and of each 
and every of them, of, in, to, and out of the said
 Easternly part, 
Share, and portion of the said
 Tract of Land and Premisses, 
and every part, and parcell thereof, And the
 Re∣version, 
and
 Reversions, Remainder and Remainders 
of the same, and every part and parcell of the same; All which said
 Easternly 
part, Share, and portion, parts, Share, and portions, was, and were then, and now is, and are by the Consent and agree∣ment of the said parties to the said partition, called and agreed from thenceforth, to be called by the names of
 East-New-Jersey, 
and is all that, and only all that part, Share, and portion, and all this parts, shares, and portion of the said
 Tract of Land and pre∣misses, 
so conveyed by his said
 Royall Highness, 
as aforesaid; as lyeth extended
 Eastward 
from the
 Eastside 
of the said
 Lyne of partition 
before mentioned; To hold un∣to

 the said
 Sir George Cartwright, 
his
 Heirs and Assignes 
in severaltie, to the use of him the said Sir
 George Cartwright, 
his Heirs and Assignes for ever. Ʋpon which partition so made and such conveyances so exe∣cuted as aforesaid; He the said Sir
 George Cartwright 
became Seazed of all that
 Eas∣ternly part 
of the said premisses, now called
 East-New-Jersey, 
with the appertenances in Severaltie. And whereas, the said
 Sir George Cartwright, 
being by vertue of the said
 Assurances, 
and
 partition 
aforesaid, soll Seazed to him, and his Heirs of the said premisses, called
 East-New-Jersey, 
by his
 Last Will 
and
 Testament 
in writing, bear∣ing date on about the
 first day of December, 
in the year
 of Our Lord, one Thousand six hundreth seventie, and eight, 
Did devise the same, and all his Estate therein, amongst other things, To the Right Honour∣able
 Edward Earl of Sandwich, 
the Right Honourable
 John Earl of Bath, 
The Right Honourable
 Thomas Lord Crew Barron Crew of Steane, 
The Honourable
 Bernard Greenvile Esquire brother 
of the said
 Earl of Bath, 
The Honourable
 Sir Ro∣bert Atkins Knight of the Bath, 
and the Honourable Sir
 Edward Atkins Knight,

 
one of the
 Barrons of his Majesties Court of Exchequer, 
and their
 Heirs in trust, 
to sell the same for payment of his Debts and Legacie, as in, and by the said
 will, 
rela∣tion being thereunto had may appear and short∣lie after d
ed. And whereas, the said
 John Earl of Bath, Thomas Lord Crew, Bernad Greenvile, 
Sir
 Robert Atkins, 
and Sir
 Edward Atkins by 
Indentures of Lease, bearing date the
 fifth 
and
 sixt dayes of March, 
in the
 32▪ 
year of his
 Majesties Reign, 
Conveyed, the said
 Premisses 
amongst other things, to
 Thomas Cremer 
of the Parish of
 Sanct Andrews Holbern, 
in the Countey of
 Midle sex 
Gentleman, and
 Thomas Pecock 
of the same Gentleman; As by the said Indentures; Relation being there∣unto, had, it may appear. And whereas, the said Earl of
 Sandwick 
by his Indentures, bearing date the Twenty
 day of February 
last past, Hath released all his
 Estate, In∣terest, and trust in the said Premisses, 
To the said
 Earl of Bath, Lord Crew, Bernard Greenvile, Sir Robert Atkins, 
and Sir
 Edward Atkins, 
and their Heirs, As by the said Indenture, relation being there∣unto had may appear. And whereas, the said
 Earl of Bath; Lord Crew, Bernard

 Greenvile, 
Sir
 Robert Atkins, 
and Sir
 Edward Atkins 
by the Consent and directions of
 Dam Elizabeth Cartwright 
Relict and Executrix of the said sir
 George Cartwright 
and the said
 Thomas Cremer, 
and
 Tho∣mas Pecock 
by the consent and directions of the said
 Dam Elizabeth Cartwright; Earl of Bath, Lord Crew, Bernard, Greenvile, 
sir
 Robert Atkins, and 
Sir
 Edward Atkins, 
Have by Indentures of Lease, and Release bearing date the first and second dayes of
 February 
last past, Granted and conveyed to the said
 William Penn, Robert West, Thomas Rudyard, Sa∣muell Groome, Thomas Hart, Ri∣chard Mew, Thomas Wilcox of Lon∣don Goldsmith, Ambrose Rigg, John Haywood, Hugh Hartshorn, Clement Plimisted, 
and
 Thomas Cowper, 
their Heirs and assignes all the said premisses, cal∣led
 East-New-Jersey, 
Together with all
 Isles, Islands, Rivers, Mines, Mine∣ralls, Woods, Fishings, Hawkings, Hun∣tings, Foulling, and all other Royalties, Priviledges, Franchess, Forts, Har∣bours, Profits, Commodities, and Hereditaments whatsoever thereunto be∣longing; 
As in, And by the said
 In∣dentures,

 relation 
being thereunto had may more at large appear. And whereas, the said
 William Penn, Robert West, 
&c. Have since conveyed one
 Moyties 
of that said tract of Land, called
 East-New-Jersey, 
and of all other the Premisses to the said
 James Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Ro∣bert Barclay, Robert Gordon, Arent Sonmans, Gavin Lowrie, Edward Bil∣lings, James Branie, William Gibson, Thomas Barker, Robert Turner, and Thomas warne, who are hereby become tennents in common of the said Premis∣ses called East-New-Jersey, with the said William penn, Robert West, Thomas Rudyard, Samuell Groome, Thomas Hart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, Ambrose Rigg, John Hay Wood, Hugh Harthorns, Clement Plumsted, and Thomas Cowper. 
And whereas, the said
 Thomas Wilcox hath since conveyed all his Share, Estate, and Interest, in the said Premisses to the said 
David Barclay,
 and his Heirs, And whereas, by the said severall recited Letters Patents made by his said Majestie, unto his said Royall Highness, as aforesaid, several powers and Authority are, and were, Given









 
granted unto his said
 Royall Highness 
his Heirs and Assignes, to be execut by his said
 Royall Highness 
his Heirs or Assignes or by the Deputies, Agents, or Commissioners, of his said
 Royall Highness 
his Heirs or Assignes, which are necessarie as well for the Planting, Peopleing, and Improving of all and every the respective Lands, Places, and Territories there∣by granted, And for the Transporting thither from time to time such of his
 Majesties Sub∣jects 
as should be willing to go, or be Tran∣sporting into these parts, or any of them, As for the Defending, Guarding, and keeping of the same. As also, for the well governing of the same, and of all such as are, and shall be inhabiting in the same. And for the mak∣ing, ordaining, and executing of necessarie and convenient
 Laws and, Constitutions, 
in order to such
 Government, 
and the Punishing and Pardoning
 Offences, 
and
 Offenders, 
as oc∣casion shall require. And to
 Nominat, Make, Ordain, Constitut, and Confirm, 
And al∣so
 to Revock, Discharge; Change, and Alter, 
all, and Singular
 Governours, Of∣ficers, and Ministers, 
which by his said
 Roy∣all Highness 
his Heirs or Assignes, shall be from time to time thought fit, and needfull to be
 made ordained, appointed, 
or
 used

 
in the saids parts, or places or any of them; And to do all other things needfull, usefull, and necessarie, for the well
 Governing, keep∣ing, Defending and preserving 
the said
 re∣spective places, 
and
 Territories 
and of every of them, and all such as are or shall be In∣habiting there;
 Now These Presents Wit∣nesseth, 
That for, and in consideration of a com∣petent sume of
 Lawfull English money, 
un∣to his said
 Royall Highness in hand payed; 
And for the better Extingushing all such
 claimes 
and
 Demands 
as his said
 Royall Highness, 
or his Heirs, may any wayes have of, or in the
 Premisses 
aforesaid, now called
 East-New-Jersey, 
or any part of them, And for the further and better settling, and convey∣ing, Assuring and Confirming, of the same, and of every part thereof according to the
 purport 
and
 true meaning 
of these
 presents, 
His said
 Royal Highness, 
the said
 James Duke of York, 
hath
 granted, bargained, sold, released, 
and
 confirmed; 
And by these presents, as far as in him lyeth, Doth
 grant, bargaine, sell, release, 
and
 confirme, 
unto the said
 James Earl of Perth, John Drummond, Robert Barclay, &c. 
their
 Airs 
or
 Assignes. 
All that part,
 share, 
and
 por∣tion, 
and all these
 parts, shars, 
and
 por∣tions,

 
of all that entire
 Tract of Land, 
and all these
 entire premisses 
so granted by his said
 Royal Highness, 
unto the said
 John Lord Barclay, 
and Sir
 George Cart∣wright, 
and their Airs, as in, by, and u∣pon the said partition was, and were Vested in the said Sir
 George Cartwright, 
and his Airs, and then agreed to be called by the name of
 East-New-Jersey; 
Together with all
 Islands, Bays, Rivers, Waters, Forts, Mines, Querries, Royalties, Franchises, and Appurtenances 
whatsoever, to the same belonging, or in any wayes appertaining. And all the
 Estates, Rights, Title, Interest, Re∣version, Remainder, Claime, 
or
 De∣mand 
whatsoever, as well in
 Law 
as in
 E∣quitie 
of his said
 Royal Highness James Duke of York, 
of, in, to, or out, of the same or any part or parcell of the same; As also the free use of
 Bayes, Rivers, 
and
 Waters, 
leading unto or lying between the said
 Premisses, 
or any of them, in the said parts of
 East-New-Jersey 
for
 Navigation, 
free Trade, Fishing or otherwayes; To have, and to hold unto the said
 Earl of Perth, John Drummond, 
Esquire, &c. their Airs and Assignes for ever. To the only use and behoove of them, the said
 Earl of

 Perth, John Drummond, 
Esquire,
 &c. 
their Airs and Assignes, for ever. Yeelding and paying therefore yearly for the said whole
 entire premisses 
unto his
 Royal Highness, 
his Airs and Assignes; the yearly rent of
 ten Nobles of Lawfull English money, 
at or in the
 middle Temple-hall of London, 
at, or upon the
 Feast of St. Michael the Arch-Angel 
yearly. And the said
 James Earl of Perth, John Drum∣mond, &c. 
do for themselves severallie, and for several and respective Airs, Exe∣cutors, Administrators, and Assignes, Cove∣nant, Promise and Agree to and with his said
 Royal Highness, 
his Airs or Assignes to pay or cause to be paid the said Annualrent of
 Ten Nobles 
on the dayes, and times herein before limited for payment thereof. And these presents, farther witness, that for the better enabling the said
 Earl of Perth, John Drum∣mond, 
Esquire,
 &c. 
their Airs and Assignes to improve and plant the said
 pre∣misses 
with people, and to exercise all necessary
 Government 
there, whereby the said
 pre∣misses 
may be the better Improved and made more useful to them their Airs and Assignes, and to the
 Kings Majesty, 
His said
 Royal Highness, 
hath likewise Given, Granted,

 Assigned and Transferred, And doth by these presents, Give, Grant, Assign, and Transfer unto the said
 Earl of Perth, &c. 
their Airs and Assignes,
 Proprietors 
of the said
 Pro∣vince 
of
 East-New Jersey, 
aforesaid for the time being all and every such, and the same Powers Authorities, Jurisdictions, Govern∣ments and other matters, and things whatso∣ever, which by the said Respective before re∣ceived Letters Patents, or either of them, are or were granted, or intended to be granted to be exercised by his said
 Royal Highness, 
his Airs, Assignes, Deputies, Officers, or Agents in, or upon, or in Relation to the said
 pre∣misses 
hereby confirmed, or intended to be confirmed, and every of them in case the same were now in the actual seazing of his said
 Royal Highness, 
to be held, enjoyed, exercised, and executed by them, the said
 Earl of Perth, John Drummond, &c. 
their Airs and Assignes,
 Proprietors 
of the said
 Province of East-New-Jersey, 
for the time, being as fully and amplie to all intents, constructions and proposes, as his said
 Royal Highness 
or his Airs might, could, or ought, to hold enjoy, use, exercise, or execute the same by force and vertue of the said several & respective before recited Letters Patents, or either of them,

 or of any thing in them, or either of them con∣tained, or otherwayes howsoever provided, al∣wayes, that these presents be entered with the
 Auditor General 
of his said
 Royal Highness 
within two moneths next after the date hereof.
 In Witness whereof, 
the par∣ties abovenamed to these presents,
 Indenturs, Interchangablie, 
have set their Hands and Seals, day and year first above written,


JAMES.




This contains an absolute Grant and Convey∣ance of the moyety of
 New-Jersey, 
called
 East New Jersey, unto the Right Honour∣able James Earl of Perth, John Drum∣mond, &c. 
under the yearly rent of
 Ten Nobles 
payable on the Feast of St
 Michael, 
in pursuance of a warrant from your
 Royal Highness, 
dated the second of
 March, 1683.


Geo: Jeffrey.


Sealed and Delivered by his 
Royal High∣ness in presence of




Ro: Worden.


Will: Crofts.


Jo: Ashtone.












Sir,


BY what is above written. I hope you are sufficiently convinced of the justness of the Title of the Proprietors, to what is contained in the Patent granted by the late King of hap∣py Memory, to his Royal Brother 
James Duke
 of 
York,
 now Our Most Gracious Soveraign: And now conveyed by him as you see, as also that by the constituti∣on of the Government, these who subject themselves thereto may rationally pro∣pose comfortable and peaceable life, with∣out any just ground of Fears of any in∣croachment upon their properties or liberties, even in matters of Opinion when the Proprietors are so far by their own concessions, from exempting them∣selves from being subject to the Law, that they declare themselves lyable thereto, as the meanest Inhabitants are, by one of the fundamental Constitutions; It re∣mains to give you als good ground to believe the above writen discription of the place, to be consonant to truth, and I shall offer you no other proof of this then what sufficiently convinced my self, that there can hardly be any cheat in the

 affair, to wit, the perusal of the follow∣ing Letters from that place: which I have been at great pains to collect for my own satisfaction in the particular. Yea, I have been so much upon my guard that I might not be imposed upon in this, that I have my self seen the principals of many of them, when you consider they come from several hands, at several times from People of Different perswa∣sions, and yet not the least contradicti∣on to be observed, amongst them all; and that the accompt given therein to the Generall Advantage of the Countrey, is homelogat by severall Gentlemen and Merchants, in this city, who to my self have Declared, they have been eye witnesses to the truth of the most materi∣all Passages in these accompts, narrated to the advantage of the place, I hope you will, find your self oblidged to rest Satisfied therewith.










An Account of the settled 
Towns,
 and most part of the 
Plantations,
 or Tract of Land, taken up in the Province of 
East-New Jersey,
 beginning at the outer∣most 
Southerly parts
 towards the Sea; So going up 
Northerly
 on 
Hudsons River
 to its outmost extent; This was the Condition of the 
Province
 Anno 
1680.
 Given under the hand of 
Captain Ni∣colas, Sacretary
 for the 
Duke
 in 
New-York.


Shrewsbery,
 A Town in that 
Province,
 lyes without 
Sandy-point,
 and hath the far∣thest plantation to the Southward; Its Sci∣tuate on the side of a River; not far from its entrance, and extends up into the Land; a litle distant from the said River, about eight mylles, near unto 
Collonel Morice,
 his 
Iron Mill
 and 
Plantation.


There is within its Jurisdiction 
Collonel Morice
 his Mannour being of 
 thousand 
Acres,
 wherein are his 
Iron Mills,
 his 
Man∣nours
 and diverse other buildings, for his Servants and dependants there, together with

 
60.
 or 
70. Negres
 about the Mill and Hus∣bandries in that Plantation.


There are diverse out-plantations, accounted to belong to the 
Jurisdictions of the Town,
 some in necks of Land by the Sea side, others within Lands, and towards 
Midletoun
 bounds, and others on the 
northside
 of the Ri∣ver, below 
Collonel Morice,
 his 
Iron mills;
 The 
computation of Acres
 taken up by the Town may be 
10000 Acres,
 and what is taken up by 
Collonel Morice,
 and the other Out-plantation 
20000. Acres,
 the number of the Families in Town are so, and of Inhabi∣tants Men Women, and Children 
400.


Midletoun,
 is nixt 
10.
 or 
12.
 myls o∣ver Land, Northward from 
Collonel Mo∣rice
 Iron Mills, being 
9.
 or 
10:
 Myles up from the entrance of that River, that which is pro∣perty, the Town may consist of 
100:
 Families, and of Inhabitants 
500:
 and of Acres taken up for the Town 
10000:
 and for the several Out-Plantations 
20000.


This was the second place settled in, till 
Nichols
 time, 
1664.
 but there are many con∣siderable Plantations within the Jurisdiction of that Town, viz. Captain 
John Broun
 and

 others that first settled, who removed out of the Town and settled greater plantations abroad 
Richard Hartshorn
 hath a Plantation, with considerable Land belonging to it, part with∣in, and part without 
Sandy Hook,
 which with a part 
of Coney Island,
 and 
Long Island
 opposite to it, makes the entrance into the Bay that goes up to 
Now-York,
 and also to the Lands of 
East-New-Jersey;
 the Town is above 
5:
 myles from the entrance of the Creek or River that goes up to it from the Bay.


There was a Plantation one the Norths side of the Creek at its entrance first settled by 
Nicol∣as Davis,
 having a large tract of Land be∣longing to it, of 
2.
 or 
3000.
 Acres, since de∣vided to deverse, besides several Out-plantati∣ons, and there is a great Deall of waist Land, and other Improveable betwixt this said Pis∣cattaway, for about 
20.
 myles, There was a court of Sessions held twice or thrice a year, for these two Towns, and their Jurisdictions.


Thirdly. Piscattaway,
 Lyes next 
25.
 or 
26.
 myles from 
Midletoun,
 Irs up 
Rari∣ton
 River 
5.
 or 
6.
 myles westward in, and there is about half myle within Land, The entrance into 
Rariton
 River is at the bottome

 of the Southren bay, and opposite to the Sou∣thermost point of 
Staten Islands
 the Northwest point of the entrance is called 
Amboy point,
 where is a fair tract of Land formerlie reser∣ved by the proprietor for his own use.


There are several Plantations all along on the North side of the River as you goe up to the Town, and some on the South-side, among which are considerable belonging to one 
Tho∣mas Lauernce
 a baker at 
New-York,
 his wife son, about 
3000.
 Acres.


Ʋp higher on 
Rariton
 River near the falls which are about 
3.
 miles over Land, there are severall Plantations a good big vassel loaden may goe up to; the falls, and so may above it for several myles in the River; At the falls its foordable for horses and other cattle, unl
s in great Floods when men may goe over
 boats and Canows; and horses will swim over, though the River be a good breadth.


About the falls, there are severall tract o
 Lands some upon on side some on the other si
 the River, viz: a place called by the In
¦ans 
Rachahova-Wallaby, Captain John Palmer
 of 
Staten Islands, Mr. Thom
 Coddrington, Mr. White; and Com∣pany

 Merchant at New-York,
 in part set∣led there on 
6.
 or 
7000.
 Acres.


M. John Robison, Mr. Samuell, Edsall, and Company of New-York, on 6. or 7000. Acres.


Captain Palmer, Mr. Whyte Cap∣tain Corsen, and Company on 5. or 6000. Acres.


There is
 some other Land taken up by Milstoun River, which comes into 
Rariton
 River, and is near the midle bounds between the two Province of 
East and West-Jersey,
 you pass 
Milstoun River
 to goe over Land from 
Piscataway to Meltinsed in Island in Delaware River,
 which is near 
Burling∣toun.


The Town Consists of about 
80:
 Families, and of about 
400.
 Inhabitants, and of Acres about the Town about 
10000:
 and for the out-Plantatations 
30000.


Woodbridge
 is over Land from Piscatta∣way about 
7.
 or. 
8
 miles it lyes up a River, the entrance whereof is about 
5:
 or 
6:
 miles to

 the North of 
Amboy-Point
 the side ebbing, and flowing betwixt the Main Land of 
New-Jersey
 and 
Staten Island
 on the Westside, as it doeth on the East-side of the said Island and 
Long Island.


On the South side of the entrance into the River or Creek, Mr. 
Delapairs
 Surveyour Generall hath a neat Plantation, and he hath severall tracts of Land in the Province: There are other Plantations on the South side of the River, or Creek, within Land and di∣verse on the Northside, lying along the water side, opposite to 
Staten Island
 untill you come to a Creek or River that divydes their bounds from these of 
Elezabeth Town,
 the mouth of it being 
8.
 or 
9.
 myles from 
Woodbridge.


There are severall Plantations up the South∣side of the Creek to the Road that goes along from 
Woodbridge
 to the Town, and passeth over that River, it being foordable over the Plantation on the north side, Sayling to 
Eli∣zabeth Town,
 Its reckoned from one Town to the other ahout 
15.
 or 
16.
 miles: over-Land, but its more by water.


This Town pretends to have more priviled∣ges

 them any other Town in the province, and hath a Charter of Corporation, It hath a Court house and a prison built on their charge; It con∣sists of about 
120
 Families, and 
600.
 Inhabi∣tants; The Acres taken up by the Town, may be about 
10000.
 and for the Out-plantations about 
20000.


Elizabeth Town
 is the first new place that was settled, 
1664.
 by vertue of a patent from Mr 
Nicolas
 to Captain 
John Baker,
 before the 
Lord Barclay,
 and Sir 
George Cartwrights Tittle
 was knowen; This Town lyes up 
3.
 myles within a Creek, the entrance whereof is almost opposite to the North-west-end of Staten Islands.


There are several Out-plantations on the North side of the River, which devides the hounds between this Town and 
Woodbridge,
 particularlie where the roads pass over, to which place is about 
7:
 or 
8:
 myles.


There are other plantations at the point or entrance of the Creek on the North side if it, comonly called Governour 
Cartwrights point,
 where there is another ferme, between the pro∣prietor and him, Its but a narrow passage there

 over to the Meadows of 
Staten Island,
 then on Northward there are other Plantations fron∣ting to the Bay that lyes to the North part of 
Staten Island,
 beside some other within Land from the Town to 
New-York
 bounds.


There is in this Town a house, orcheards and ferm within the Town in partnership between the Proprietor and Governour, 
Philip Cart∣wright
 it being one of the first house built there, and hath all along been the residence of the Go∣vernour, untill of late he hath finished his New-house.


The Town is built on both sides of the Creek, and Consists of 
150.
 Families, and of 
700.
 Inhabitants, The Acres taken up by the Town are computed to be 
10000.
 and for the Out-Plantations 
30000.


Newark
 alias 
Millfoord,
 is a Town dis∣tant to the Northward over Land from 
Eli∣zabeth
 Town about 
6:
 or: 
7:
 myles.


It lyes on a River called 
Newark River,
 which emptieth it self into the Bay about 
4:
 or 
5:
 myles down opposite to the Town, on the North side of the River lyeth a great tract

 of Land belonging to Mr. 
Kings-Land
 and 
Captain Sanfoord, the quittrents where∣of is purchased.


There is another great tract of Land taken up higher in the River by Captain 
Berrie,
 who hath disposed of a part of it; There are several Plantations setled there; Its said he hath about 
10000.
 Acres there, farther up the water is an Island of about 
1000.
 Acres, belonging to Mr. 
Christopher Hoogland
 of 
Newark,
 if it be not an Island, it is tyed by a very narrow slip of Land to the 
Con∣tinent.


Above that again is a greater tract of Land above 
8.
 or 
9000.
 Acres, purchased by Lease of the Governour, according to the Concessions, by Captain 
Jacques Cartelayne,
 and part∣ners, Who have begun some settlement.


All these tracts of Land are within the Ju∣risdiction of 
Newark.


In this Town hath been a Court of Session, held between this and 
Elizabeth Town;
 It is the most compact Town in the Province, and consists of about 
100:
 Families, and of

 about 
500.
 Inhabitants; The Acres taken up by the Town may be about 
10000:
 And for the Out-plantations, over and above beside Mr. 
Kings Land,
 and Captain 
Sanfoords, 40000:
 Acres.


At the bottom of the Bay upon over-
prok-Creek
-side near 
Hackinsack River,
 There is a River settled by severall Valleys having a brave mill belonging to it, they have taken up a brave piece of Land, into their plantations, for the which Mr. 
Nicolas of New-York
 hath a patent, but gave Leave to their setle∣ment at the request of Governour 
Cartwright,
 on promise of as much more in a better place.


Near unto 
Snoke-hill
 is a brave Plantati∣on on a piece of Land almost an Island contain∣ing 
1000:
 or 
1200.
 Acres, belonging to Mr. 
Penhorn
 a Merchant at 
New-York,
 and one 
Edward Eickbe,
 Its well improven and Stockt, Mr. 
Penhorn payed
 for his half 
500:
 lib.


There are other Plantations upon 
Hackinsak
 River, which goes a great way up the Coun∣trey almost 
North-West,
 there are other al∣so on the 
East-side
 of another Creek or River at 
Hackinsak River.




There is a large neck or Tract of Land, for which one Mrs. 
Sarah Kirk-stead,
 of 
New-York
 hath a Patent, given here by on old 
Indian Sachem,
 in recompence for her In∣terpreting the 
Indian Language
 into 
Dutch,
 as there was occasion, there are some little Families thereon.


Between 
2:
 or: 
3:
 myles up there is a great Plantation setled by Captain 
John Berrie,
 where he now Lives, there is a good house thereon, and a good quantitie of Land cleared and Improved by 
20. Negers
 or more, he hath about 
2000.
 Acres of Land there.


There is another Plantation adjoyning, which belongs to his son in Law, Mr. 
Michell Smith,
 who hath about 
1500:
 or 
2000:
 A∣cres, who by 
16:
 or more 
Negres,
 hath impro∣ved a good quantitie of that Land.


And there is another Plantation more near to Captain 
Berrie,
 belonging to 
Mr. Baker,
 who came from the 
Barbadoes,
 and bought the Land from 
Captain Berry,
 being about 
7:
 or 
800:
 Acres part of which he hath Impro∣ved by 
7:
 or 
8: Negres.




On the 
West-side
 of the Creek opposite to 
Captain Berry,
 there are also other Plantati∣ons, but none other more 
Northerly;
 up above these Plantations on that side of the neck of Land that is betwein 
Hudsons-River
 and it, the neck of Land is in breadth from Cap∣tain 
Berries
 now Plantations on the 
West∣side
 where he lives over to his old Plantati∣ons, to the 
East at Hudions-River-side,
 about 
3:
 myles, which distance, severs to 
Con∣stables-Hook
 upward of 
10
 myles.


To goe back to the South part of 
Berghen∣neck
 that is opposite to 
Staten Issand,
 where is but a narrow passage of water, which ebbs and Flowes between the said Island and 
Berg∣hen point,
 called 
Constable-Hook.


There is a considerable Plantation on that side of 
Constable-Hook, Extending
 in Land above a myle over from the Bay, on the 
East-side
 of the neck that leads to 
New-York,
 to that on the west that goes to 
Ha∣kinsak
 and 
Snokehill,
 the neck 
running
 up between both from the South to the North of 
Hudsons-River
 to the outmost extent of their bounds.




There belongs to that 
Plantation
 about 
12:
 or 
1500:
 Acres, and its well stockt and im∣proved; it was Settled first by 
Samuel Edfall
 in 
Collonel Nicholls
 time, and by him sold 
3:
 years agoe for 
600:
 lib.


There are other small Plantations along that neck to the 
East,
 between it, and a Little village of 
20.
 Families, called by the 
Indians.
 
 of 
Penelipe,
 
 then further one to another cottadge, there are more, where 
Lawrence
 the 
Draper
 lives a 
Dutchman,
 there may be 
16:
 or 
18
 Families, then one to 
George Umpane,
 which is over 
against New-York,
 where there is about 
40. Fami∣lies,
 within which, about the medle of the neck, which is here about 
3:
 myles over stands the Town of 
Berghen,
 which gives name to that neck, then again 
Northward
 to the wa∣ter side going up 
Hudsons-River,
 there lyes out a point of Land, wherein is a 
Plantati∣on, and a water belonging to
 a Merchant in 
New-York.


Southward
 there is a 
small Village
 about 
5:
 or 
6: Families,
 which is 
comonly
 called the 
Dukes Ferme,
 and harh alwayes

 paid a small annualrent to the Governour of 
New-York,
 who first granted it out for two lives, but leased out now for some years, yet is under the Jurisdiction of 
New-Jersey
 for Government; further up is a good Plantation in a neck of Land almost a Island, called 
Ho∣buk,
 It did belong to a 
Dutch Merchant, who formerly in the
 Indian 
war, had his Wife, Children and Servants Murthered by the
 Indians 
and his house, cattle, and Stock destroyed by them; Its now setled again, and a mill erected there, by one dwelling at
 New-York.


Ʋp Northward along the river side are o∣ther Lands near to Mr. 
William Laurance,
 which is 
6.
 or 
7.
 miles further opposite there∣to, there is a Plantation of Mr. 
Edsall,
 and above that 
Captain Beinfields
 Plantation, both without Tennents, this last is almost opposite to the northwest and 
Manhattas Island
 on the south part is 
New-York town, and Fort;
 there are other smal Plantations up the River to 
Havercham,
 near the 
High-lands,
 be∣tween which the River leads up to 
Lepus
 and 
Albany.


Here are the outmost extent of the Northren

 bounds of 
East-Jersey
 as alwayes com∣puted.


There was here taken up a great Tract of Land by 
Governour Philip Cartwright
 for himself, and another for an 
Campyne,
 and 
Company;
 Its supposed to be little Impro∣ven yet, some Plantations are said to be there, under the Jurisdiction of this Town of 
Berg∣hen
 are all the Plantanions on both sides of the Neck, to its outmost extent, as also these at 
Hakinsak:
 Here is a Town 
Court
 held by 
Select Men, or Overseers,
 who use to be 
4.
 or more as they please to choose 
annually, to try small causes, as in all the rest of the Towns, and two Courts of Sessions in the year, from which if the Cause ex∣ceed 20.
 lib. 
they may appeal to the Governour, and Council, and Court of Deputies in their Assemblie, who meet once a year.
 The Town is compact and hath been fortified against the 
Indians;
 There are not above 
70.
 Families in it. The Acres taken up by the Town, may be about 
10000.
 and for the 
Out-plantations 50000.
 and the number of Inbabitants are computed to be 
350.
 but many more abroad. The greatest part of the Inhabitants which are in this Jurisdiction

 are 
Dutch,
 of which somo have setled here, upwards of 
40.
 years agoe.


Patents have been given out by the Governour and Council, for the greatest part of the Land here discribed, all Lands Patented, are to pay the quitrents, whi∣ther improven or not; what is set forth here, relating to
 New-East-Jersey 
is only Computation of the Neighbours of that Collony; not declaring every thing to be just as he hath written, but sets it down as a good part to his own know∣ledge, the rest guessed at, and is to the best of his remembrance particularlie about the quantity of Acres and num∣ber of Inhabitants,






 


Acres,






Shrewsberry town and Plantation.


30000






Midleton and Plantation.


30000.






Piscattaway and out Plantations.


40000.






Woodbridge and out Plantations.


30000.






Elizabethtown and Plantations.


40000.






Newark and out Plantations.


50000.






Berghen and out Plantations.


60000.






 


in all 280000.












 


Acres,






Shreusberry Families


080.






Midletoun.


100.






Woodbridge.


120.






Elizabeth.


150.






Piscattaway.


080.






Newark.


100.






Berghen.


070.






 


in all 700. Families.






And reckoning 5. to all Families, the old Inhabitants in the several Towns estimate to be 3500. Persons.


These besides the out Plantations that cannot be so well guessed at, for Families or Persons, as the Towns.




I desire Sir, you may here stop a little, and consider the Incouragment to be had from the above written Information, which will by any understanding Person be judged of very great import, you come not to a place altogether void of Inhabitants; But on the contrar to a Coun∣trey, where at your first landing you have houses, which can accommodat you with all necessars whatsoever: If you look back with me to the great trouble these were redacted to, who first went to that place of the World,

 who were necessitat to carry over with them, Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hoggs, &c. Yea, all sorts of provisions, you will certainly ac∣knowledge that it is a very easie business now, in comparison of what it was then, when so soon as you come to land, you have houses to affoord you good and comfortable accommoda∣tion, till you make provision for one of your own; when you have some way accommodat your self with Lodging, you may from all hands provide your self with Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hoggs, 
&c.
 all sorts of Poultry, all sorts of Seed for sowing, this consideration does in my apprehension, make the Design far more easie, then would appear at first to any who would be necessitat to lay before his eyes great difficulties to be rancountered, when come from Ships, lodging is wanting upon the shore, no other Victuals are in readiness but what is brought along from the place they came from, none of these other accommodations to be fur∣nished, but what is brought a great way off: Sir, you will be oblidged to say we have even upon this one consideration, a great advantage of our Countrey-men lately settled at 
Port-Royal
 in 
Carolina,
 to mention nothing else in this place.


But now let us return to the perusal of se∣veral

 Letters from that place, and I desire you to mark narrowly if you observe the least contradiction in any matterial point, contained in any of them, or if you do not find the above written Discription quadrat in the least parti∣cular with the said Letters.




A Letter from 
Thomas Rudyard
 Deputy Governour of 
New-East-Jersey,
 to a Friend at 
London,
 dated at 
East-Jersey
 the 
30th.
 of the 
3d.
 Moneth called 
May, 1683.


Dear B. G.


TO be as particular in my return, were but thy due, yet I cannot promise so much, However I may give thee some general account of the Province, and of our satisfaction with our present Lot, the short time I have experienced this.


But to give thee also, as thou desires a Character of 
Pensalvania
 and 
West-Jersey;
 that will be a task I must be excused to undertake, least I give offence, or at least bring me under censure as partial: Were

 I not concerned in any of the Provinces I might satisfie thy curiositie: But be∣ing chieflie interested in this, I'le be very cautious medling with my Neigh∣bours more then here, one with another, so I may use my freedom with my Neighbours which they take not ill, but writ that they may take otherwayes; They lye so near adjacent, that they may be said in a sence, to be but one Coun∣trey; And whats said for one in General may serve for all: I have been at 
Bur∣lingtoun,
 and at 
Pensilvania,
 as far as 
Phi∣ladelphia,
 which lyes about 20, miles be∣low 
Burlingtoun:
 That journey by Land gave me some view of all the Provinces, and made me now considerably to esti∣mate this of 
East-Jersey;
 having some Conveniences esteemed be me, which the others are not so plentifully furnish∣ed withal, 
viz.
 fresh and salt Meadows, which now are very valuable and no man here will take up a Tract of Land without them; being the support of their flocks in Winter, which other parts must supplie be store, and taking more care for English Grass; But know where salt Marisshes are not; there is no 
Musket∣tos,


 and that manner of Land, the more health, and this was often answered me, when I have been making comparisons; I must tell thee, their Character in Print by all that reads it, here is said to be modest, and much more might have been said in its Commendation. We have one thing more particular to us, which the other want also: which is vast Oysters banks, which is Constant fresh Victuals during the winter to 
Eng∣lish
 as well as 
Indians;
 of these there are many all along our Coasts from that Sea as high as against 
New York,
 whence they come to fetch them, so we are sup∣plied with salt fish at our doors, or with∣in half a tydes passage, and fresh Fish in aboundance in every little brook, as 
Pearch, Trout, Ells, &c.
 which we catch at our doors. Provisions here are very plentiful, and people generally well stockt with Cattle: 
New-York
 and 
Bur∣lingtoun
 hath hitherto been their Mer∣cat, Few or no Trading-Men being here in this Province, I believe it hath been very unhappily heretofore under an ill managed Government, and most of

 the people who are such, who have been invited from the adjacent Collonies by that goodness of its Soill, and convenient Scituation, at 
Amboy
 we are now build∣ing some small houses of 30. foot long, and 18. foot breadth, fitting to enter∣tain Work-men, and such who will go and build larger, the stones lye exceed∣ing well and good up that 
Rariton River
 a Tydes passage, and 
Oyster-shells
 upon the point to make lyme withall, which will wonderfully accommodat us in building good houses cheap, warm for Winter, cool for Summer, and durable, covering for houses are Shingles, Oak, Chesnut and Cedar, we have plentiful here of all, the last endures a mans age if he live to be old; There is 5. or 6. Saw∣mills going up here this Spring, two at work already, which abates the price of boords half in half, and all other timber for building, for although tim∣ber coast nothing; yet workmanship by hand was 
London price,
 or near upon, or sometimes more, which these Mills a∣bate; we buy Oak and Chesnut boords no cheaper then last year; My habita∣tion with 
Samuell Groome
 is at 
Elizabeth

 Town,
 and here we came first, it lyes on a fresh small river, with the tyde, Ships of 30. or 40. Tuns come before our doors, throughout this Town is good 
English
 grass and (bears) a very good burthen; we cannot call our habitation solitarie, for what with the publict employ I have little less companie at my house dayly then I had in 
George Yeard,
 although not so many pass by my doors. The people are general a sober professing people, Wise in their Generation, Courtious in their Behaviour, and Respectful to us in Office among them. As for the Tem∣perature of the Air, it is wonderfully scituated to the 
Humours of Mankind,
 the wind and weather rarely holding in one point, or one kind for ten dayes toge∣ther: It is a rare thing for a Vessel to be wind-bound for a week together, the wind seldom holding in a point more then 48. hours, & in a short time we have weet and dry, warm and cold weather, which changes we often desire in 
England
 and look for before they come; Yet this Variation creats not cold, nor have we the tenth part of the cold as we have in 
England;
 I never had any since I came,

 and in the midst of Winter, and Frosts could endure it with less cloaths then in 
England,
 for generally I go with that same Cloaths I use to wear in Summer with you, but warm cloaths hurt not. I bless the LORD, I never had better health nor my Family, my Daughters are very well improved in that respect, and tell me, they would not change their place for 
George Yeard,
 nor would I; People here are generally settled, where the tyde reaches, and althoughs this is good Land and well Timbered and plentifully supplied with Salt-Marish, yet there is much better Land up higher on the River, where they may go up with small boats, where many now are settling, there's extraordinary Land, fresh Meadows overflowed in the Winter time, that produces multitudes of Win∣ter Corns, and its believed will end are 20, 30, or 50, years flowing without in∣tromission, and not decay; such Land there is at 
Sops
 on 
Hudsons River,
 which hath born Winter Corn about 20. years without help, and is as good as at first, and better. 
William Penn
 took a view of the Land this last moneth, when here,

 and said, he had never seen such before in his life: All the 
English Merchants,
 and many of the 
Dutch
 have taken, and are desirous to take up Plantations with us. Our Countrey here called 
Berghen
 is al∣most 
Dutchmen,
 at a town called 
Newark
 7. or 8. miles hence is made great quan∣tities of Syder, exceeding any we can have from 
New-England,
 or 
Rood-Island,
 or 
Long-Island;
 I hope to make 20. or 30. Barrels out of our Orchard next year, as they have done who had it before me, for that, it must be as providence ordered: Upon our view and survey of 
Amboy-point
 we find extraordinary well scituate for a great Town or City, be∣yound expectation, at low water round about the point are Oysters; There are Oysters of two kinds, small as 
English,
 and others two or three morsells, ex∣ceeding good for roasting and stewing; The people say our Oysters are good and in season all Summer; The first of the third Moneth I eat of them at 
Amboy
 very good; The point is good lively Land, 10. some places 20. foot above the water mark, About it are several Coves with small Coasts may lay up Vessels as

 in a decke, besides great Ships of any burthen, may all ryde before the town Land-loked against all winds: There 
Rariton-River
 runs up, or rather down 50 (far larger,) some say 100. mylles for small boats. I saw several vines upon the point, which produces, as they say, good grapes in their Season, this Coun∣trie is very full of them, but being no present mother of profite, few regard them more then to pick them as they lay in their way when they are rype. We have store of Clamms esteemed much better then Oysters; one 
Festivals
 the 
Indians
 feast with them, there are Shallops, but in no great plentie. Fish we have great store, as our relation set forth, but they are very good when catcht. (as the proverb is) I have se∣veral Barrels by me now, which are good for our Table, and for Sale. I brought a Sea-Net over with me which may turn to good account. Sea-Nets are good Merchandise here, mine cost me about 4. or 5. 
lib.
 and can have 20. 
lib.
 for it if I would sell it now; I may writ of many such matters in our Pro∣vince, which may invite persons here,

 but so am resolved to conclude, knowing that in probability, there is not an In∣dustrious man, but by GODS blessing may not only have a comfortable, but plentifull supplie of all things necessary for this life, with the salutation of my true affection to all, 
&c.
 I rest thy af∣fectionat friend,


Tho. Rudyard.






A Letter from 
Samuell Groome
 Surveyour General in 
East-New-Jersey,
 dated at 
East-Jersey,
 the 11th. of 
August,
 1683.


Friends, and Fellow-Proprietors.


SInce my last I have now sounded the Channell from 
Amboy to Sandy∣hook,
 and finds it to be a broad and bold Channell in no place less then 
3.
 fathom at high water, in ordinary tydes 
4, 5,
 or 
6,
 fathom, except in one short place, 
Rariton Ri∣ver
 is a good River, and hath a good tyde of flood, overpowering the freshes about 
30:
 miles above 
Amboy,
 after its flood, the tyde hath no force against the Freshes, which comes out of several branches of 
Rariton,
 and joyns in one, 
40.
 or 
50.
 miles above 
Am∣boy,


 I have spent a considerable time in mak∣ing discovery, I have not as yet had times to lay out much land for you, only about 
17.
 or 
18.
 thousand Acres in one tract, good upland near 
Elizabeth Town;
 I have now seen the tract of Land against (or nigh 
Amboy point
 for∣merly laid out by 
Vanquillian;
 it is on the West-side of a Creek called 
Chingeroces,
 a∣bout 
eight thousand Acres.
 And I intend shortly to lay as much or twice as much more to it; but first we must talk with the 
Natives
 about that, and other tracts of Land they are not yet paid for; The last day of this moneth is appointed to treat with several 
Indians
 to buy several exceeding good tracts nigh the head of 
Rariton.


The tenth of the next Moneth is also appoin∣ted to treat with other 
Indians,
 to buy other tracts of choice Meadowing, and Ʋp-land that lyeth about 
12.
 or thirteen myles up into the Countrey, which I have seen; and when we have accomplished these two things, we shall he able to lay out for you much land; and when I have been up in the Countrey towards and at 
Barnagate,
 and agreed with the 
Indians
 thereabout, for such land as we may see occa∣sion to purchase (presently) in order to a setle∣ment

 there; for here are many both of 
New-England, New-York,
 and some parts of this Province, stands ready to sit down in that part of the Countrey, not only for the sake of the good Ʋp land and Meadows, which re∣port saith, is much thereabouts; but also for the sake of the 
Whale
 Trade, and other fishing trade, which is like to be there shortly. 
New-England Men,
 and others were a
 tampering with the 
Indians
 to have purchased there, be∣fore and since we came, but now they are out of hopes of coming in at that door; so now they make their Addresses to us, and would have us to purchase, and let them come in our Ten∣nents, otherwayes as we may agree. I intend to attempt these things, this fall I have not been much on the South side of 
Rariton,
 only upon some upland at severall places, and upon the tract of 
8.
 thousand 
3.
 hundreth and 
20.
 Acres of yours aforementioned; and also on the Meadowing that lyes on the southside of 
Ra∣riton
 above 
Amboy,
 a year or two since, purchased of the 
Indians
 in the name of 
Dam Cartwright,
 though it was never intended for her, nor for any Proprietor, but as it fell out, they quarrelled about disposing and shar∣ing thereof, so it is now without controversie yours: Now know that 
Rariton
 River is

 accommodate on both sides with salt and fresh meadows, salt as far as the salt sea water flows or predominats, and fresh above as the River of 
Thames.
 We have about 
3000.
 Acres of meadowing butting on the river, I hope it will never hurt 
Amboy
 town, besides re∣port saith, that the upland next adjoyning to this meadowing, beginning over against 
Am∣boy,
 and so up 
10,
 or 
12,
 miles to a River that stricks out of 
Rariton
 south, and is cal∣led 
South River,
 is but mean land.


It may be well if you would agree to take each one a 
24th
 part of Lands as we lay them out whither it be more or less, or else take 
500.
 Acres Lots, and let these Lots be cast when 
24.
 times 
500
 Acres is laid out, & where we can make greater Lots we may; we have now got up three houses at 
Amboy,
 and three more ready to be set up, but workmen are scarce, and many of them base; the best will work but when they can spare time out of their plantations, (if no help comes it will be long are 
Amboy
 be built, as 
London
 is) housing will bring a Trade to that place, the 
Indians
 comes thither to get Fish, Foul, Oy∣sters, Clams, Mussels, 
&c.
 (as people go to mercat for things they want) and these 
In∣dians


 brings at Seasons great quantities of skins down 
Rariton,
 so by 
Amboy
 and to 
New-York,
 where they have a continuall supplie of things they want.


Well here is a brave Countrey, the ground very fruitfull, and wonderfull inclinable to 
English grass,
 as Claver, 
&c.
 It Predominats over the more wild grasse, very little barren, much dry up-land and good meadow, some phenny, swampy land, and small running brooks and rivers throughout all the parts of the Countrey I have been, and these phenny and swampy Land hears great burdens of grass; in short, the land is four times better then I expected, we must needs be out some money at present to purchase lands of the Indians, but that will be soon got in with profit, as people come to Inhabite and take up Land, and pay as alwayes they have done their part of purchase from the Indians; Here is great talk of the braveries of the place and land, 
Barnagate
 I intend to see shortly, after the season is fit∣itng, to go by land and water to it, I intend to go by water in a Sloop, to see how convenient its by water, and from thence come by Land, so then I shall tell you more; Ye must expect to be at charges for doing these and such other

 things I purpose shortly to writ to, and de∣mand in all places of the Quitrents, and Ar∣riers, they generally say, they will pay Captain 
Berry
 his two or three hundreth pounds be∣hinds in arriers, as is said because his caice dif∣fers from others a little, I'le (GOD permit∣ting) begin with them first of all about his rent, &c. and either have rent or land, what you write concerning building and repairing shall be ohserved, I wish I were freely rid of all the goods I have of yours, and my own at 
28. per cent.
 Excepting such as are for the In∣dian Trade, These part of America, are com∣modated with English goods; Nevertheless when I pay Workmen and Labourers, I pay them goods rated 
cent per cent; New-York
 mo∣ney, but then 
I
 must pay them 
2. or 3.
 silver, and part paction, which I procure with goods as well as I can.


The houses at 
Amboy
 are 
30.
 foot long and 
16.
 foot wide, 
10.
 foot betwixt joynt and joynt, a double Chimney made with Timber, and clay as the manner of this Countrey is to build, will in about 
50. lib.
 a house, this pay procur∣ed here, for 
25.
 in goods the first coast, I shall make you no return this year, seing we are about purchasing and surveying all, which will run

 out money in this place, where Mint are so scarce to be had on such accounts, I must as well as I can turn your goods into money, pro∣vision and goods for 
Indians,
 I have laid out 
Amboy
 into 
150.
 Lots, and have sent home a draught of it,


your 
S. G.






Abstract of a Letter from 
Gavin Laurie
 De∣puty Governour of 
East Jersey,
 to the Proprietors at 
London,
 dated from 
Elizabeth Town
 the 
2.
 of 
March, 1684.


I Took up several dayes with Coun∣trey men and others, to view the Ground and Water, at last I pitch∣ed upon a place where a Ship of 300. Tun may ride safely within a plank length of the Shoar at low water, and joyning thereto is a peece of marish ground, about 12. pearch broad, and 20. pearch long, and high land on each side like our Keyes by 
London Bridge;
 this may be easie cut quit round for smal Vessels to come to the Key, and lye safe round this Island, I set out Lots, 1. Acre a peece,

 
viz.
 4. pole at the Key, and 40. pole back∣ward, from thence along the river, near half a mile I lay'd out the like lotts ve∣ry pleasant for scituation where they can see the ships coming in the Bayes of 
Sandy-Hook;
 for near 20 miles the Ships may ride alongs by the Town as safe as at 
Lon∣don,
 just at the point by the Town; 
Ra∣riton-River
 runs up the Countrey a great way, there boats of 40 tun may goe, and the River, by the Town goes to 
New-York, Hudsons-River Long Island, Staten Island,
 and so to 
New-England;
 there is no place in all 
England
 for Conveniency and plea∣sant scituation; There are 60 Lotts upon the River, and 40 backward between these and the River, and these backward have a highway 100 foot broad, where I have laid out a place for a mercat, with cross Streets from the River to the Mar∣ket where the Town-houses are to be built; when this was done I laid out 400 Acres to be divided in 48 parts, 
viz.
 36 to each Proprietor, and those who have Lotts in the Town, I grant them half Lotts in this to pay for the Lotts in the Town, 20 pound or if a half Lott of 36 Acres

 40 pounds; I laid 400 Acres to ly untill the Proprietors agree to devyd it as people comes over; There is 16 Lotts taken up by the 
Scotish
 Proprietors, and 8 Lotts by the Proprietors that are here; There are 20 Lotts taken up in the Town by other People; I engadge all to build a house of 30 foot long, and 18 broad, and 18 foot high to the raising, to be finished within a year, To pay for laying out 40 shil: a Lot, and 4
 d per Annum,
 Quit-Rent there are several begun already to build, I have laid out between 40 and 50 Acres for the Go∣vernours house. The high way and wharfe between the Hooks and the Ri∣ver a 100 foot broad; And to 
eave a raw of trees along upon the River before the houses for shade & shalter exceeding plea∣sant: I have agreed for two houses of like demensions, to be built for the Proprietors; and also a house for the Governour of 6 foot long, & 18 foot broad And if the quit rents come in, I intend 3 or 4 houses more for the Proprietors, I can easily let them this work took me up 5 weeks After I had finished this work I set the people to work, 
Scotish
 and 
English,
 about 50 persons, some preparing, for building, other on

 clearing ground to get Corn sowne, this spring, then came in a Boar privatly to 
Elizabeth Town
 the 12th. past next morn∣ing; I went to 
New-York
 to visit the Go∣vernour, stayed there two or three days; He was very kind and promised a fair correspondency, so I did not publish my Commission untill this day before the Council; They have been kind and cour∣teous: Now is the time to send over people for settling these. There is 30000 Acres of Land in several places belonging to Proprietors formerly taken up by 
Cartwright,
 so here is land enough. The 
Scots
 and 
William Dorkwrans
 people coming now and settling, advance the Province more then it hath been advan∣ced these ten years. Therefore Proprie∣tors send over some Families and Servants; I shall presently set them out Land, and it well presently bring them in consider∣able profite in a few years here wants; nothing but people; There is not a poor body in all the Province, nor that wants; Here is abundance of Provision, Pork and Beef. At 2 
 d per pound,
 Fish and Fowl plenty; Oysters I think would serve all 
England,
 Wheat 4. 
shil. Ster. per.

 Bushell, Indian
 Wheat 2. 
ss.
 6. 
 d. per bus∣shell;
 It is exceeding good food every way, and 2. or 300. fold increass; Sider good and plenty for 1. 
 d. per Quart;
 Good drink that is made of water and Molasses stands in about 2. 
ss.
 per. Barrel wholesome like our 8. 
ss:
 Beer in 
Eng∣land,
 Good Venision plenty brought, us in at 18. 
d.
 the quarter, Eggs at 3. 
d.
 per Dozon; all things very plenty, Land very good as ever I see; Wines, Walnuts, Peaches, Straw-berries and many other things plenty in the woods; 
The Proprietors have
 150. 
or
 200. 
Acres
 3. 
miles from the town upon
 Rariton River, 
salt Marsh where I intend to let the people of
 Amboy 
cut grass for hay to their Cattle in Winter, untill we otherwayes order it, by Lots to them; I reckon there is laid out for the Town Governours house, and publick high wayes, near or about
 200. 
Acres, so there rests
 1800. 
Acres, I laid
 400. 
Acres as I said the rest to ly in common untill divided; I have put two houses in repair upon the River called the
 Point, 2. 
m: from
 Elizabeth Town, 
have let one of them with
 10. 
Acres of Pa∣sture ground, and
 10. 
Acres of Woody ground for
 7. 
years at
 26: lib. per annum; 
the

 man to clear the ten Acres of Woody ground, and make it fit for Pleuching or Pasture; I intend to let the other also with some land, all the houses were like to drop down, all the land lying wothout fence, and an barn quit falen down, and destroyed, another without any cover; And that other next to the house where I dwell all to peices, and all the fences and out-houses is down, but repairsd before I came; I am setting up a Ferry-Boat at
 Perth, 
for Men and Horses to go and come to
 Bur∣lingtown, Pensalvania, 
and
 New-York; 
Also I am treating with one to set up a house midway to
 Burlingtown, 
to entertain Tra∣vellors, and a Ferry-Boat to go to
 New-York, 
all which is for promotting
 Perth, 
that being the center; also you should give me power to set out a Line between the Governour of
 New-York 
and us; he calls on me for it, because several Plantations on the River are settled, and we know not yet what side they will fall to; I cannot at present mention all particulars, which you must supply by some general clauses or words, for it is not possible for you to un∣derstand what is for the good of the Province as I do, that am here; and be not sparing to send over people, it will bring you it again with large profits; for here is a gallant plentifull

 Countrey, and good land; I bave given you a large account of the little time I have been here; I have none to writ for me; but you must send a Coppy of this to
 Scotland, 
and with it your further Instructions to be signed, and send me forth; I will be bound till it come, I rest your friend, Sic subscribitur,


Gavin Laury.






An Letter from 
Gavin Laury
 to a Friend of his at 
London.


East-Jersey,
 
March 16. 1684.


Loving Friend,


I
 Promised to write to thee when GOD brought me to 
Jersey,
 but had not time till now, I shall give thee a breef, ac∣count of the Countrey, no 
fiction
 but the 
truth;
 It is beyond what I expected, It is scituate in a good 
Aire,
 which makes it healthy; and there is great conveniency for travelling from places throw the Province in Boats, from a small Canoa to Vessels of 
30, 40,
 or 
50,
 Tun, and in some places 
100;
 In the Bay coming up to 
Amboy
 point, where the Town of 
Perth
 is now in building, a Ship of 
300.
 Tun may asily ride closs to the Shoar, within a plank

 length to the Shoar, and the houses of the Town, and yet the land there, nor other in the Province is not low, Swampy Marish ground but pretty high ground, rising from the water side at 
Amboy
 point, the bank of the River is 
20.
 foot, in some places 
30,
 and in some 
40.
 foot high; And yet hath many convenien∣cies for landing goods, The soile is generally black in some places a foot deep, beareth great burthens of Corn, and Naturally bringeth forth 
English grass 2.
 years pleuching, the ground is tender and the ploughing is very easie, the trees grow generally not thick, but some places 
10,
 in some 
15,
 in some 
25,
 or 
30.
 upon an Acre; This I find generally, but in some particular places there is 
100.
 upon an Acre, but that is very rare; The trees are very tale and straight, the generall are Oak, Beech, Walnut, Chasnuts, and Accorns ly thick upon the ground for want of eating, Peaches, Vines, Strawberries 
nd many other sorts of Fruits grow commonly in the Woods; There is likewayes Gumtree, Cedar, White-Wood, like our Fir-tree, Walnuts, Chesnuts, and others lye tick upon the ground; there is great plenty of Oysters, Fish, Foul, Pork is 
2.
 pennies the pound, Beef, and Venison 
1.
 penny the pound; a whole fat back at 
5.
 or 
6.

 per Bushell, Indian
 Corn for 
26 per Bushel,
 Oats, 
20. pennies,
 and Barley 
2. shill: per Bushell;
 We have good brick earth, and stone for building, at 
Amboy
 and elsewhere the Countrey Farme houses are built very cheap, A Carpentar with a mans own Ser∣vants builds the house, they have all materi∣alls for nothing, except Nails; their Chim∣neys are of stones, they make their own Ploughs and Carts for the most part, only the Iron work is very dear; The poorer sort set up a house of two or three Rooms themselves after this manner, The walls are of cloven Timber about 
8.
 or 
10.
 Inches broad, like planks set on end to the ground; and the other nailed to the raising which they plaister within; they build a Barn after the same manner, and these cost not above 
5. lib.
 a peece, and then to w
rk they go. 
2.
 or 
3.
 men in one year will clear 
50.
 Acres, in some places 
60.
 and in some more; They sow Corn the first year, and afterwards main∣tain themselves, and the encrease of Corn, Cows, Horses, Hogs and Sheep, comes to the Landlord; several Merchants of 
New-York,
 have left their several Plantations there to come to 
East-Jer-sey; 2.
 or 
3.
 joyn together be 
12, 15,
 or 
20.
 Servants and one Overseer, which costs them nothing for the first year, except some Shoes,

 Stockings and Shirts; I have been to see these Plantations, and find they make a great in∣crease by them, maintains their Families at 
New-York
 with all provisions; sell a great deal yearly, and for Servants our 
English people
 are far better Husbandmen then the 
New-England men,
 the Servants work not so much by a third as they do in 
England,
 and I think feed much better, for they have Beef, Pork, Baccon, Pudding, Milk, Butter, and good Beer; and Cyder for drink: When they are out of their time, they have land for themselves; and generally turn Farmours for themselves; Servants wages is not under 
2: shill:
 a day besides Victuals; and at 
Amboy
 point 
2: shill: 6: pen: per day,
 at 
Amboy
 we have one setting up to make Malt, but we want a Brewar, I wish thou would send over some to set up a Brewhouse and a Bakehouse to bake Bread and Bisket, for a Bisket-maker we must have to vend our meat to the Plantations, send over some Husband Men and Countrey Fellows that Plough, Sow, Reap, Thresh and look after Cattle; A Carpentar or two, and a Smith for Ploughs and Horse, and a Cowper, which we want very much; If thou will send a dozon of Servants, most of them Countrey men, I will set thee out a gallant Plantation of

 
500.
 or 
1000.
 Acres upon a River side; but thou must send over some goods to stock it with∣all, I desire thee to encourage some of our Fri∣ends, especially the Proprietors to send over some servants to stock some Land, And when they have cleared it, if they have a mind to lett it, here are tennents to take it, and if they will sell it, here are also purchasers; there is one man since I came here sold his Plantati∣on for 
1500. lib.
 the whole was 
1600.
 or 
1800.
 Acres, whereof only 
120.
 Acres were cleared, upon which he had a house, Garden and Orchyard, and Barn planted; I know several men who lett cleared Land at 
6.
 shil 
8.
 pennies and at 
10.
 shil. the Acre yearlie rent, which is a good encouragement for sending over servants to plant; I write not this as idle story, but as things realy and truly are; I have sent for servants my self to setle a farme for if the Pro∣prietors will not do so, I see not what they can exect. The 
Scots
 have taken a right course, They have sent over many servants, and are likewayes sending more; They have likewayes sent over many poor Families, and given them a small stock, and these Families some for 
7.
 some for 
10
 years give the half of their increase to the Land-lord, except the milk, which the tennent hath to himself, I have set

 them out land, and they are at work, I beleive they will have 
40.
 Acres cleared this Spring; and this Summer I am to sett them out more, so that in a short time they will have a great in∣creass coming in, this will raise the price of the Land here; And is the reason that several from 
New-York
 bounds come to me, to take up Land, for they beleive now this Province will be improven; And our Land is beeter then theirs; so that every Proprietors sending over 
10.
 peo∣ple will be a great advantage to himself, en∣courage others to take up Land and bring all the division that hath been here to an end, for these men seing that they shall be ballanced are already more complyant then they were, Now I have layd these things before thee, and desire thee to impart them to some of the Proprietors, and other friends that they may consider of the same, I am thy Loving friend; Sic subscribtur,


Gavin Laury.






A Letter from 
Gavin Laury
 to the 
Scots
 Proprietors of the same date.


KNowing you do expect from us an account of this Countrey, we have for your encourage∣ment, and for the encouragement of all

 our Countrey Men who may be inclin∣able to come into this Countrey, given you this breef and true account of it, ac∣cording as we have seen and are credibly informed, for having seen little, yet save the Winter Season, we must writ what is to be seen in Summer, upon Information which we have just ground to believe to be true, because what we have seen al∣read in it (notwithstanding of all that we heard of it before we came) surpass our expectation in many things; the Aire in this Countrey is very wholesome, and though it alter suddenly sometimes be∣ing one day hot and another cold, yet people are not so subject to catch cold, or be distempered by it as in our Countrey of 
England;
 the land lyes for the most part pretty high, but on the River and Creek sides are many Meadows which lye low, of which the Countrey people getts their Hay, whereby their stocks are maintained in the Winter Season, Pro∣visions here are pentifull and cheap; There is Beef, Pork, Venision, Mutton, Foul and Fish, aboundance to be had at easie rates, and for drink they have good Beer, and Cyder, and these that are de∣sirous

 may have Wine of several sorts, and other kinds of strong Liquor, so that we see little wanting here that a man can desire; and we are here sure that a sober and industrious People might make this a rich Countrey, and enrich themselves in it, especially poor people who are hard put to it to gain bread at home; notwithstanding of the excessive Labour, for we see that people here want nothing, & yet there labour is very saml; they work not so hard by one half as the Husband men or Fermors in our Coun∣trey; and many of these who have setled here upwards of sixteen years, have lived upon the product of the Land; They cleared the first two years after they came (and cleared none since) which pro∣duced not only Corn to maintain their own Families, but to sell every year, and the encrease of their Bestial whereof they have good store of several Sorts, Cows, Oxen, Horses, Sheep, and Swine, yeelds them other provisions and to sell; besides, yet there be some more Indu∣strious among them who have continu∣ed clearing and Improving Land, and these have got Estates, and would not

 sell their Plantations for several hundred pounds, we have late up a little way on the 
Rariton
 River, but could not go so far as we intended being prevented by Rainy weather, but so far as we went was very rich land, and yet that above it is said to be richer, a great deal of it is natu∣rally clear of wood; And which is not so, is easily cleared, the trees being but small and a good distance from one an∣other, so that the Land yet untaken up so far as we can understand, is easier to clear then that which is taken up; the Towns that are already seated, being seated in woodiest places, the Merchants in 
New-York
 both 
Dutch
 and 
English
 have many of them taken up Land and setled Plantations in this Countrey, and seve∣rall from that Collony are desiring to come and take up land among us, though they might have land in their own Col∣lony without paying Quittrents; The wood here is not so hard to clear as ma∣ny think, they do not pull it up by the Roots, but them about a foot or more from the ground; and one man may cut down many in a day, four of our men the first day they began, cut down seven∣ty

 the best Trees they could find fit for building; there are not many of great Trees, but straight and tale, and there be of many sorts, Oak, Walnut, Ches∣nut, Cedar, Popler, Gumtrees, Firrs, Pines, Birth and Beech, and other sorts which we remember not at present; there are many good Orchards of Fruit trees, and they make abundance of good Cy∣der, especially at one Town called 
New-wark,
 which is esteemed at 
New-York
 and other places where it is sold, beyond any that comes from 
New-England;
 there are Peaches, and Vines grow wild about the River sides, which in Season bears good Fruit, and Grapes, and there are Strawberries over all the Woods and many other kind of goods and Fruits, and at 
Amboy
 point and several other places there is abundance of brave Oy∣sters: There will be many houses built there quickly, for many have taken up lots and all that have taken are oblieged to built within a year; there is good en∣couragment for Tradsmen to come over, such as Carpentars, Massons and Brick-layers, for they build not only of Wood, but also of Stone and Brick, yet most

 of Countrey Houses are built of Wood, only Trees split and se
 up in end on the Ground, and Coverings to their Houses are mostly Shingles made of Oak, Chesnut and Cedar wood, which makes a very neat Covering, yet there are some Houses covered after the 
Dutch
 manner with pantikles; the Towns are all settled upon Rivers, where Vessels of 30, or 40, Tuns may come up to their doors, and the out plantations generally upon some Brooks or Rivelets which are as plenty here as in our own Countrey, and curious clear water, and in many places are good Spring walls; but in the Towns every man for the most part have a well diggd by his own hand: Among all the towns that are Setled here, there is none lyeth so convenient for trade as 
New-Perth,
 for Shipps of great burden may come up closs to the houses, and may come up any time in the Winter; There came a Ship of 300. tuns in there this winter, in the hardest frost we had, and lay hard by the town, so near that she was tyed to a tree: The Land here; brings furth most sorts of English grain, and great encrease, Wheat, Rye, Barly,

 Oats and others sorts of grain, such as 
Indian
 Corn, which is very good and wholesome kind of Grain; and also Buck-Wheat, and those Corns are to be had at easie rates, either for money or for goods, and those that have not m
¦ney or goods may have abundance for their work.






We shall now answer so far as we are capable, your 
Quarries
 sent over to us.




To the first, we cannot positively answer to give an account of the whole length and breadth of the Province, But we are informed that it is a great deale broader then ye expected, for these that have travelled from the extent of our bounds on Hudsons-River straight over to the 
Delawar
-River, say it is 
100.
 myles or up∣wards; we shall know that certainly after a while, for the Line betwixt us and 
New-York
 is to be run straight over to Dela∣ware-River, about 
3.
 weeks hence, and after that the Line betwixt us and 
West-Jersey,
 After which we shall be able to give a true ac∣count of the bounds of that Province.


2ly. When the bounds is so exactly laid out we can the easier guess at the Number of Acres, and by that time may be able to give an account what number of Acres is already ta∣ken up, but there is no fear of want of Land.


3ly. The quantity of Meadow ground we cannot determine, having travelled as yet but litle in the Province, but the way we have travelled, there is meadow abundance, both on the water sides and on the up Land.


4ly. There is also other good ground in some places great quantities free of wood, which is fit either for Corn or Grass, and the ground all over brings furth good English grass naturaly after it is ploughed.


5ly. There are also Commons upon the Countrey, but what quantity we cannot tell, there is litle keept in them save wild horses, which the people take up when they have occa∣sion; There is also Land fit for pasturage for Sheep, and there is their Sheep in the Coun∣trey; but what number the ablest planters have we know not, but some we see have good flocks.


6ly. An exact Mapp of the Countrey is not yet drawn nor can you quickly expect it, for it will tak up a great deale of time, charge and pains to doe it.


7ly. There are also hills up in the Coun∣trey, but how much ground they take up we know not, they are said to be stony and covered with wood, and beyond them is said to be ex∣cellent land.


8ly. To the Eight we cannot answer as yet.


9ly, There be People of several sorts of Re∣ligion, but few very Zealous; The People be∣ing mostly 
New-England
 men, doe mostly in∣cline to their way, and in every Town there is a meeting house where they worship publickly every Week; They have no publick Law in the Countrey for mantaining publick Teachers; but the Towns that have them makes way within themselves to maintain them; We know none that hath a setled Preacher that followes no o∣ther Imployment, save one Town New-wark.


10ly. The method of building their houses is mentioned already.


11ly. There are not many Out Plantations that are not within the bounds of some Town; Yet there be some, and these are the richest, what number are there we know not, some have great quantities of Land and abundance cleared.


12ly. The richest Planters have not above 
8.
 or 
10.
 Servants, they will have some of them 
1
 Dozon of Cowes, yea some 
20.
 or 
30. 8.
 or 
10.
 Oxen, horse more then they know themselves, for they keep breading Mears, and keep no more horses at home then they have occasion to work; The rest they let run in the woo
 both Winter and Summer, and take them as they have occasion to use them; Swine they have in great flocks in the wood, and Sheep in flocks also, but they lett them not run in the woods for fear of being destroyed by wolves; Their profite arises from the Improvement of their Land, and Increase of their Bestial.


13ly. There will be in most of the Towns already settled at least 
100
 Houses, but they are not built so regular as the Towns in our Countrey, so that we cannot compear them with any Town we know in 
Scotland;
 every house in the Town hath a Lott of 
4. Acres
 ly∣ing to it; so that every one building upon his

 own Lott makes the town Irregular and scatter∣ed; There streets are laid out too large, and the Sheep in the Towns are mostly mantained in them; They are so large that they need not trouble to pave them.


14ly. Betwixt 
Sandy-Hook,
 and 
Lit∣tle Egg harbor lyes 2. Towns Midletoun and Shrewsbery,
 there is no Land taken up that way but what is in the bounds of these two Towns; what kind of land it is, we know not, having never travelled that way, 
Bor∣nogate or Burning-Holl
 is said to be a very good place for fishing, and there is some desir∣ing to take up land there, who inform us that it is good Land, and abundance of 
Meadow
 lying to it.


15ly. There are no 
Fisher-men
 that follows only that trade, save some that salt 
Whales
 upon the Coa
ts, and other Fishes, there is abundance to be had every where through the Countrey in all the Rivers, and the People commonly fish with sives or long netts, and will catch with a sive 
1.
 sometimes 
2.
 barrels a day, of good fish, which they salt up mostly for their own use, and to sell to others.


16ly. There is no Ships belonging to this Province particularly, or built here, save one which 
Samuel Groome
 built here the last Summer, which stands yet in the Stocks (a stop being put to it by his death;) there is conveniency enough to build Shippes, the Shippes in this part trade mostly to the 
West-Indian Islands,
 and some to 
New found-Land,
 where the Provisions of this Countrey vends.


17ly. There is land here in several places, after it is cleared and brought into a farm sett out for Rent
, as in out Countrey at 
5.8.
 and 
10.
 shil. 
per Acre.
 According to the goodness and scituation of the said Land, and those that will be at charge to clear land may get tennents to take upon these termes; But whither it will turn to good account or not because little experienced as yet with the Charge of clearing of Land. I will not positivly inform.


18ly. There is several places of rhe Coun∣trey fit for mills, and several both Corn and Saw mills already sett up, and good encou∣ragment to sett up more.


19ly. The Acres are here reckoned accord∣ing

 to the 
English
 Account; There is 
16
 foot goes to the Rude, and 
20.
 Rude long and 
8.
 Rude broad, makes an Acre; One English butt of Wheat which is 
8 English Gallons
 or 
Scots Quarts,
 commonly sows an Acres 
2.
 bushells of Barlay also an Acre, and 
2.
 bushells of Oats an Acre, and half Acre; 
English
 peck which is 
4. English
 quarts or 
Scots Shopens,
 of 
Indian
 Corn plants one Acre.


20.
 There are but few 
Indian-Natives,
 in this Countrey; Their strength is inconsi∣derable, they live in the Woods, and have small towns in some places far up in the Coun∣trey; They plant a little 
Indian Corn,
 shoots Deer, and other wild Beasts and Fowls for their food; They have 
Kings
 among themselves to Govern them; for 
Religion,
 they have none at all, they do not refuse to sell Land at occasion.


The prices of Grain and other Provi∣sions here at present,


Indian 
Corn, 2.
 ss. 
6.
 d. 
the Bushell, Wheat 4 shill: Rye, 3. shill: Oats, 1.
 ss. 
8.
 d. 
the Bushel, Beef, 1
 d. 
Pork 2.
 d. 
Ve∣nison 1
 d. 
Mutton 3
 d. 
the pound, this
 English 
Measure and Weight; But mark

 these things being valued in this Coun∣trey money, there is a fifth part diffe∣rence betwixt it and Sterling money, So that Wheat being valued here at 4.
 ss. 
the Bushel, is but 3
 ss. 
3.
 d. 
Sterling, and so of the rest proportionally.


Here you have an Account of things as far as we are capable to give you at present, with which we hope you will be satisfied, while further opportunity and better experience give us occasion to writ more; And so we rest your Fri∣ends and will wishers to all our Country Men.


Sic subscribitur,



David Barclay.


Arthur Forbes.


Gavin Laurie.




Elizabeth Town in East-Jersey, 
the 
29.
 of the first moneth called March, 
1684.




This I have heard read, do also subscrive to the truth there is, and so rests, 
G. L.


For the 
Scots Proprietors
 of 
East-Jersey.














A Letter, from 
George Mackenzie
 Merchant in 
Edinburgh,
 to Mr. 
George Alexan∣der
 Advocat there.


Elizabeth-Town 
Sept.
 1. 1684.


Mr. 
Alexander,


I Doubt not but you expect here a particular ac∣count of the province of 
New-Jersey,
 but that I thought needless, The person 
David Barclay
 whom this comes alongst with, being more able to give you that satisfaction, as whose interest oblidgeth him to a more narrow observation of its natural advantages, and whose place being one of the Council, gives a larger liberty and occasion to inspect the concerns of this Province; But in general its a healthfull, plea∣sant fruitful Country, in many places of a most Luxu∣rious Soyle, rewarding the labour of the Country∣man sufficiently, its well watered with many fair and pleasant Rivers and Creeks, stored with seve∣ral sorts of fish, and most of the Rivulets convenient for mills, whereof there are severall both for sowing of wood and grinding of Corn. They raise great store of Hogs & Cattle; and fowls they have in abun∣dance; The Countrey for ten or fifteen miles up from the River and Sea is generally plain; farther up Mountains, besides the Towns mentioned in the publick paper since Governor 
Lawries
 arrivall, there is laid out at 
Amboy-point
 1000. Acres for the City of 
Perth
 divided into 96. Lotts, 9 Acres to a Lott, the Remainders is for the streets, Mercat place, Go∣vernours house, and other publick conveniencies. How large the Countrey is, is a question hard to re∣solve,

 and how much bought by the Proprietors (if any) 
David Bar
lay
 can satisfy you, The inhabi∣tants are 
English,
 with a few 
Scots, French,
 and 
Dutch
 of sufficient number, to defend thems
lves against any prejudice may be offered them by the Inhabitants. That fancie of a Common Improvement will not take, but whoever expects profi
e from their Inte∣rests here, must Imp
ove them a part, I have sold some of your Gloves a
 2 shil: and 6 pen: 3 shil: 4: pen. a pair, being what I c
uld gett for 
hem; the money five and a half part less then 
Inglish,
 and shal make an account thereof at meeting, Pres
nt my ser∣vice to all Friends.


I am Your very humble Servant, Sic scribitur, 
George Mackenzie






A Double of a Letter from 
New-Perth,
 da
ed the 1 of the seventh 
Moneth,
 1684. From 
Iohn Reid,
 who was Gardner to the Lord 
Advocat,
 to a Friend at 
Edinburgh.


SEing it hath pl
sead 
God
 to bring me and mine safe unto this part, I took upon my self as oblidged to writ something according to my pro∣mise of this Countrey; indeed I must sa
 its a brave place, but I have nor had time to take such ob∣servations as I w
uld, being so ingadged to at∣tend my other businesse; Here is no ou
ward want, especially of provisions, and if people were in∣dustruos they might have cloaths also within them∣selves; by the report 
f all, its the best of all 
he 
Neighbouring Collonies,
 it is very wholesome, pleasant, and a fertill-land,

 there are also some barren land, 
viz.
 whit Sandy land, full of Pin trees, it lyes betwixt 
South-Ri∣ver,
 and 
Barngate
 on 
Neverssink,
 (albiet there be also much good land in that precinct) yet its a good place for raising a stock of cattle, provid∣ing they have large room to run in, for cattle finds g
od food there in winter, when none is in the best land, and therefore do the inhabitants provide little hay in winter. The soyl of the countrey is generally a 
red marle ear
h,
 with a sur∣face of blak mould (nor doth it appear that rea∣ly it is to their eyes; who cannot penetrat beyond the surface) full fraughted with grass, pleasant hearbs, and flowers, and in many places little or no wood, but most places full of large timber, as walnut, especially oak, there be some places here and there in the Woods, they call swamps, whick is low Ground, amidst or betwixt rising ground full of bushes, which holds water in win∣ter, tho most of them be dry in summer, but these being cleared, and some of them that needs being drained, are the richest land; here are great conveniencies of Bay, Sounds, Rivers, Creeks, Brooks, and Springs, all over the Province; but one of the best things is the large quantities of brave Meadowes, both falt and fresh, which makes the people here able to supply their Neighbours as they doe, throw the abundance of their cattle. I know one Planter who hath a hundred of cattle, not above three years setled, and no wonder for some of the grasse is als high as my head; Its pity to see so much good land as I have been over in this province lying wast, and greater pity to see so much good and convenient land taken, and not improven.


As soon as any of the land here comes to be cul∣tivated, it over-runs with small Claver-grass, by the

 pasturage and dunging of cattle, and so supplants the naturall grass and hearbs, notwithstanding of their quick and strong growth, Fruit trees also pros∣per well here; 
Newark
 made about a thousand barrell of sider last year (a barrell is 8 
Scots gallons
) this is like that of 
Woodbridge;
 who made 500 barrels of pork in one year, before the law was made against the swins trespasses.


Here they sow most 
Indian corn,
 and Wheat, some Rye, Barly, Oats, 
Indian corn
 the first year that they break up or plough, the second they sow Whea
, be∣cause the spontaneous grouth of the weeds is done a∣way by howing the 
Indean corn,
 as we do cabboge; here is one planter makes accompt, 
That he hath ab∣out three thousand bushels of wheat reapt this year; I
 suppose he hath above a hundred acres of it, but I doe not make these instances as so many precedents.


I know nothing wanting here, except that good Tradsmen, and good Husbandmen, and Labourers are scarce; a Labourer may have a bushell of Corn 
per day,
 when he is a little acquainted with the work of the country, but Tradsmen much more, Smiths, Carpenters, Masons, Weavers, Taylors, Shoe∣makers, are very acceptable; any who comes let them bring some cloaths, and their proper tools with them, as used in 
England,
 and provide butter, bisket, wine, and especially beer and ale, for their Sea-voyage, besides the ships allowance, and they need not fear when they come here, albiet they have no more, yet they will be the better if they have something, either in money or 
Scots
 linning, and stuffs to buy a little provision at first, to set them up a house, and buy a cow or two; and tho a man be rich, I would not advise him ro bring many servants, at least not to keep many at first, untill he see about him, and know what he is doing.




I Cannot tell what goods are best to bring, 
David Barclay
 can tell better; But he who brings money, may expect 15. d. For the 
English;
 shil: some may bring a Little of the best Wheat for a change of seed, and some barly, and Oats, for the same use; al∣so a Litle 
Scots
 field pise, there being none such here, bring also some great clower seed.


There are great store of Garding hearbs here, 
I
 have not had time to inquire unto them all, ne∣ther to send some of the many pleasant (tho to me unknown plants of this Countrey, to 
James Suther∣land
 Physick Gardiner at 
Edinburgh,
 but tell him, I will not forget him, when opportunities offers.


I had forgot to writ of 
Ambo,
 or 
New-Perth,
 therefore I add, that it is one of the best places in 
Ame∣rica,
 by the report of all Travellers, for a town of trade; for my part, I never saw any so conve∣niently seated; this with my love, and my Wifs to all friends, and acquaintances,


I Rest thy friend, 
John Reid.






David Mudies
 Letter to his Wife.


New-Perth.
 
the
 12. December. 16
4.


My heart,


I Hope this shall find you and your Children in Good-health, and I wish in as much satisfaction as I and our Children are here, far beyond my ex∣pectation, and others my well-wishers, who are

 with you, my last to you was upon my arrival here, dated the 8th of 
November,
 and at that time I could give you but a small account of my Judgement anent it, it would take a great deale of time to in∣form you of every thing, as it truelie is; But to be short, I have travelled through a part of it, and it is far larger than ever I heard it reported in 
Scotland:
 I dare say, above a third more ground, and there is abundance of brave Rivers through 
t all, 
 better then ever I did see in any place, brave Meadows a∣l
st all the River sides: and lands above the Mea∣d
w ground, abundance of Fresh water Brooks, and Springs, plenty of Fishes in all the Rivers, in the Summer time, and that very good Fishes such as they preserve for Victual in the W
nter, and in very few days they use to take more then they make us
 of in Winter; as for wild Meat there is of all sorts; 
Cows, sheep
 and 
Oxen
 as large as in 
England,
 and aboundantly cheap, considering their good∣ness, Corns and all Sorts of Fruit in great aboun∣dance, and no less then they are called in 
Scotland.
 Mo
y within this three years is become pretty plentiful, Servants dear and scarce, I have taken up sex Acres of Land in 
New-Perth,
 which pleases me exceeding well, in regard it is good Land, and f
 
r building of a City, and Persons of Good For∣tune a
e come from New-York, and other places in th
 Countrey, and are very busy building; and I a
 begun to build a house, and have near digged the ground, which is very hard, it being under a great part of it Oker, which is hard to digg, and the least deepness is eight foot: I have my two Wrights Squaring of Timber for it, and I resolve to have it a good Handsome House, six Rooms off a floor, with a Study, two stories high above the Sellers, and the Garret above; And I doubt nor

 if the Frost bide away, but I shall have the Sellers finished, and the gests laid above it, against the let∣ter end of this moneth; for the Land that lyes to the house, I resolve to fence in two Acres of it for an Orchard. and an Yeard, and to have hat done before the middle of 
February,
 and to have it plant∣ed with fruit trees; for 
I
 find a man in three years will have more Fruit in such in Orchard then he kn
ws how to make use of.


And about the middle of 
February,
 according as the Weather is, I resolved to go out where I have tak
n up my Land, which is upon a River, called the 
South-River,
 which is an exceeding pleasant River, and place, there goes onely with me 
here 
Mr David Violent.
 I can go from 
New-
erth
 
o it in a Boat, in two houres and a half, let the wind blow as it will, and come ba
k again in as much time; I wish I had as many Servants here as 
I
 could make use of. Any man that is 
rugal, and hath 300. lib. Sterling in Stock, to come over here, and bring over 7. or 8. g
od Servants with him, I could assure him in 3. years time he sh
uld make a stock better then 1000. if not 1500. lib. if he bestow his money right in 
Scotland,
 and take advice to bring all things here which is necessary for him to have in this Countrey. I am uncertain of the time I wil be at Home, but 
I
 resolve you shall come over with me again, and ye will both think and say, when ye see the Countrey, that ye wish it had been done twenty years agoe. I thought it not fit to trouble my friends and relations; since I could not write short Lettèrs to them, but any of them that desires to know the condition of this Countrey, ye may shew them this Letter, since there is no secret in it, you will find by 
William Burnets
 Letter, that he desires some of his Sons to come over, and 
John Geddis


 writs for some of his Brethren; the which Letters cause deliver them carefully, and get an answer that if they be to come over, ye may speak for their pas∣sage timely; he tells some of them are good Wrights; which is all at present, but keep a good heart to your self, and take care of your Children, and I hope to see you with more Comfort then we parted, and I am your ever loving Husband while I breath,


Dauid Mudie.






James Johnston
 of Spotswoods Letter to his Brother, 
John Johnston Drougest in
 Edinburgh.


East-Jersey 
the 12th. of December, 1684.


Loving Brother,


I Have taken up a part of my Land, 9. miles from 
Amboy,
 and 4. miles from 
Piscataway,
 and as far from the nearest part of 
Rariton,
 on a Brook side, where there are exceeding great plains with∣out any Timber, there is excellent Gunning for Dear and Turkies, of which there is great plenty, and easily shot. But I resolve to see a place called 
Bernagate,
 which is 60. or 70. miles from this, on the Southermost place of the Province, where there is a good River and Harbour, the best Fishing and Gunning in any place in 
America
 30. or 40. miles from any Plantation. The Indians here are nothing to be feared, the Place being as peaceable as any where else; I had occasion to travel through 
Long-Island.
 and 
Stallen Island,
 and for many miles found as many towns and plantations in the way, as in any so much Land in 
Louthean,
 there are no Bears

 nor Ravinous Beasts but Wolves, which are no∣thing to be feared, neither are the Countrey People afraid to be among them all night, in so much as I oft-times going wrong, and lying out all night, and hearing their yells about me, and telling that I was afraid of them, the Countrey People laught at it; neither are the Snakes any thing to be noticed, for nothing can come near them, but they give warn∣ing with the ratling of their tail, so that People may either kill them, or go by them as they please. Oxen are so well taught that they go sometimes in a Plough, or Cart, without Horse, or without a Gade-man; Horses and Cattel are as cheap as in 
Scotland,
 considering their goodness and the differ∣ence of the Money; All sorts of 
Scots
 goods sells well here, ye will be advised with the next Occasi∣on, what goods sells best in this place. I have great reason to thank GOD, that I am in a place which abundantly answers any thing I expected; The Air is healthful, and the Soil fruitful; the 
Indian
 Corn yeelds commonly 2. or 3. hundred fold, Oats 20. fold, as I am informed; the 
Indian
 Corn is an ex∣cellent grain, I have eat it and likes it very well in Pottage and Bread; there are several reasonable good towns in this Province, most of them hath more then eighty Families; there is no poor persons here, but all are half idle in respect of what they work with you. Flax twice heckled, sold at 9. 
 d. per pound,
 Wool is very cheap, only work is dear; the Liquor we most use is Sider; we have great store of Fruit. In many places untaken up there are many plains and not a tree; I have never since last part∣ing had any sickness to keep me from one Dyet, for which I render thanks to GOD. The 
Indians
 here make it their trade to kill Venision, and sell it to us: for a smal matter, I will have my Family served with

 Flesh all Winter; one of their 
Sashiams,
 (which is their King) came to the Governour when I came first here, desiring he might be suffered to trade amongst us, and not to be beat out of our houses, when they were drunk, but only that we might bind them, and permit them to cut timber, and some such things: At 
New-Perth,
 we have a good Stationers Shop of Books, the land is no where diffi∣cult to clear, albeit trees be 100. foot long and 3. or 4. foot over; I would heartily wish and perswade any to come over that intends to live well, plenti∣fuily and pleasantly: Neither is there any Tradesman or Servant that could come wrong to this place, and I could wish my best friends no better but in the same place with me; the old Inhabitants are a most careless and infrugall People, their profession are most part 
Protestants,
 few 
Quakers,
 some 
Anabap∣tists,
 it is most desired there may be some Ministers sent us over, they would have considerable Bene∣fices, and good Estates; and since it would be a matter of great Piety, I hope ye will be instrumen∣tall to advise some over to us, the place is aboun∣dantly healthfull, as any else; there are a great dif∣ference betwixt the people here, who are Strong and Vigorous, and the people more Southerly in Mariland, we have great store of Venision which is sometimes as fat as Pork; one good Buck is sold at 5. 
shil.
 and by the 
Indian
 at 2. 
shil.
 Oats are sold at 18. 
pence
 the Bushell; all sorts of Fish is here exceed∣ing plentifull, the poorest Persons ea
s no Meat that is Salt, except Pork; in Summer, they live much on Milk. I would no more value the Sea coming through if I had occasion, then ye would riding of of 20. miles; let me be rememberd to all friends, to 
Patrick Fortune
 who most carefuly disswaded me from this Voyage; which 
I
 doe not repent, but would

 as carefully perswade others, who study their own good; what I most earnestly desire of you, for the encouragment of this Plantation, is, you would be Instrumental to send us over some Ministers, who I dare engadge shall afterwards ever be thank∣full, and I oblidge to be your ever affectionate Bro∣her,


James Johnston.






Amboy;
 or New-Perth in 
America,
 
 9. of 
November,
 1684.


Dear Brother.


HAving accidently met with the Bearer, had not time to give you any particular accompt of this Countrey, only assure you, that it is beyond (not only) all our expectations, but all that ever you have heard spoken of it, we (praised be GOD) all of us arrived safely without the loss of any on
 Pa
ger; scacely any of them was ever sick, only we had much troubles coming from 
Mariland
 by land, our Skipper having for his own advantadge put in first at the 
Capes
 of 
Virginia;
 but we have had a brave Prospect of the Countrey, and all the way as well as in this place where now we are, we found plenty of Corn, and all Kinds of Fruit, with Fish, Venision and wild Fowls, in such abundance, that a Deer may be had for 2. 
shilling
 Countrey money, and Turkies for 6. 
pence,
 which will be at least as big as any 2. Turkies in 
Scotland,
 and are realy Turkies only blacker then tame Turkies that you have seen; I shall give you full satisfaction with the next oc∣casion,

 pray you fail not to writ to me, when you meet with any, otherwayes you disoblidge him who is ever yours,


D. M'kgregor.




Writen to his Brother 
Munivard,
 in 
Scotland.








Patrick Falkconers
 Letter to 
Maurice Trent.


Elizabeth Town
 in 
East-Jersey,
 
the 28th. of 
October,
 1684.


Sir,


MY last was dated the 22. Current, from 
Phi∣ladelphia,
 at which time I could give you but a small account of the Countrey; and as yet its but a small account, I can give by reason that I have had but a little time here as yet; I have tra∣velled on Foot more then a 100. miles in 
East
 and 
West Jersey,
 and 
Pensilvania;
 I have also Travelled in 
Maryland,
 I cannot but say it is a good Coun
y, but its possessed with a Debauched, Idle, Leasie People, all that they Labour for is only as much Bread as serves them for one Season, and als much Tobacco as may furnish them with Cloaths, I be∣lieve it is the worst improved countrey in the world; for the 
Indian wheat
 is that they trust to, and if that fail them they may expect to starve. I find 
Pensil∣vania
 and the two 
Jerseyes
 are the places which set themselves out most for Planting of Corn; As for the 
Jersies
 I need not insist in commending of them, for 
David Barclay
 and 
Arthur Forbes
 who had a lon∣ger stay here than I have had, will give you a more all account; for I intend to write no more than 
I


 am able to make good. I may say, that it is a pleasant Countrey, I did never see more pleasant Meadows, and Grass, then I have seen in both the 
Jersies, I
 have seen plains of good Hay consisting of about 30. Acres of ground, hardly one Tree to be seen upon the whole spot. And there are seve∣ral places so; 
I
 can say, its a well watered Coun∣trey, and good waters, and if they were desirous, they might have very good Quarrie here both for Stone of any sort, and Lime-stone likewise; but so long as Timber is so plenty, they will not be at the pains to seek after Stone; there are some houses in the Countrey built with stone, but very few. Having fallen in here, the end of the year, I cannot be capable to give an account what may be the product of the Countrey, but 
I
 hear that all sorts of Grain hath very good Increase, I see the Countrey abounds with Apples, Quinches, Peat∣ches, Walnuts, and Chasnuts, and Strawberries in great abundance, wild-Wine-Grapes are plenti∣full, wild-Fowl of all sorts, a great number of Deer, Turckie-Fowls-wild, in great abundance and very bigg, I have seen these things in great plenty: I hope ye will excuse me, because 
I
 am not capable to give an ampler account of the Countrey, for I have not been two dayes in one place, 
I
 will tell you this is a good Countrey, for men who resolves to be Laborious; any who comes here they must resolve to work hard for the first two or three years, till they get a little Ground cleared, for this must be looked on as a wood-Countrey, tho I must confess the woods are not so thick as people expects; and there are several places in the Countrey where there is little or no Wood; Peo∣ple are generally curious to have their Land near Navigable Rivers, but when they are better ac∣quaint,

 they will find that the farther back the bet∣ter is the Land, there are aboundance of Fish and Oysters here, this is not a Countrey for idle people but such as will be at pains, they need not doubt but to get Bread here in plenty, so 
I
 wish it be the Lords will that we may have a happy meeting again, his will be done, 
I
 wish you may be protected by the Lord, this from,


Your affectionate Friend, and humble, Servants Patrick Falconer.






Abstract of a Letter writ by 
Peter Watson
 (who went over a Servant with 
David Barclay,
 in the year 1683.) to 
John Watson
 Messenger in 
Selkirk.


New-Perth,,
 
the 20th of. August, 1684.


Cusing,


I Could never write to you before now, because 
I
 was never rightly setled, and am not yet fully setled, but I am from among the rest of the Servants, one 
James Reid
 and 
I
 and our Families are together, set out to a Farm on 
Amboy;
 we are to have some Land laid out to us, and we are Stock∣ed with two 
Mares,
 four 
Cowes,
 two 
Sows,
 two 
Oxen;
 my Wise and 
I
 and the Child 
Richard
 are very well in health, and hath been so ever since we came out of 
Scotland:
 Now as for this Countrey, it is a very good Countrey; indeed poor men such as my self, may live better here then in Scotland if they will but work, a man can have Corn and Cattle or any other Goods for his work, and he can sell these good to some hands for money, it is not for a man that hath a Familie to come bound four years, but young men, who

 have no trouble, they will do better to come and serve four years here then to serve in 
Scotland,
 for they are not so hard wrought as in 
Scotland,
 and when the four years are out, they can gain abun∣dance to work to other men; or if they desire to setle upon Land of their own, they can have it reasonably Cheap, the hardest work that is here, is clearing of the Ground, and felling of Trees, and the like; the first year is the worst, till they be accustomed with the work of the Countrey, my Neighbour and 
I
 did clear from the middle of 
February
 till the midst of 
May,
 five Acres of Land, and have it planted with Indian Corn, and Indian Beans, and Tobacco for our own smoaking; a man who lives here needs go no where to buy any things, here he can have Corn and Cattle, and every thing that is necessar for mans use, if he be Industrious, only the thing that is dearest here, is Cloathing, for there are but few Sheep to this Countrey, but there are store of all other Beasts, such as Horse; and Cows, and Hoggs, there is here good Fishing, good hunting of Deer; and other kind of wild Beasts; The Countrey is very healthie as 
I
 have seen yet, it is cold in the Winter like unto 
Scotland;
 But fra once the Summer breaks up, it is hotter then it is in Scotland; There are here very good Religious People, they go under the name of 
Independants,
 but are must like to the 
Prisbyterians,
 only they will not receive every one to their Society, we have great need of Good and Faithful Ministers; And I wish to God, that there would come some over here, they can live as well, and have as much as in Scotland, and more then many gets; we have none within all this Province of 
East-Jersey,
 except one who is Preacher in 
New∣wark;
 there were one or two Preachers more in the

 Province; but they are dead; And now the people they meet together every Sabbath day, and Reads and Prays, and sings Psalms in their Meet∣ing-houses: this Countrey is very well settled with People, most part of the first Settlers came out of 
New-England,
 very kind and loving people, kinder than in 
Scotland
 or 
England.
 And for the 
Indian Natives,
 they are not troublesome any way to any of us, if we do them no harm, but are a very kind and loving people; the men does nothing but hunts, and the women they plant Corn, and works at home; they come and trades among the Christians with Skins or Venison, or Corn; or Pork; And in the Summer time, they and their Wives come down the Rivers, in their Cannoas, which they make themselves of a piece of a great tree, like a little Boat, and rhere they Fish and take Oysters. This Countrey is a very pleasant Coun∣trey with Rivers and Creiks to fish in; Only it is full of Wood, such as Oak and Walnut-tree, Chesnut, Poplar, and Cedar; The only thing we want here is good People; I wish that all the poor Friends I or my Wife hath were here: As for my Brother, if he have a mind to come. Brother if you have but as much in the World as would tran∣sport you hither and your Family, I would desire you earnestly to come, and bring my Sister with you; if you have as much as will transport you, sell all and come, tho you had not a penny after your passage were payed, you need not fear if you have a mind to work; I was as little brought up with work as any man, yet blessed be GOD, I can work now as my Neighbors, and lives very con∣tentedly with my Wife better then ever we did in 
Scotland;
 shew my Mother in Law tha
 my Wife and 
I
 would be very well pleased, if she would

 come over, there are as old Women as she com
 here out of old 
England;
 there was one came a∣longst with us elder then she, if she will come, she shall live with her Daughter and me, as easie, and as well as ever she did live in 
Scotland;
 and I do know that was well enough; my Wife and I are well at present, as you could wish, GOD be blessed; 
I
 can say no more, but my love to my Brother, and his wife, and all Friends,


I
 rest your loving Cusin, 
Peter Watson.






A Letter write by 
John Campbel
 to 
John Dobie.


New-Perth,
 
8th of November, 1684.


B. 
John,


I Wrote a line from 
Philadelphia
 to you, as we were coming hither, your Cusin 
James Dobbie
 the bearer is in such haste, that I cannot write what I would say; but is short, we are come here to a good wholesome Countrey, in which with little industrie a man may have a comfortable life; there is good Wheat and Oats growing here, and 
Indian
 Corn, which our Servants likes very well; There is Fish and Fowl abundance, and of Cows and Horse; they labour wi h Horse and Oxen; There is Deer through all the Countrey, and Turkies which some of our Servants has killed a part of already; There is Pertrages and Quails very rife, that my wife yesterday morning saw about 20. of them walking before the door like Chikens. I shall say no more till I see farther, for 
I
 am

 with others going to the Countrey on Munday to see for the Countrey lotts; for I have taken up the Towns already, and cut down the trees of two Acres of ground with six men in three dayes, My service to all Friends, I am


Your most assured Friend,
 John Campbel.






A Letter from 
Thomas Fullerton
 Brother to the Laird of 
Kinnaber,
 to his Brother in Law Doctor 
Gor∣don
 in 
Montross.


Elizabeth-Town,
 
4. January, 1685.


Dear Brother,


BY my last about a Moneth since I dated from 
Am∣boy,
 you understand that we came to 
Sandy-Hook,
 18. weeks after we sailed from 
Montrofe,
 we were 9. weeks at Sea from 
Killebeg
 in 
Ireland,
 we had ma∣ny cross winds, what other accidents we met with by the way were worth the telling, but not the writ∣ting; blessed be 
God
 we all kept our healths very well, only one Boy fell over boord; what you expect, and 
I
 design by this, is a breef, but true accompt, of the Country. The first land we discovered was About the midle of 
Long-Island,
 it appeared at first like trees, growing out of the 
Sea,
 Towards night we Anchored in 
Sandy-Hooke;
 The land is low and levell, that is the reason we were within 8. or 10. mile thereof, before we saw it; the country appears all over Woodie; 
I
 landed on a sandie-bank and closs by the flood march, where grew 
Bayes, sassafax
 and severall prettie shrubs 
I
 knew not; The Woods consists of severall kinds of Oaks, Chesnut, Hic∣kacy, Walnut, Poplar, and Beetch, Cedars grow on swamps, and barrens Firrs and Pines only on barrens; The ground generally is 2. or 3. inches

 deep of black dung as it were, below that is reedish mould, what you heard of the product of the 
Indian Corn, viz.
 100. or 200. fold, of 20 or 30 fold, 
Inglish wheat,
 of the abundance of dears and wild horse, and severall turkies and of the great plenty of fishes are all true; There is very much Cider here. In 12. or 14. years you may make 100. barrells from your own planting, the best fleshes of all kinds ever I did see are here, tho this in respect of what you have heard, be generally tautollogie; yet 
I
 found my self oblidged to writ it, because 
I
 am witness to the truth thereof, without 
Hyperbole.


Notwithstanding of all this, its very troublesome expensive to settle a plantation here, and when it is done, 
I
 cannot promise you a man will grow verry rich; but he needs want nothing, and it is not every one will agree with the solitude of the Woods, these who can, and resolve to lead an countty life, can∣not doe better then come hither; a merchant who will come over and set up store in the country, for a year will make 
cent per cent;
 of several commodi∣ties with which 
I
 doe allow none to be acquainted but commerads. I wish 
I
 had some money of my stock so imployed, and sent safely here, 
Johnstouns
 of 
spois∣wood,
 and I haue taken up upon a river, 6, or 8. miles in 
Amboy,
 your Brother 
Thomas
 and 
Robert,
 are here also, servants are not easily intertained here, I designed to have shot als many 
squirles
 as would have furred a coa
 for you, but I am other∣wise taken up; I have omitted to tell you that the weather here is constantly clear, the sun rises and setts free of clouds; I have obseved none to have the cough in this country tho I have frequently lyne in the woods; aboundance of fire is an excellent counter charm. Now brother as to your own coming over,

 it will be time to invite you, when I have a good house, and inter
ainment to treat you with un∣bought; for you must not feel any of the inconveni∣encies I have met with; we are all well, I pray 
God,
 this may find you also; present my service to all friends, 
Male
 or 
Femal;
 this letter wil serve that, pre∣sent my service to my 
Grand-Mother;
 upon 
Christmass
 I drank her good-health in 
Rhumb Madera,
 and 
Fial Wine;
 If I can be frugall, I may be soon rich here; by my next I hope to ensure 60, or 70. lib: to the person, for we want a minister, this from,


Your 
Affectionat Brotner Tho: Fullertoun.






A Letter from the same hand to the Laird of 
Brotherstoun
 in the 
Mairns,
 of the same date.


Kind Comerad,


YOu were pleased so kindly to concern your self with my welfare when I was by you (and I find that absence augments true friendship) that 
I
 am oblidged to acquaint you with my present fortune, which 
I
 hope shall be far better then what 
I
 could expect, by so much stock in 
Scotland.
 This place is not altogether bowrish; for at 
New-York
 you may have railing and Gallanting enough, the inhabitants are generally great spenders. Dear 
Bro∣thertoun
 writ to me, and give me an accompt of affairs, for 
I
 assure you, neither Governour nor Council will medle with yours to me, nor mine to you; by my next 
I
 will writ to 
Cl
nie,
 and 
John Johnstoun;
 in the mean time present my service to them, 
I
 am in haste to end writ∣ing, tho ever being,


Your Oblidged Commerad and humble servant, 
Tho: Fullertoun








Abstract of a Letter from 
Robert Hardie,
 Merchant in 
Aberdeen,
 to his Son 
John Hardie
 Merchant there, dated from 
Elizabeth-Town,
 the 8. of 
December,
 1684.


Loving Son,


I
 Have writ two Letters already to you at our arrival, an other shewing the death of your Brother 
William,
 and something of the country; but knowes not if they be come to your hands, and now having this occasion, know that 
I
 am in good health, and your Brother 
Alexander,
 praised be 
God,
 know that 
I
 intend to reside here, and should wish that 
I
 had all my childring with me, but your conveniencie cannot permit, neith
r am 
I
 able to transport them as yet; however 
I
 desire you to acquaint your sister 
Elspeth
 that 
I
 desire her to come over if possible, with her first conveniencie; I in
end before her coming to have a new house in 
New-Perth,
 and a Plantation near by it; if 
I
 had gott an good accompt of that Litle 
cargo I
 sent over; 
I
 would have lived upon it here, als well as upon 
100 lib. Sterling
 in 
Scotland;
 But 
I
 have got an bad accompt of it; how ever, 
I
 hope to Provide for you all with what is left, if the 
Lord bless;
 Shew my brother and brothers in law, that if they would come over with each of them two Servants, they could have good Land here, at one easie rate, they might live better then their masters; and with less trouble, if they took but half the pains; They take in 
Scotland;
 for the Land is an brave and plentifull Land; Shew 
Andrew
 and 
David Hardies
 that if they can but pay their Passage and come to me, 
I
 shall make them to live in better condition then ever formerly; 
I
 doubt not but some of our neighbours will come over, to bring

 Servants here, who will give you an true accompt how, 
I
 and others can live here; believ
 me, this is an brave Land, and any who will be Industrous, may live very comfortably here; He who comes first will have the best choise, and most profitable as for idle-men who will neither work nor trade, need never come here, for there are none idle here, I wish you all a blising from God, and so rests,


Your affiectionat father Robert Hardie.






A Letter from 
James Johnston
 of 
Spotswood,
 to his brother 
John Johnston,
 dated the 13. of February, 1685. from 
Piscatta way, in East-New-Jersey.


Dear Brother,


THese are to remember my kindest affection to you, my Mother, and all friends, we have kept our healths hither to exceeding well, Have endured an short hut very cold witner, now the Weather hath been for some time bygone exceed∣ing good, was an 
Bear-seed
 season with you; 
I
 have been throw several or most places of this Countrey, of late; But am not yet resolved where my first Husbandry shall be; the Land is exceed∣ing good, which is yet to take up, much better then what is inhabited; only not so convenient; the difficulty of clearing many places is no wayes con∣siderable; 
I
 find Land where Several hundered Plughes may be presently set a work, 
I
 take all pains 
I
 can to be conveniently setled, and the Go∣vernour refuses us nothing we desire; 
I
 stand in need of 40. pound, value of good, and some Ser∣vants;

 hoping to have Corn for them, and others who come over; 
I
 could wish your self were here, we could live competently and quietly; but 
I
 doubt how affairs may premit; 
I
 wish any Land I had were sold, that you might he furthered; presen
 my love and service to my 
Mother▪
 and Sister whom I hope to see here; 
I
 wish you would send over some Ministers, one or moe to us I am,


Your affectionat and ever, mindfull Brother, 
James Johnston.






NOw Sir, does not the perusal of thir Letters, obliege you to be∣lieve there is no deceit in the a∣bove written discription of the place, see∣ing you find the same Homollogat by so many different persons; the 
Hollograph
 of most of them have been perused by many persons in this City, and are to be seen by any inquisitive thereanent at 
Captain Hamiltouns
 Lodging at the Sign of the Ship, for their more satisfaction of the truth thereof.


But tho you appear to be convinced, that 
East-Jersey
 is in it self a very desir∣able place, and consequently upon se∣veral considerations a very proper seat

 for a Collony; From this yet I have ground to conjecture from some tacit hints and insinuations in yours, that be∣cause 
West-Jersey, Pensilvania,
 and in a speci∣al manner 
Carolina,
 are more southerly, therefore 
you think
 there is some ground to believe they may have the advantage of the Soyl, seing you oblidge me to tell you freely my opinion in this affair, I will be plain with you; the two first lying, the one upon the one side of the River of 
Delawar,
 the other upon the other side thereof, may have in them∣selves other advantages; but I cannot be so blind, when I notice the 
Mapp,
 as not to discover too palpable an incon∣veniencie to be past over; wherewith both the said Countries are much strait∣ned; 
to wit.
 the Town of 
Newcastle
 lying upon the mouth of the River, which doth so absolutly command the River, 
that whosoever is master thereof, may if they please, lay what imposition they think fit upon both the said Countries; seeing if any dif∣ference should fall betwixt the Town of Newcastle,
 and the Possessors, or Inha∣bitants of these two Provinces, they may make themselves very quickly Masters

 of them, by imposing what conditions they think fit upon them; seeing no. Ship can either conveniently go up or down the said River of 
Delawar,
 but by allowance of any 
Fort,
 built upon the said Town of 
Newcastle:
 Whatever o∣pinion others may have of this as a matter of no great import, I have these sentiments of the apparent inconvenien∣cies thereof, as after perceiving it never to be any more so much concerned, as to make farther inquiry after these places seeing in my apprehension, no advan∣tage to be proposed there could compense that so visible conveniency.


As for 
Carolina,
 I confess it is nothing strange that any person who hath read 
Ogibies
 description thereof in his 
America
 and 
Wilsons
 in his Treatise thereanent; Judge it in a maner a 
Terrestiral Paradise,
 but notwithstanding of all this, err you pass any judgement upon my choising rather 
East-Jersey,
 then 
Carolina
 for the seat of a Collony from this, allow me to give my Reasons why I do prefer the one to the other.




We lye here in 56. Degrees of 
Northren Latitude, Jersey
 in 41. 
Carolina
 in 31. it is very obvious to any understanding per∣son, that our removall to 41. is more probably contributive for our health, then to 31, being ten degrees hotter; and consequently more dangerous, what e∣ver opinion others may have of this, I judge it a matter of no smal consequence, health being very much preferrable to all other things whatsoever.


But further, our access to 
East-Jersey
 is very patent, no apparent obstruction in the way, whereas the coast of 
Carolina
 is the most dangerous in all 
America,
 there being a bank of sand lying all along the same for 200. Leags and up∣wards, so that the entry to any part thereof is altogether hazardous, we have too sad a proof of the truth of this, by the Shipwrack of the 
James
 of 
Air,
 upon that bank this last Harvest, in which were lost upwards of 60. peop
e.


Experience also teacheth that the Cly∣mate of 
Jersey,
 is far move suitable to our 
Constitutions,
 then that of 
Carolina;


 You find in all the Letters come from 
Jersey,
 this one particular specially mark∣ed, 
That it is a very healthfull Air;
 no complaints of sickness there, whereas in the few Letters from our Countrey men settled in 
Carolina;
 You have an accompt of the 
death of the greatest part who went hence to that place.


There is one further consideration ob∣lidging me altogether, to close my Ears and Eyes against 
Carolina;
 whatever specious pretences may flie abroad in fa∣vours thereof, and be received by such who are not concerned, to enquire fur∣ther, then to 
hear-say,
 and that is the con∣sideration of the model of their Govern∣ment, then which nothing can be more discouraging to any having the sence of a rational Man, or Spirit of a Gentleman. The Offices of Honour and Trust, such, as 
Chancellour, Thesaurer, Admiral, Secretar, &c.
 are all Heretably annexed to the Proprietors; by the constitu∣tion of their Government, so that let a Gentleman deserve never so well, how∣ever eminent his parts may be, he must in the first place purchase a property, err he can attain to any of these places of

 Trust, or Honor; whereas if you have so much Money as to make this purchase, you may then come to these preferments though you were the 
arrentest Block head in nature!
 Money here makes you ca∣pable of Preferment, which neither Ver∣tue, Merit, nor parts can do! Can there be a greater discouragement to any per∣son of 
Spirit
 or 
Honour,
 than to go subject himself to a Government where he sees himself debarred of any Trust or Prefer∣ment, how ever deserving he may be? unless he hath money in a manner to buy it with. Both in this 
Kingdom
 and our 
Neighbour Nations,
 we see mean Per∣sons have by their Parts and Merit raised themselves to places of the highest Pre∣ferments in the Kingdoms, and have discharged that Trust conferred upon them with 
Honour
 and 
Applause;
 So that when I have this consideration before my Eyes, I must conclude any who subjects themselves to that 
model of Government,
 are either ignorant of the Constitutions thereof, or of very mean Spirits, to settle themselves in a place where Vertue nor Merit can neither raise them, nor their Posterity!




Let me add another Ground of my dissatisfaction with the 
Model of that Go∣vernment,
 and you may judge whether the same be reasonable or not; There are 
eight Proprietors by their Constitutions,
 it appears clear to me, that they are so many 
Soveraigns,
 seing by one express 
Article
 of their 
Fundamental Constitutions,
 it is declared, 
That the Proprietors are no waves subject to Law, in so far as to be cen∣sured by any Judicatur there;
 So that be their Actings never so Illegal, or unjust; if any these 
eight Proprietors
 should com∣mit Murders, or Rapes, or any other Act of Oppression, they cannot be challeng∣ed upon accompt thereof in any 
Judica∣tory
 in 
Carolina.


These being so matterial Objections, I need not add the apparent hazard of be∣ing next Neighbour to the 
Spainard,
 whose interest it is to ruine any setling at 
Port Royal;
 how little probability there is, that any going at first from this can be of sufficient strength to defend them∣selves against their designs, that in case of any assault from that airth; their nixt and only neighbour, 
Charles-toun,


 could not give that help, which were requisit in such an exigent, either against the 
Spainards
 their nixt neighbours, at 
St. Augustines
 Fort, or the 
Natives,
 if they should become 
quarrelsome Neighbors;
 But from the complext consideration of all together, I must divest my self of my reason, or I judge 
Carolina
 a proper seat to settle my self in.


But tho you be oblidged to grant, that 
East-Jersey,
 may be the most desirable spott of ground upon the continent of 
A∣merica
 for such a design, upon the above written considerations; yet I do appre∣hend you may incline to think that 
To∣bago, St. Luce, St. Vincent,
 or some of these Islands were yet more proper as affoording at first view greater ground of expecting suitable returns to the apparent expense & hazards of such a undertaking; witness the great riches of 
Barbadoes,
 by the improvment of a Trade, from that place all 
Europe
 over.


In answer to this, I must confess, Sir, that there may be greater improvements of such Islands as to trade, when they do come to that length of improve∣ment, as to produce 
Suggars, Cotton,

 Indigo, &c.
 But let me also tell you, there is a certain prospect of far greater & more imminent hazards in settling there, then in 
East-Jersey.
 It is certainly obvious to the meanest capacities what hardships these must be oblidged to lay their compt to meet with who would interprise such a design, not only from the wants thy might be exposed to throw lake of ne∣cessar supplies, wherewith they cannot ex∣pect the conveniencie of being furnished. but from other hazards and difficulties. It is not small stock could set such a de∣sing on foot, neither can it be expected that such who would ingadge in such un∣dertaking from this place could in many years attain to that strength, which were necessarily requisite for defending them∣selves even against the Piracy of a 
Bucca∣nier
 or two, far less against the invasions or assaults of forraign States and Princes.


As for my own part I must confess, I am not very anxious of great Riches, as the result of this undertaking, but to carry my Wife and Children with me; I am bound the best I can to look to their Accommodation; when I land in 
East-Jersey


 there are Lodgings, and all other necessars to be had for money, till by our own industry in Labouring the Ground, we provide for our selves, which could not be expected in one of these Islands; If I have a Countrey no worse than the 
South of France,
 with these Conveniencies above narrated, I desire no richer Soyl; though greater expecta∣tions might be had of the result of such a design of setling in one of these Islands, as to Profit and Gain, when once come the length of a good Trade.


But besides this, 
our Countrey People
 which will be the 
strength of any Collony,
 to go from this place, 
knows very well how to labour the Ground, for producing all sorts of Grains, after what fashion, to breed abun∣dance of all sorts of Bestial, in both which, will the great riches of
 Jersey 
consist; But it cannot he expected, that they know how to im∣prove these Islands, for
 Suggar, Cotton, In∣digo, 
&c. and this being altogether out of their road, we should thus be altogether deprived of the assistance we may rationally expect from them, by proposing to settle in a place where the
 Nigro Slaves 
could do more service, and

 be far more usefull than the most laborious▪ and judicious of
 our Countrey People.


As for the ordinar
 Objection 
against setl∣ing in
 Jersey, 
upon account of the inconvenien∣cies may arise from having a
 Governour 
of Principles alledged inconsistent with the stand∣ing of any Society; upon this one head menti∣oning no other, that a man who professes, he
 judges it unlawful to draw his sword to defend himself agains
 a Na ive, if he were coming to cut his throat, can never be so careful in providing such certain and speedy remedies for preventing any hazard that way, as are absolutely requi∣site for the security of these who settle there, both against any Designs of the 
Na∣tives
 or Forraign Invasions. 
This is very easily answered, that there being several very substantial Citizens of
 London 
concerned in this Plantation, who are not of this Principle, who have laid out considerable summs on this Design, as I am oblidged to know by the ac∣compt I have from one of them, with whom I have some correspondence; who tells me,
 he himself hath laid out 1800. pound; 
It cannot rationally be supposed that they will be so unconcerned, as not to follow such measures as may secure what interest they have there; Me∣thods

 are already laid down, which I know will satisfie you in this particular, that as to defence against any such inconveniencies;
 East Jersey 
will be as effectually secured as any of the Neighbouring Plantations.


As for any other Apprehensions you or others may have upon this head, I shall only say,
 what ever Mr. 
Barclays
 Principles may be, he is a Gentleman known to be a∣bundantly qualified to advance the inte∣rest of that Collony, else the Trust there∣of had not been devolved upon him by the Proprietors, who are Men more knowing in their own Affairs, then to have made an escape in so matterial a point; they are Men abundantly sharp∣sighted to remark his Actions, and ac∣cordingly as they find them for the in∣terest of the place, to continue him in that Trust or not; And you may be assured, he understands himself so well, as to behave himself in that station so as becometh a Gentleman, concerned in his own Credit and Interest, seing upon the least 
malversation,
 he is als well 
vable to censure of the Law, as the meanest Inha∣bitant. 
Which consideration abundantly se∣cures

 any reasonable Man against the Appre∣hensions of any inconveniencie from his being Go∣vernour, tho his inclinations prompted him to act upon a selfish design, to the prejudice of the general interest of that Province, I perswade my self, he is more a Gentleman, than ever to be guilty of any thing that is base, or unbecom∣ing a Gentleman.


It is now more then time to bid you farewel, having nothing further to add, hoping from what is here said, you will rest satisfied, that in prosecuting this design, I do act upon so∣lid foundations, let the result be what it will; I hope you are convinced I have not pro∣ceeded indeliberatly therein; I am not so foolish as to propose no difficulties to my self to be ran∣countered, notwithstanding all the incourage∣ments above written, I am too well acquainted with all the
 Spanish, French, Dutch, Portugues, 
&
 English 
undertakings of this nature, and their staits and difficulties they have been trysted with in prosecuting thereof, to think I have any ground to expect to be al∣together exeemed from all the inconveniencies they met with; as to this I cast my self alto∣gether upon the divine Providence, being con∣vinced, I am in my duty; if you please to

 take a share, it would be not a little incourag∣ing to me, you see that we have some Gentlemen of our Countrey settled already there; so that I am hopefull we may have there a very agree∣able society if your affairs cannot allow, your good wishes are expected by,


Sir,


Yours, &c. 
G. S.






Sir,
 Since the conclusion above writ∣ten, severall other Letters are come to my hand which I had not formerly seen, most of them of a later date; I resolved to add them to the rest for your further Confirmation.






A Letter for Mr. 
Robert Paterson
 Princi∣pal of 
Marishal
 Colledge, in the City of New 
Aberdeen,
 in 
Scotland.


Woodbridge,
 in 
East-Jersey,
 in 
America,
 
March
 the 7th. 
1685.


Sir,


I
 Hope you have heard of our Voyage and safe Arrival here, I thought it my duty to present my dutiful respects to you and all Friends at

 
Aberdeen,
 and to acquaint you of mine own and all their welfares who came over the last year,, all which intends to settle in the Coun∣trey, except 
 who has spent all his means already foolishly on drink, and is returning home for more; you have 
David Barclay
 and 
Arthur Forbes
 to inform you of this Countrey; when I have seen it through all the Seasons of the year as they did, I shall then give you my opinion, if you be desirous; only in short, what I have seen I may write, that it pleases me better then 
Virginia, Maryland, Pensilvania,
 or 
West-Jersey,
 that it is pleasant to mine eyes, and I find it healthful to my body; I am not troubled here (blessed be GOD) with defl
ctions, head-aikes, and coughs, as at 
Edinburgh;
 that the land is furnished with all conveniencies 
f Nature, such as Wood, Grass, M
adow, and abundance of fresh Water Springs, Brooks and Rivers, and plenty of Deer, Turkies, Geess and Dukes; many ten∣der H
rbs, Fruits, and Trees grow naturally here that will not grow in 
Scotland
 at all; these things are so notoriously known, that it is superfluity to write them, and no unbyassed per∣son will deny them, or speak ill of the land: There is about a duzon of 
14.
 houses in 
New-Perth,
 and the half of those built since we

 came, several others are building presently, and many others have taken Lotts to build; Mr. 
Mudie
 is building a stone house, and has an Horse Mill ready to set up; Governour 
Rudyeard
 intends another Stone house this Summer; The Governours house, and the publick Court-house are abuilding; It is the best scituate for a City of any yet I have seen, or for ought I can learn of any yet known in 
A∣merica.
 There is great encouragement here for all kind of Tradsmen; I intend my self to follow mostly Planting and Fishing; Let this remember me to all my Friends, Relations, Co∣morads and Acquaintances at 
Aberdeen;
 I could not write to them all, being busied about mine own setlement, and it is now far, spent in the year, so that I do not expect to do much this year, neither could I settle sooner, by rea∣son that my bed-cloaths are not yet come from 
Maryland;
 and the land I intend to settle on is not yet purchased from the 
Indians.
 I intreat to hear from you on all occasions, and what remarkable News abroad or at home, and how the 
Civilists
 place is disposed of; my ser∣vice to your self and bedfellow, I am,


Sir,


Your most affectionat and humble Servant, 
Charles Gordon.








For 
Mr. Andrew Irvine
 Merchant, at his Shop, in the East end of the 
Lucken∣booths,
 in 
Edinburgh,
 in 
Scotland.


Amboy
 in the Province of 
East-New: Jersey,
 in 
America,
 
March,
 the 5th. 
1685.


Dear Andrew,


I
 Suppose ye have heard of our voyage from my Brother, and Governour 
Barclay;
 I shall only in short tell you that notwithstanding the loss of our masts, we were only 
8.
 weeks betwixt land and land, and entered the 
Capes
 of 
Virginia
 the same day 
9.
 weeks we parted from 
Aberdeen.
 We sailed up 
Chessapeck
 bay to the head of 
Bohemia-River
 in 
2.
 slowpes, from thence we came to 
Elizabeth-Town,
 partly by Land and partly by Water, the storm being the tail of a 
Hurricane,
 was not uni∣versall, for we heard of no Ships which met with it but our selves; nor the 
Montrose
 Ship did not meet with it. There is incourage∣ment for several trades here, in the first place Planting, for 
Wheat, Indian Corn; Beef, Pork,
 &c. give all ready money in 
York,
 and the Neighbour Collonies; Wheat 
4.
 shillings the

 bushel, 
Indian
 Corn 
2.
 ss. or half a crown, Pork and Beef, &c. to be had at an ordinary easie rate. And in the second place there may be Fishing; For the 
Inhabi∣tants
 averr they swim so thick in the Creeks and Rivers, at certain seasons of the year, that they have hailed them out of the waters with their very hand. In the third place for one to have a Malt-house, a brew house, and a bake-house, to make Malt, brew beer, and bake biskeet for 
Barbadoes
 and the Neighbour Collonies, pro∣viding he have a ship of his own, and skill to manage his busines, would certainly be a good trad. Lastly for one to buy up the product of the Countrey, such as all kinds of grains, Beef, Pork, &c. and export them to 
Barba∣does,
 and import 
Rumm
 and 
Malasses,
 would certainly be a good trade; as likewise change keeping wold be a good trad in 
Amboy,
 for the highest designe of the old 
Buckskine
 Planters (I am just now drinking to one of them; our Countrey man who was sent away by 
Cromvel
 to 
New-England,
 a slave from 
Dumbar,
 Living now in 
Woodbridge, Like a Scots Laird,
 wishes his 
Countrey men
 and 
Native Soyle
 very well, though he never intends to see it. Pardon this Paren∣thesis) is to acquite a piece of monie to drink

 in the change house. This Countrey, and particularly this Town (showeth it to be the best scituated for a city of any there known in 
Ame∣rica
) is but yet in infancie (it not being above 
48.
 years at most since ever there was a Planter in the Province; & that occasioned by their chang∣ing so many Masters) yet there are several thou∣sands of People already, and not want of good company, and if ye please badd too, as in any place of the world; neither are we altogether destitut of 
Books
 and 
Clergy,
 for 
George Keith,
 (who arrived three weeks since with others, they were all winter in 
Borbadoes
) hath brought 
Mathema∣ticks,
 and 
Benjamin Clark
 a 
Libra∣rie of Books,
 to sell; so that you may see 
New Perth
 begins to be founded upon 
Cler∣gy.
 Shew my Cusins, 
George-Burnet,
 and 
Richard Maitland,
 that I hope they will not laugh more at me, for saying, 
n Edinburgh, 
I would line my house with Cedar-wood,
 for all houses here are cover∣ed with 
Cedar;
 and one just now built in 
Perth,
 altogether of 
Cedar-Wood,
 it is reckoned a wood of no value here, except for its lastiness. I intend to follow Planting my self, and if I had but the small Stock here I have in 
Scotland,
 with some more servants,

 I would not go home to 
Aberdeen
 for a 
Re∣gencie,
 as was profered me; neither do I in∣tend it however, hoping, to get my own safe over; we are not troubled here leading our pitts, mucking our Land, and Ploughing 
3.
 times; one Plouing with 
4.
 or 
6.
 Oxen at first breaking up; and with 
2.
 horse only thereafter, suffices for all; you may judge whither, that be easier 
Husbandrie
 than in 
Scotland;
 But I know you are no good 
Hus∣band-man.
 But which of the foresaid trades you will choice, if you will come here you self is more then I can divine, or will advise you to; I have told you how things are, and in 
Gods-Name
 take your own choice, as I have done. I shall tell you what I would do, were I in your place, if it shall fall out you do come, 
I
 would get some trusty Comorads, Merchants to joyn with me, and sett up a trade in 
Perth,
 for I think a mans own trade fitts him best; if you have 
5000.
 Merks it is enough, 
4.
 in goods and one in money, Let none come here destitute of money, it is of great request here, and gets chape Penyworths, and 
25. per cent
 of advantage by it; but I doe not advise you, for if you should meet with such trouble and disopoyntments as we have done by being put by our 
Post,
 you would perhapps be dis∣couraged,

 & give me the blame; all our baggadg is not yet come from 
Maryland,
 and I want yet my bed Cloathes, and the Land I intend to settle on is not yet purchassed from the 
In∣dians;
 for after I have viewed all the 
Province
 such of it as is yet habitable, I have chosen the 
South branch
 of 
Rariton-River
 for conveniency of Fishing, Fowling, and Mea∣dow, but all the best Land lyes back from the Rivers and the Sea Costs; the further back the better it is, which necessitates me to go a mile back. In breif what you heard of the coun∣trey is all true, so I need not spine out long Discriptions of it; no unbyassed and in∣different Person will speak ill of the Land, it is both pleasant and wholesome, and industrous People, after some few years Labour, may lead a pleasant, easie Life, and want for no∣thing; And I am of opinion, may grow rich too, if they take pains for it, and follow Mer∣chandising, and some are actaually grown rich since they came here, who had nothing before; if any shal miscredit what I have said, I shall not think my self baffled for that; but let them live in their opinion and I will live in mine. And if they please they may do with me as I did with 
John Skeens
 Wife, cast my Letters in mine own teeth, and when

 they come upon the place, I shall make good what I say, face to face, as she did to me, and if they come not themselves, they need not trouble themselves whither it be true or false. The goods fit for this Countrey are all kind of house-hold Plenishing, without which and a years provision in victualls, let none come hither; if they would wish not to be preyed on by the old Planters. All course cloath such as hodden-grayes, and Playding, course Stock
ns and Linning, no fine things, for an infant 
Countrey,
 except for a mans own use; course Bedding and Blankets; Governour 
Barclay
 can give you full information as to this point. The Inconveninencies we have met with are, great trouble and charges for want of our baggadge; there is likewise trouble and charges in the first setlement, in carting out ones goods to the woods; fencing is the cheif Difficulty, and if the
e be many great trees the logges most be drawn off with oxen and the branches burned, the trees are falled equal to a mans thigh hight, but the roots are no im∣pediments, where is much brush the roots most be plucked up with grubbing howes; any man may learn Husbandries here, who was not a∣quaint with it in 
Scotland,
 (Tobacco would grow here as well as in 
Maryland,
 but it is

 best for 
European graines;
 I doe not in∣tend, to write more Letters to 
Edinburgh
 with this occasion; being busied about mine own setlement, therefore I intreat you will re∣member me to all my friends, Relations, Com∣arads, and Acquaintances at 
Edinburgh;
 and shew them of my wellfair that I had not my health so well this 
7.
 years bygone, as now (Blessed be God) and that I am not troubled here with coughs, and head aikes as in 
Edin∣burgh,
 which is likewise a great motive for me, to stay in this Countrey. I intreat to hear from them all, you will not readily miss occasions from 
London
 every Moneth, to some place in 
America;
 And there is ordi∣narly occasions hither from the Neighbour Col∣lonies; 
I
 have received Letters from the 
Bis∣sets,
 and my Brother, from 
Mr. Alexan∣der
 since we came; 
I
 intreat to hear particul∣arly from the 
Professor of Divinitie,
 and 
Mathematicks, Doctor Pitcairn,
 Mr. 
George Burnet, Richard Maitland,
 Mr. 
George Alexander,
 and any others who shall ask for me, wishing you and all your con∣cerns well,


I
 continue, 
Dear Cusin,


Your most affectionate Cusin, and humble Servant, 
Charles Gordon.








P stscript by the foresaid hand.


If any pleases to tell me what their scruples are, I shall endeavour to answer them, if Servants knew what a Countrey this is for them, and that they may live like little Lairds here; I think they would not be so Shey as they are to come, and during their service they are better used then in any place in 
America
 I have seen; you may know my Subscription by the sign I gave you of my Pistoles misserving in the Boat, or at least when you tell your Mother, you may mind on me, for you will miss some pints of wine you spent with me, (that Fridays night, you convoyed me aboard) on the Shore, and in the Ship. If there were a Caball of Merchants here to export the product of the Countrey to 
Barbadoes,
 and the 
West-Indies,
 and to Import 
Rumm, Malasses, Suggar
 and 
Cot∣ton, &c.
 it would do a great deal of good to this Countrey. I intreat to know what remarkable Revolutions has hap∣ned either abroad or at home since I came away. Any Merchants who settles

 here must take Lotts in the Town, and build houses. 
Mr. David Mudie
 is building a stone house, and hath already an Horse-mill ready to set up presently in 
New-Perth.
 Adue.






For Mr. 
James Mudie
 Merchant in 
Mon∣trose.


New-Perth,
 
the 9th 
of
 March, 1685.


Sir,


MY Love ever being remembered to your self, Lady and Children, these are earnestly intreating you to let my Wife have any little thing she stands in need of untill it shall please the 
Lord
 I return; and I shall pay you very thankfully; I have left 
Thomas Parson,
 and resolves to trade this Summer in the Countrey, and to come home with your Uncle the nixt Spring. I wish you were here and your whole Family, for I doubt not but the Countrey would please you well; For there is abundance of much better Land here then ever 
Ar∣bikie
 was, and an Earldome to be bought far below in pryce the vallow, of what such pettie 
Lairdshipps
 as 
Arbikie
 is sold for in 
Scotland;
 without purging of the Lands of any incumbrances; For I

 hope to winn as much monie this year, as will buy a better Lairdship then 
Arbikie;
 and if ye resolve not to come over, I re∣solve to buy Land before I come from this, and title it 
Arbikie.
 But I shall be sorie to take away your title, for if I do, it will be your own fault; and for your better incouradgement I know you love a Gunn and a Dogge, and here ye will have use for both, For Wilde Geese, Turkies, Ducks, and Drake, Partridge, Cunies, Doves and innu∣merable more kind of Fowls which 
I
 know not their names, are here to be seen every hour of the day, in flocks above Thousands in Number; And for your Skieft which you use to Fish with; bring here with you, or one like her, for I assure you of good employment, and yet ye may catch more Fish in an hour here, than any Fisher in 
Montrose
 in two, excepting Podloes at the shore head.


Sir, take this as no jest from me, for what is here written is a reall truth; but ye may think, it is not my dictating, but the Writter and I have set it together the best way we can; But yet not so

 full as I would have had it; Present my Love to your Sister, Uncle, and all Friends, and I am,


Sir,


Your very loving Friend and Cusin, 
James Mudie.






A Letter from 
David Mudie,
 Merchant in 
Montrose:
 For 
James Mudie
 of 
Courthill
 in 
Scotland.


New-Perth,
 
the 
9th. of March, 1685.


Loving Brother,


I
 Write you a lyne upon my arivall here, and by my last to my Wife, of the date the 
12. December, I
 desired her to let you see it, which 
I
 hope she has done if it be come to her hands; 
I
 do now understand this Countrie, better then 
I
 did at that time, and the longer 
I
 travell in it I like it the better; for a frugall man with a small fortune may very soon raise a good Estate, which I wrote formerly to my Wife, in relation to the Coun∣trie; I find it most certain and much better then I wrote; this Winter hath been exceeding hard and sharpe, the like not seen by those who have lived 
20.
 or 
30.
 years in it, which hath

 hindred me of a great deal of work; yet I have cleared three Acres of Ground to be an Orchard and a Garden, which lyes close to the house which I am a building, which is all of Stone work, with Cellars under the Ground, six Rooms off a floor, two Stories high, beside the Garrat; and I have two Massons dayly working at it since the first of 
February;
 three Wrights working at an Horse mill, which will be clear against the later end of this Moneth: And I am told that the Mill will be worth 
100. lib.
 a year, but I am sure she will be bet∣ter then 
50.
 of clear Money, for every 
Scots∣boll
 of Wheat or 
Indian
 Corn payes here for grinding of it 
2. shill: Ster:
 this house and mill stands me a great deal of Money, but there is none such in this Countrey, nor ever was. I resolve to go out to the Countrey to the Land which I have taken up, which is u∣pon a place called the 
South River,
 which is 
2
 hours going from my own house by water; I mind to settle some of my Servants there a∣gainst the midle of this Moneth; I am provid∣ed with six course Horse, Oxen and Swine sufficiently in number, for any Plantation for the first year; the Land I have settled on, in my Judgement is extroardinary good; If any Friend or Acquaintance hath any inclination to

 come over here, I can assure them if they be Frugall men, and have but 
300. lib. Ster:
 Stock, they may live better then a Gentleman with us of 
40.
 Chalders of Victuall: I cannot now resolve to come home till this time twelve Moneth, since 
Thomas Parson
 hath so much disappointed me, as I have written to my wife; but against that time, if the LORD preserve me in health, 
I
 will come home then; present my service to 
Arbikie,
 and to my Sisters, and to all our Friends; which will save me a trouble to give them a Line, my love to your wife, and children, 
I
 am,


Your Loving Brother,
 David Mudie.




Let 
Arbikie,
 my Sisters, and the rest of my Fri∣ends, see this Letter.








Abstract of a Letter from 
Robert Fullerron,
 Brother to the Laird of 
Kinnaber,
 to his Brothers and Sisters, from 
Amboy,
 the 
6.
 of November, 
1684.


Dear Brothers and Sisters,


By the Mercies of the 
Most High,
 we are safe arryved, after a long Demur by

 contrary winds, we encountered very hapily at first with 
Long Island,
 and the next day came to an Anchor in 
New Jer∣sey;
 The Passengers did all very well, though we had some very rough gusts, and were very throng in so small a ves∣shel, being 130. Souls, besids Sea men, of these 27. were women, 6. or 7. child∣ren only; one man whom I hyred in your house, called 
William Clark
 stand∣ing carlesly upon the Forcastle tumbled over boards, and drowned tho we put out our boat and endeavoured in vain to save him. This Countrey pleaseth us very well, and appears to be nothing short of our expectation; We were yes∣terday ranging about veiwing our Land, where
 
u shall have accompt by the next; 
 Land in general is good, and a
ree
 
th the accompt you have heard; t
 I 
ees are no hing so invincible as I did 
magine, being neither so thick nor so great as we thought. The first plant which I touched was wild Bayes, which row in abundance here, the fruits are gery excellent, such sorts as I have seen, v
les the best I believe in the world, some I have seen of a pound weight;

 Cattle in generall are abundantly plen∣tifull, especially Horse and Oxen, the greatness and fatness of the Oxen will Countervail the Difference of the price, being about 5. 
lib. sterling.
 The Coun∣trey is not altogether leavell, as some o∣ther Countries here, but hath easie ry∣sings, and Vallies; my new experience cannot give you such an accompt as you may afterwards expect; but in generall the Countrey may satisfie any rationall ingenuous mind; yet I find there be Novices who knows no happiness save home, with a glass of Wine, and Como∣rads in a change House; tho there be no want here of more noble devertisments as hunting wild Beasts, wild Horses, and Deer; yesterday I did see severall droves of Deer, and wild Horses, as I did ride up in the Countrey. The Land which we were veiwing is a large plain, under the blew hills, watered with two or three little Rivers about 8. or 9. miles from 
New-Perth,
 four from 
Rariton-Ri∣ver
 Northward; the land downwards is all taken up by the Quitrenters of 
Pis∣catway, Woodbridge,
 or 
Elizabeth Town;
 there shall be nothing of care wanting in

 your affairs, and I do expect the like from you; I hope my Grand Mother is in health, wish her from me long life, and good health, and assure her, she wronged the Countrey in her opinion; present my love to all my Friends, I am,


Your affectionat Brother, 
Robert Fullertown.






A Letter from 
John Forbes
 Brother to the Laird of 
Barnla. Directed to Mr.
 James Elphingston 
of
 Lo∣gie 
Writter to His
 Majesties 
Signet, in
 Edinburgh, 
in
 Scotland.


From
 Amboy-point, 
alias
 New-Perth, in the Province of East-New Jersey, 
in
 A∣merica, 
March 
18. 1685.


Honoured Sir,


I having the occasion of this Bearer Mr. 
Drum∣mond,
 brother to 
John Drummond
 the Factor in 
Edinburgh,
 and who came Pas∣senger with me to this place from 
Scotland; I
 could not omit my duty in acquainting you by

 this line, of our safe arrival into 
America;
 tho being by the Divine Hand of Providence miraculousl
 preserved from the cruelty of the tempestuous Ocean, occasioned by a mighty storm of wind, (which happened upon the 
12.
 day of September last) and which blew so tem∣pestuously, that in short, it carried first away our Bolspret, and afterwards our whole three Masts, Flagstaff, and all by the board, before the Sailers were able to get them cut; it like∣wise took away the awning above our quarter∣deck, and left not so much as an yard of a rope above our heads, all which was done in the space of half an hour; We lay thus di∣stressed like a pitiful Wrack all that night (we having lost our Masts about 
12.
 of the clock in the day) and two dayes thereafter at the mer∣cie of the Waves, (which being like mountains occasioned by the great storm of wind,) with∣out hopes of recovery, being then above 
200.
 leagues from this land of 
America,
 tossing to and fro, expecting that each wave should over∣whelm us; Yet at last it pleased GOD to turn the storm into a calm; and having pre∣served all our lower Yairds, we made all haste and made Jury Masts of them; with the help whereof, (tho very unsufficient ones, to dryve forward the bulk of so great a Vessel) and of

 GODS miraculous Mercie and Providence; Who immediatly after we had put our ship in any mean posture for plying out her Voyage, was pleased to send us such a fair and moderate gale of wind, as brought us in sight of the 
Capes
 of 
Virginia,
 within 
15.
 dayes after or there a∣bouts, having never ceased for the whole time, till it brought us thither in safty; So we came within the 
Capes,
 and sailed up that great Navigable Bay, called 
Chessapeik bay,
 up through all 
Virginia
 up to 
Maryland,
 where we landed at the place where our ship was bound to take in her Tobacco, for her home∣ward Loadning. But being this Disabled, and not being able to ply out her Voyage to this place (where she ought to have landed us, we was necessitat to travel from thence by Land to this place, being upwards of 
200. English
 miles, and having left our Goods behind us, which was thereafter to come about in a 
Sloup
) we was necessitat to stay all Winter in this New and young Citie, where we had but very bad Commodation for Lodging, tho we knew of no want of Victuals of all sorts for mony, tho at a considerable dear rate; This hindered us long from our falling to work about our husbandries, which was a great loss of time to us. However when our sloup came about,

 (which did not hold the half of our goods; So that every man yet wants the half of his goods. But are dayly expecting them by the same 
Sloup
 which we fraghted thither back again. I went out to the Woods to the land we had pitched upon, with several others of our Coun∣teey men, such as 
Tho: Gordon,
 and Mr. 
Chat:
 his Brother, Brothers to the Laird of 
Straloch, Kinnabers
 two Sons, 
Robert
 and Mr. 
Thomas Fullertons, James Johnston
 of 
Spotswood,
 and 
John Barclay
 the Go∣vernours Brother, with some others; where we have all pitched near by one another, upon an piece of excellent land as we suppose; Whereof I judge I have not the worst, (if not the absolute best piece of land in all that Tract, for we had it all at our own choising and not by lots, this land lyes not on a Navigable River, but about 
5.
 or 
6.
 miles from 
Rariton
 river, which is Navigable up the nearest place to our Plan∣tations; For the best places of the Rivers are already inhabited by the old Planters of this Countrey who have been here some 
16.
 or 
18.
 years agoe. There are many places upon Na∣vigable Rivers yet untaken, and some very near this place also, which is intended to be the 
Metrapolis
 of this Province; But it is generally sandy barren land, and the best

 land is compute by all to be in the woods, back some several miles from the Navigable Rivers; So that we rather chuse land for profitablness, then for Conveniences of Towns, and pleasure allennarly. For there is aboun∣dance both of good and barren land in this Province; So that a man may chuse some for pleasure, and some for profit and Conveniency, for I intend to take up about 
4.
 or 
500.
 Acres where I have now setled; which is on a very pleasant place and good land, and whereof I have with two hands (not having had time to get many Servants away with me, having come away upon so short advertisement, and whereof I lost one at 
Maryland
 by sickness; so that now I have but two, and a Woman for dressing our Victuals and Cloaths, till I get more sent me this year) already cleared, or at least will clear; and have in Corn this year about 
8,
 or 
10,
 Acres of ground; tho it was prettie thick of stately tale Timber, and that since the 
26.
 of 
January,
 at which time, I went to the Woods. I have 
1000.
 Acres to take up at this time out of the first Division of 
10000.
 Acres ordained to be laid out to every Proprietor; I having bought a 
10.
 part, whereof my Brother is half sharer. I have al∣so taken up 
400.
 Acres of excellent fine land on

 
Rariton
 River, about 
20.
 miles above 
Am∣boy,
 whereon I design to set Servants, that I expect over this ensuing Summer; and so to divide our said parcels, and improve them for a year or two to the best advantage, and then to sell them off. If I design to come home, which we can do at good profite. Now for a general description of this Countrey, it is a fine place for those who have a good stock, to lay out upon a stock of Cattel of all sorts, which do greatly multiply here in a short time, and are sold at great rates, and may soon increase a stock greatly; or it is a good Countrey for an Industrious Frugal Man, that designes to fol∣low Husbandries closlie; providing he bring but some little stock to stock a Plantation with∣all; or it is very good for Tradsmen, as good Carpenters, Smiths, Tailors, &c. who will get large wages a day. But it is not a Coun∣trey for idle sluggish People; or those who cannot some times put too their hands, and en∣courage their Servants. It is a place that pro∣duces many fine Fruits, and Physick Herbs; The Woods are stored with wild Deers, Conies, Woulves, Boars, Racouns, some Bavers, and several other Beasts, which have fine Furrs. There is also abundance of Fowls, and Fish, and Water Fowl for the killing. The Timber

 are mostly Oak of all sorts, Walnut, Chesnut, whereof there are great abundance where I have planted, tho they bescarce so bigg as these that comes to 
Scotland,
 yet large as pleasant. Strawberries grow very thick upon the ground amongst the Trees; so that some places of the Woods are in Summer as it were covered with a red cloath. As I am certainly informed, Fruit Trees advance at a great rate in this place, for a Man may have an Orchard within a few years after the Planting, that may yeeld him a great quantitie of Cydar, which is the chief∣est of their drink in this Province, even amongst the meanest of the Planters; So that this Countrey if well improved, may make a fine place; for Nature has been defficient in nothing to it, either for pleasure or fruitfulness of the Soyl; So that a man being once settled two or three years in it, and having Corn, Cattle, and all things necessary for the use of man within himself. And the trouble and hard∣ship of his first settling by his hand; He may live as Comfortably here as in any place of the World; Providing he could dispence with the want of his Friends and Relations, and the sa∣tisfacti
n of their Companie, which is the loss 
I
 most regrate in this place; And thus having given yon a short description of the place, I

 cannot but in the next place, much regrate my misfortune, in not seeing you, and taking your advise before I came to this place; But my Resolution was so sudden, by the encouragement 
I
 received from the Chief Governour, and some of the Proprietors at 
Aberdeen;
 and having come in onely to see my Sister with my Brother; and by the many Gentlemen that were going a∣long in the ship, that I was induced to go along without so much as taking my leave of any of my Friends, save onely these that were then in Town; So that I came of resolution only to see the place, and to settle onlie if I fand conve∣niency. And having thus abruptly come away, when I came here, I designed not to return till I took some tryal of the Countrey, that at my re∣turn I might be the more able to give an true accompt thereof. I am not as yet of any deter∣mined resolution as to my staying for altogether as yet; but I resolved to stay this year, till I see what the ground produces; and to see how my endeavours take effect; and GOD willing, be that time, I may in some measure be resolved what to do, for then the greatest hardship will be over my head; and by that time I will have up an prettie good house, which is near already framed; whereas hitherto I have dwelt for the most part here in a 
Wigwam,


 (as we call them here) accounting all our hard∣ship in the beginning but short, in expectation of good success in the end. But however 
I
 may be resolved hereafter, I intend GOD willing, life and health serving to come home a start within this year or two, and see all my Friends; and apollogize the best manner I can, for my abrupt departure. Now having thus in some mea∣sure discharged a part of my dutyfull respects towards you by this line, in letting you know of my welfare and present condition; Earnestly desiring ye will favour me with a return by the first occasion; wherein I shall be glade to hear of your welfare, of your kind Ladies and Children (To whom and others my nearest Freinds and Relations, and Comarads, I desire the favour to be Kindly remembered, begging pardon for this trouble, and your patience to peruse this, when your leasure can permit; and afterwards to communicat it to my Ʋncle, 
Calder-hall
 and his Lady, or to my Cusins 
Harie Lockhart,
 or 
George Ersken,
 if they call for it; I not having time at present to write to them at length, as I have in haste done to you; I shall forbear to give you furder trouble at present; intreating you to remember me kindly to your Worthy and Oblidging

 Lady, and fine Children, and shall only sub∣scrive my self, as I sincerly am, and shall con∣tinue,


Sir,


Your most affectionat Cusin, and oblidged Servant, while 
John Forbes.






A Leter from 
Thomas Fullertoun,
 to his Brother the Laird of 
Kinnaber,
 dated from his new possession, in the plains of new 
Caesaria;
 January 
7. 1685.


Dear Brother,


YOu have above a transcript, con∣taining the principal Contents of an abrupt Letter, sent you three or four days after our arrivall; since that time we have possessed our Selves in the above mentioned plain 11. miles from 
New-Perth,
 four from 
Rari∣ton
 Northward; And 12. from 
Eliza∣beth-Town;
 we have the honour to be the first Inland planters in this part of 
Ameri∣ca,
 for the former Settlement have been by the 
River-sides,
 which are all possessed

 by the 
Quit-renters;
 the which I would have grudged at, had I not found the goodness of the Land, upwards will countervaill the trouble of transportati∣on to the water; As to the number and nature of these 
Quit-renters,
 they are about 2. or 300. Families, some civill and Discreet, others rude and Malcon∣tent with the late Purchassers. and need some thing of austerity to make them Complaisant; We have at present sharp frosts, and a good deall of Snow, three dayes of vitrefying frost, this winter, had not its match for cold these 16. years by gone, as the Inhabitants do in∣form us. Against this extream we have a good Defence of Fire, and felling of Trees, and might live warm enough, were we not forced to travell for recruit of Provisions. I reckon the winter to consist only of nights, for the 
Suns
 ap∣pearance by day moderateth the cold, and melts the Frost; I do not find the cold here to cause obstructions or coughs; the Air is ever transsparent; we have singular good stomachs, which if it con∣tinue as they say, it will require a fer∣tile Countrey when peopled; the water

 or temper of the Air keeps mens bellies moderatly looss; I cannot find it necessar to give any particular account of this Country with its product, because ye have had already many, and some very in∣genuous of this nature; besides I have not yet proof of all the 
seasons
 of the 
year;
 we have the Deer to walk the round nightly about our Lodge; this morning I shot a large Hart, and followed his bloody tract in the snow, above two miles before he dyed; I believe the fat∣est Deer in the world are here; we have made choise of your land next adjacent to mine, and have placed your Servants there, where they will settle if we find convenient, when the snow is away; this is all at present from,


Your affectionat Brother, 
Robert Fullertoun.






Another Letter from the same hand, dated the 
10.
 of 
March 1685.


Dear Brother,


BEfore the dispatch of the above∣written, of the date of this In∣stant, so that they may both go to∣gether;

 the Winter is now past, and we are providing ground for the seed, the Fields being bare, we can better distin∣guish where is good land; we have chos∣en our chief Plantation and yours two miles further up in the Countrey, closs under the blew Mountains, where you may reckon you have an Estate of 40. Chalders of Victual, with no more Wood thereon then your self would de∣sire and it might yeeld no less yearly presently, if it were all plenished after a little pains to root out the brush; that which wanteth Wood is open plain with short bushes, which we cut at the roots with a how; I wish the adjacent bounds were purchassed, and possessed by our friends, who have any design this way; for it is excellent land, the mould in the Province is Generall, is either like that I possessed at the 
Northwater,
 or more marly or clay; but all of it hath 3, 4, or five inches of black rotten mould up∣permost, I have not much more to trouble you with, but my respects and love to all Friends; if my Uncle or any other Friends send their Sons here, let them advert to this Maxim, 
A Gentle∣man

 that is not to work himself, must be well provided with a Stock,
 and this must be more or less, as he designs his Estate; I question not your care in my affairs; neither need you question in your con∣cerns, the care of,


Your affectionat Brother, 
Robert Fullertoun.






Abstract of a Letter from 
Charles Gordon,
 (Brother to the Laird of 
Straloch,
) to Doctor 
John Gordon,
 Doctor of Me∣dicine at 
Montrose;
 dated at 
Woodbridge,
 in 
East-Jersey, 7.
 of 
March, 1685.


Dear Brother,


I Design 100. pound 
Sterling
 for goods and servants, if Tradse-men and Ser∣vants knew they were better used here then in any Neighbouring Collonie, and that after their time is expired, they may gain a stock by their work, and live like some of your Lairds before they dye; they would not so much scrouple to come hither. There are a number of queries proposed by our Bro∣ther

 
Thomas
 to the 
Fullertouns,
 which I remember you desired me to answear, the most matteriall of them are answer∣ed, by this and my former Letters; I shall therefore superceed any long de∣scription of it, till I see it throw all the seasons of the year; in short, I see it pleasant, and furnished with all con∣veniencies of Nature, such as woods, grass, meadow; plenty of Fresh Springs, Creeks, and Rivers; I find it whole∣some, for I am not (blessed be God) troubled here with Defluction, headakes, and coughs as at 
Edinburgh,
 which is a great inducement for me or any vali∣tudinary man to stay in this Countrey: People come from 
Barbadoes,
 to 
York,
 and hither for their healths sake; if you design to come hither your self, you may come as a Planter, or a 
Merchant,
 but as a 
Doctor of Medicine
 I cannot advise you; for I can hear of no deseases here to cure but some Agues, and some cutted legs and fingers; and there are no want of 
Empericks
 for these already; I con∣fess you could doe more then any yet in 
America,
 being versed both in 
Chirurgery, Pharmacie;
 for here are abundance of

 curious Herbs, Shrubs, and Trees; and no doubt 
Mediciniall
 ones for making of drogs; but there is little or no Imploy∣ment this way; your Servants are set∣led on a pleasant plain beside the 
Fuller∣touns
 on a brook, called 
The Vine or Ce∣der Brooks;
 from a swamp of 
Cedars,
 from whence it Springs, and the mul∣tiplicity of Vines which grow upon it; all your friends and Countrey men here are in good health, blessed be GOD; This hath been the hardest Winter that was almost since ever there were 
English
 here. The sound betwixt 
Jersey
 and 
Staten-Island
 was frozen in 
January,
 that carts and horse went upon it; be∣twixt 
Martinmas
 and 
Christmas
 flying shours of snow with clear moderat frosts; in 
January
 deep snow and most bitter frosts, which ever I found, but did no wayes affect peoples bodies; the Air be∣ing ordinar clear and serene; about the 20. of 
January,
 the snow went off in∣sensibly; and about 3. weeks in 
February,
 it was almost like Summer in 
Scotland;
 the end of 
February
 and beginning of 
March
 for the most part rain and wind; Acquaint me the value of sweet-sent-Gumm,

 which flowes from the wood-Gum-trees of Sassafras, Sassapatella, and such other things as the Countrey naturally produceth; Be pleased to send me some Medicins for Agues, and ac∣cidentall cutts, or sores, in case my self or Servants be overtaken with them; I hope with the blessing of GOD, here to make a livlihood for my self; I intreat to hear what remarkable news, and revolu∣tions are either at home with you, or abroad, and so continues,


Your most affectionat brother, and humble Servant, 
Charles Gordon.






A Letter from 
Thomas Gordon
 Brother to the Laird of 
Straloch.
 For Mr. 
George Alexander Ad∣vocat,
 in 
Edin∣burgh.


From the 
Cedar-Brook
 of 
East-New-Jersey
 in 
America,
 
the 
16. Februa∣ry, 1685.


Dear
 Mr. 
George,


THis is the fifth time 
I
 have written to you since I came to 
America,
 some of which 
I
 am confident have

 come safe to your hands; so that I need not now resume them, for in them I gave you a full account of our danger by Sea, and travels by Land; and therefore I shall now proceed and begin where I left last, upon the eighteen day of 
November
 I and my Servants came here to the Woods, and 
8.
 dayes thereafter my Wife and Children came also; I put up a Wigwam in 
24.
 hours, which served us till we put up a better house, which 
I
 made 
24.
 foot long, and 
15.
 foot wide, containing a Hall and Citchen both in one, and a Chamber and a Study, which we put up pretty well (with Pallisadoes on the sides, and Shingles on the roof) against 
Yuill,
 on which day we entred home to it, and have been ever since, and still am clearing ground, & making fencing; So that 
I
 hope to have as much ground, clear∣ed, fenced, ploughed, and planted with 
Indian Corn
 in the beginning of 
May,
 (which is the best time for planting it) as will main∣tain my Family the next year, if it please GOD to prosper it; 
Robert Fullertoun
 and I are to joyn for a Plough this Spring, con∣sisting of 
4.
 Oxen and two Horse, but if the Ground were once broken up, two Oxen and two Horse, or 
4.
 Oxen alone, will serve; so that the next spring I intend (GOD willing)

 to have a Plough of my own alone; I intend to build a better House and larger, and to make a Kitchen of this I am in; which I will hardly get done this Summer, because I re∣solve to build upon my lot at 
New-Perth;
 I am settled here in a very pleasant place, u∣pon the side of a brave plain (almost free of woods) and near the water side, so that 
I
 might yoke a Plough where I please, were it not for want of Hay to maintain the Cattle which I hope to get helped the next year, for 
I
 have several pieces of Meadow near me. The first Snow we had was about the midst of 
November,
 & went twice away again, and about the end of the Moneth it came on, and continued with very great Frost and knee deep Snow till towards the end of January; And then the Snow dissolved pleasantly and calmly with the heat and influence of the Sun, and now I judge it as warm here as it will be with you in 
May,
 and much more pleasant, for we are not by far so much troubled with winds here as ye are in 
Scotland;
 the winter was generall very pleasant and calm, altho sometimes very vehement frost; I have spoken with several old Inhabitants here, who assure me they had not seen so hard a winter as this has been these 
16
 years bygone; and truely

 if I never see much worse I shall be very well pleased with this Countrie; we have great abundance of Deer, Turkies, 
&c.
 here about us; and as for the wild Beasts, and Natives (whereof 
I
 was greatly affrayed before I came here) 
I
 find no danger, trouble, inconveniency thereby at all; there are abundance of all sorts of Cattle in this Countrey to be had at very reasonable rates, I can buy a good Cow for 
4 lib. ster.
 a good Ox for 
5. lib. ster.
 and a good Horse for 
5,
 or 
6. lib. ster.
 a Hogg for 
20.
 ss. 
ster.
 a Bushell of Wheat for 
4.
 ss. 
ster.
 of Rye 
3.
 ss. 
6. d. ster.
 of 
Indian Corn
 for 
2.
 ss. 
6. d. ster.
 There are 
8.
 of us settled here within half a mile, or a mile of another, and about ten miles from the Town of 
New-Perth,
 or 
Amboy-point,
 so that I can go and come in a day either on foot or horseback. 
viz. Robert
 and 
Thomas Fullertouns, James Johnstoun
 of 
Spotswood, John Forbes, John Barclay,
 Doctor 
John Gordon
 his Servants, 
Andrew Alexander,
 and my Self; this is the most of what I can say of this Countrey at present, for I intend to write nothing but what I either see or know to be certainly true, and for my part I am very well pleased with this retired Countrey life; and 
I
 love this Countrey very well as yet; altho I hear of

 some of our Countrey men who are not, neither can it be expected, that any Countrey in the World will please the different humours of all Persons; blessed be GOD, my self and Wife and Children and servants have been and are still in good health which GOD continue; be pleased to communicate this to both yours, and my Friends and Acquaintances, because I have not leasure to writ at great length to e∣very one; and let these remember me to all others that give themselves the trouble to in∣quire for,


Your most humble and and oblidged Servant, 
Thomas Gordon.






A Letter from 
David Mudie
 of the date of the former, to Mr. 
Alexander Gairns,
 one of the Ministers at 
Edin∣burgh.


Sir,


I Did write to you a line upon my ar∣rival here, and my last the 12. of 
December,
 directed to 
John Graham,
 I desired him to let you see his letter, and my wifes, which would inform you

 as fully as I had written to you; since that time I have travelled throw the Coun∣trey, and informed my self of the condi∣tions thereof, which still does the better please me; the winter hath been exceed∣ing hard, and sharp, which hath much hindered me of work; yet I have clea∣red three acres of ground, to be an Or∣chard and a Garding, which lyes at the back of my house, which I am building of stone, sex good rooms off a Floor, Sellers all under the ground, two stories high, and garrets, at which I have had Massons since the first of 
February;
 and I hope will have it fully Finished this Sum∣mer; I have also built an horse-mill, the house is 32. foot wide, 40. foot long, the great wheel 30 foot Diameter, which I will have fully finished against the let∣ter end of this Moneth; it is told me, she may be worth 100. pound Sterling a year; I am sure she will be better then 50. clear money, this from,


Sir,


Your humble and obedient Servant, 
David Mudie.








A Letter from 
Thomas Fullertoun,
 Brother to the Laird of Kinnaber, to 
John Johnstoun
 Drogust, in 
Edin∣burgh,
 dated the 9. of 
March,
 1685. from 
East-Jersey.


Loving Commorad,


YOur Brother and I did write to you about three Moneths agoe, wherein we told you, that we were 9. weeks at sea, after we parted from 
Killebegs
 in 
Ireland,
 we were all very well; at Sea only we had more Stomachs then meat, to prevent which, if you or any other Commorad come this way, it will be prudence to fortifie themselves with good Cheese, Butter, Bisket, Caks, and Brandie; I believe you are cloyed with descriptions of the Countrey; And therefore this in brief, the reports you hear of it are generally true, some it may be are 
Hyperbolick
 in magnifying its Goodness, but as many are detractive from what it really deserves; There is abundance of good Land for the impro∣ving; Abundance of Swine and Cattle for the raising, Deers for killing, houses for the building: But some expect all

 these without pains. Your brother and I and our Servants have had good Veni∣son broth once a day, all this winter; to be short, if a man please to live a Countrey Life to labour Land, plant Or∣chards, and such like; I believe he cannot come to a place that will better answer his expectations, and when he hath a minde to be merry he will get a Punsh-house, and very good fellows. I hope in a little time I shall want nothing but the company of the prettie Girls, to all whom, who retain any remem∣brance of me, Let my service be re∣membered, & to all friends; I long exceed∣ingly to hear from you, but more to see you; we had many difficulties as our entrance, and in our first indea∣vours; But when you come, I hope they shall be prevented by,


Your affectionat Commorad, 
Thomas Fullertoun.








A Letter from 
James Johnstoun
 of 
Spots∣wood,
 to 
Alexander Henderson
 writ∣ter in 
Edinburgh;
 dated the 9. of 
March,
 1685. from his Plantation at the blew Hills in 
East-Jer∣sey
 in 
Ame∣rica.


Kind Commorad,


THese are to present my best wishes to you, and all Acquaintances, if any injoyment could make up the want of your Company, I should not complain here; what else can con∣tribute to profite or pleasure, being here to be had; neither is there any thing here to dis∣courage us; 
Quakers
 are not numerous; Wolves are so far from troubling men, that if a man shall lay a Glove upon a Carcass, or their prey, they will yell, but not come nigh it: You cannot come nigh a rattle-Snake, but they will rattle with their taile: whereby a man is advertised either to kill them, or go by them; they frequently charm Squirrels, or other little Beasts of the tops of the Trees unto their mouth, and that without touching them with their teeth; which if they did, they would

 poison themselves. There is a Flee by the salt Marishes most troublesome in Summer, but is not in the 
up-lands;
 I am mightily well satis∣fied with my coming over, neither do I think I could live again in 
Scotland.
 In the Sum∣mer there is plenty of Fruits, Peaches, Wal∣nuts, Chesnuts, Strawberries, and another berry like Currans; Vines as good as any where. I and all who have come over, have kept our health very well; our food hath for the most part been Venison; we got from the 
Indians
 which I like exceeding well. The 
Indian
 Corn, 
Indian
 Beans, and Pease, are pleasant Grains; we have very good fish∣ing; present my service to all Friends, and believe me to be ever,


Sir,


Your oblidged Servant, 
James Johnstoun.






Sir,


I Nothing question but by the perus∣all of the above written Letters, you are abundantly satisfied, that 
East-Jersey
 as to all things necessar will accommodat our present design; But if some 
(Malevolent Persons)
 who because

 they have not the courage nor resolut
 to adventure upon such an undertaking themselves, do cavill at the design in others, may insinuat that the greatest part of these Letters being written by Gentlemen; it may be presumed; in∣terest may oblidge them to represent things otherwise then they are, to the advantage of the place. This is easily answered, that there are severall per∣sons in this Town, who have been upon the place, who have perused all their Letters, and declare they find nothing contained therein, that they can contra∣dict; But as for a further proof thereof, I have thought fit to conclude with a letter from a Masson, sent over as a Servant, by Captain 
Hamiltoun,
 he being a plain Countrey-man, it is not very probable he can have any design; I had the Let∣ters from his said Master; as followeth,








A Letter from 
James Cockburn
 Masson, Servitour in 
East-Jersey
 in 
America,
 to Captain 
Hamiltoun,
 at the Ship-tavern in 
Edinburgh,
 dated the 12. of 
March,
 1685. to his Uncle 
James Broun,
 Shoe∣maker in 
Kelso.


UNcle these few Lines do testifie that I am well and in good health, bles∣sed be GOD for it, desiring to hear the like from you, for I am very well in this land of 
America;
 We lake neither wild nor tame to eat; the most part of our drink is 
Rumm, Cyder,
 and Beer; such as have these to sell, drives a very good Trade. I am working at my work daily, in good wea∣ther, and have very good incouragment among the old Planters; if my Sister 
Katharin
 in∣cline to come over, she may have good service here and 
Francie
 also; it is better to be bound some few years then come free except they have a good stock; it is dear living here the first year or two: The 
Indians
 are a harmless People and very kind to us, they are not a harie Peo∣ple as was said to us in 
Scotland;
 a Shoe∣maker would live very well here, if he bring any store of Leather with him, the Shoes are five or six shillings a pair; there is nothing discourages us more then want of Ministers

 here; but now they have agreed about their Stipends, there is one to be placed in 
New-Perth, Piscattaway, Woodbridge,
 and 
Elizabeth Town,
 they have a mind to bring them from 
Scotland; Uncle
 I hope you will let me know of your welfare; and how the Town is repaired again, and so I rest your 
Nephew
 untill death, 
John Cockburn






Another from the same hand to 
George Fae
 Masson in 
Kelso,
 from 
New-Perth
 in 
America, the
 20. of 
March,
 1685.


Cusin,


THese are to show you that I am in good health blessed be GOD for it, wishing to hear the like from you; We had a long Voyage, but we came very well to our Harbour in this place of 
America,
 within a stone-cast of my Masters Lott; it is upon the very Harbour; this Town is scituate betwixt two great Rivers, the one called 
Ra∣riton,
 the other 
Hudsons;
 It is a very plea∣sant Countrey and good for all Tradsmen; You was angry with me for coming away, but 
I
 re∣pent nothing of it my self, for 
I
 have abun∣dance of Imployment; I am at the building of a great stone house in 
New-Perth,
 with an∣other 
Scots-man.
 They build most with

 Timber, but are beginning to build with stone; there is as good stone in this Countrey as in 
Scotland,
 if they were at the pains to find it out; there are not many of our Trade in this Province; Any who hath a mind to come here will get good wages, these who have a mind to come here will do far better then in 
Scot∣land.
 I have no more desire to my 
Native-Countrey
 then I had never been in it; they had better be bound some years with a good Master, then come over frree, for it is dear living at first here. The Natives of this land are a harmless People, they do wrong no to no man, they are very kind to us: tell my sister if she please to come over, she may have good service here; Remember me to all Friends, and Comorads in 
Kelso,
 and so I rest your 
Cusing,
 while I live,


John Cockburn.






A Breif
 ADVERTISEMENT, 
Concerning
 East-New-Jersey, in AMERICA


THat whereas it hath upon solid grounds been by very Judicious Men, judged as well the advantage of the Na∣tion in generall, as of the particular Un∣dertakers, to have an Interest in some

 of the 
America
 Plantation; and that in Order to the Promoting this Design: There went in 
July
 last, 1684. a Vessel from 
Leith,
 with 160. 
Passengers,
 or thereby; another from 
Montross
 with 130. to 
East-New-Jersey,
 in which two Vessels were some Gentlemen and Mer∣chants, of very good Repute; the account of their safe Arrivall in eight weeks after their parting from 
Aberdeen,
 and their several Opinions of that Countrey, all agreeing anent the Fertility, pleasant∣ness, and Wholesomness thereof, as be∣ing stored with all things necessar for the comfortable Accommodation and Life of Man, being compared with former Relations of that Countrey, and both confirmed as Truth, by several Gentle∣men Merchants at present in 
Edinburgh,
 who have been there: The considerati∣on of this, as of the reasonable consti∣tution of the Government; the Model whereof hath been fully perused, and found satisfactory, hath ingaged many to pitch upon this Province of 
East-New-Jers
,
 as the most proper s
t for a Col∣lony of this Nation; The same being a Climat agreeable to our Constitutions,

 and a place fit for Trade; and of great Security, being as it were, the Centre of the English Plantations, and a place affording in plenty, all desirable Ac∣commodations.






And seeing the Approbation of these in Authority is absolutlie requisit, for countenancing and encouraging such a Design, without which, it cannot be expected, that any such Attempt can be made effectual; Mr. 
George Scot
 of 
Pitlo∣chie,
 resolving to settle his Family in that place, hath procured the following Pass,




By the Right Honourable Earl of 
Perth,
 Lord High Chancellor of 
Scotland, &c.


These are Permitting, and allowing Mr. 
George Scot
 of 
Pitlochie,
 with his Lady, Children, and Family; and such other Persons as he shall ingage to pass from this Kingdom, either by Sea or Land, to any of His 
Majesties
 Forraign Planta∣tions, providing such persons to be tran∣sported by him, be not declared Trai∣tors, Rebels, Fugitives; and that with∣out any Let, Impediment, or Mole∣station,

 from any person whatsoever; they alwayes behaving themselves peace∣ably, and according to Law.


Given at 
Edinburgh
 
the first of 
January,
 1685.


PERTH, 
Cancell.


For all Magistrates, Officers, and Souldiers within the Kingdom of 
Scotland,
 whom these do or may concern. 




By the perusual of the foresaid Passe, it will appear that such who intend to be concerned with the said
 Mr. George Scot, 
in prosecuting this Design, are hereby included as well as himself, they being qualified according to the contents there∣of,


And for his further encouragement, the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council have been pleased by an Act, to conde∣scend, That such as are under Bond, to compear before them when called, shall have up their said respective Bonds, up∣on their going with him, Whereby they are secured from the Apprehension of any Process to be in their absence, in∣tented against them upon that head,


Whereas there are several people in this Kingdom, who upon accompt of their not going

 that length, in conformity required of them, by the Law do live very uneasie; Who beside the other agreeable Accommodations of that place may there freely enjoy their own principles, without hazard or the least trouble; seeing there are Ministers of their own perswasion going along with the said Mr. 
George Scot,
 who by the fundamental Constitutions of that Coun∣trey, are allowed the free Exercise of their Ministry, such as Mr 
Archibald Riddel
 brother to sir 
John Riddel
 of 
Riddel,
 Mr. 
Thomas Paterson
 late Minister of 
Borth∣wick,
 and several other Ministers. It is here∣by signified to all who desire this Voyage, That the 
Henry
 and 
Francis
 of 
Newcastle,
 a Ship of 
350.
 Tun, and 
20.
 great Guns; 
Richard Hutton
 Master, is fraighted for the Transportation of these Families, and will take in Passengers and Goods at 
Leith,
 and Passangers at 
Montross,
 and 
Aberdeen,
 and 
Kirkwa
 in 
Orkney,
 and set sail thence for 
East-New-Jersey,
 against the 
20.
 day of 
July,
 GOD willing. It being resolved by these concerned in the frieght of the Vessel, to Accomodate such Passengers as may convenient∣ly done, without crouding themselves, and their Families; the inconveniencies of which they are fully resolved to avoid; as what is

 certainly very troublesome in such a Voyage. Su
h therefore who desires to go Passangers in this Vessel, may apply in time; between and the 
12.
 of 
May,
 to Mr. 
George Scot
 of 
Pitlochie,
 at his Lodging in 
Baillie Robi∣sons land,
 and at 
John Johnstoun
 Drogist at the sign of the 
Unicorn
 in 
Edinburgh,
 to Mr. 
John Gordon
 Colinston
 Doctor of Physick, at his 
dging in 
Montross;
 to 
James Armour
 younger Merchant in 
Glas∣gow;
 To 
Heugh Broun,
 or 
James Nisbet
 Marchant in 
Irvine;
 To Bail
ie 
Boyd
 in 
Kilmarnock;
 To Bailly 
M
 kenen;
 or 
Ralph Holland
 Merchant in 
Air;
 To Bailly 
Burt
 in 
Stirling;
 To Bailly 
James Gordon
 in 
Kirkcudbright; William Corbet
 A∣pothecary in 
Dumfries; Hery Elphingston
 Collector of His 
Majesties
 Customs
s. in 
A∣berdeen;
 whereby th
 may have their pas∣sage secured upon Rea
onabl
 Conditions in the said Vessel; And accompts of the Propositions to be made to them, in Order to the promoting effectually of that design, seeing after the num∣ber condesended upon, as to be carried with∣out Croud in the said Ship; there will be no more admitted there; and so such as incline to go the Voyage, may loss their passage in the said Vessel, delaying to secure their place in time.




FINIS.











