A description of New-England in general, with a description of the town of Boston in particular published by John Seller.
Seller, John, fl. 1658-1698.
Approx. 29 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 7 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2016-02 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A59133




Wing S2470



ESTC R14175





ocm 12428480




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A description of New-England in general, with a description of the town of Boston in particular published by John Seller.
Seller, John, fl. 1658-1698.
[12] p.   


London :


[s.n.],


1682.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
New England --  Description and travel.
New England --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
Boston (Mass.) --  Description and travel.
2009-12 
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images 
2014-09 
John Latta 
Sampled and proofread 
2014-09 
John Latta
Text and markup reviewed and edited 
2015-03 
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion 






S2470


12428480


61919












A DESCRIPTION OF NEW-ENGLAND IN GENERAL: With a DESCRIPTION of the Town of BOSTON IN PARTICULAR.


Published by
 JOHN SELLER.


NEw-England
 was first Discovered by 
John Cabota,
 and his Son 
Sebastian,
 in 
Anno Domini
 1514. A further Discovery was made by the Honourable Sir 
Wal. Rawleigh,
 in 
Anno
 1584. All which Part of 
America,
 that now bears the Names of 
New-Scotland, New-England, New-York, New-Jarsey, Mary∣land, Virginia,
 and 
Pensilvania,
 were known by one common Name, and called by the 
Indians, Wingandicoa.
 And in 
Anno
 1602. was further 




 The first 
English
 that Planted here, set down not far from 
Nara∣
anset
 Bay, and call'd their Colony 
Plimouth
-Colony.


The whole Country is bounded on the North with 
Nova Scotia,
 and other unknown Countryes of the 
Indians;
 on the West with 
Hudsons
 River, and 
New-York
 Colony; on the South and East, with the great Western Ocean, and is now divided into these three great Colonies, 
viz. Plymouth, Massachusets,
 and 
Connecticot.


On the West Coast of 
New-England,
 by the Sea-side, are many 
En∣glish
 Towns; as first 
Westchester,
 about 20 Miles from 
New York:
 To the Eastward of this is 
Greenwich,
 then 
Chichester, Fairfield, Strat∣ford, Milford,
 all Sea Towns; Eastward of 
Milford,
 is 
Newhaven, Brainford, Guilford,
 and then 
Connecticot
 River, on which is situated 13 Towns; at the Mouth of the River on the West-side, is the Lord 
Say,
 and 
Brooks
 Fort, called 
Say-Brooks
-Fort; beyond this North∣ward, is the Town of 
Middletown, Wethersfield, Hartford;
 about it low Land, well stored with Meadows, and very Fertile; then 
Wind∣sor,
 and 
Pinsers
 House, all which are situated on the West-side of the River: On the East-side of the River are situated these Towns, 
Had∣ley, Harfield, Dearfield, Springfield,
 which Towns are all in the Ju∣risdiction of the 
Massachusets
 Colony; the last of which hath been infamous, by reason of Witches therein; 
Pistol-Point
 is also situated on the East-side of the River, and is in 
Plymouth
 Colony; 
New-Lon∣don
 is seated by a small River, called 
Pequet
 River, which lies to the Eastward of 
Connecticot
 River.


From 
Connecticot
 River to 
Hudsons
 River, lieth 
Long
-Island, stretch∣ing it self 120 miles, but is but narrow, and about 16 miles from the Main; the considerablest Town upon it is 
Southampton,
 built on the South-side of the Island, toward the East end: Opposite to this on the North-side is 
Feversham,
 West-ward is 
Ashford, Huntington,
 &c. The Island is well stored with Sheep and other Cattle, and Corn, and is reasonable Populous. At the East-end lieth three small Islands cal∣led 
Plumb
-Island, 
Shelter
-Island, and 
Gardiners
-Island, and due East from the Point of 
Long
-Island, lieth 
Block
-Island, and near the Main lieth 
Fishers
 Island.


The next place of Note on the Main, is 
Narragansets
 Bay, within which Bay lieth 
Rhode
 Island, which by the 
Bostoners
 is uncharita∣ble 






Christians, besides 
Quakers;
 who are forc't to flie from their violent Persecutions, for no other Reason, but because they dissent from them in their Worship; as witness their Imprisonments, Fines, Whippings, and Banishments.


Further Eastward lieth 
Monument
 Bay, and at the entrance of which, on the East-side, lieth 
Elizabeth
 Islands, and to the Eastward of them lieth 
Martins
 Vineyard, and to the Eastward of that lieth 
Nantoket
 Island. Now we strike off from these Islands to the Main, and arrive at the Wood-land of 
Monomoy,
 and from thence to Cape 
Cod,
 (so called at first by Captain 
Gosnold,
 and his Company, because they took much of that Fish there.) The first place to be taken notice of on the South-side of the Cape, is 
West's
 Harbour; the first Sea-Town, 
Sandwich:
 Doubling the Cape, we come now into 
Barnstable
-Bay, on the West whereof is 
New-Plymouth
 Bay, the first 
English
 Co∣lony that took firm Possession in this Country, which was in 1620. and the first Town therein, was built nine years before any other Town; since which time of the first Building thereof, there hath been the increasing of forty Churches in this Colony, but many more in the rest; and the Towns have increased since to the number of 120. for the most part near the Sea-Coasts: The other Towns of Note in this Colony, are 
Green
 Harbour, to the Eastward of 
Plymouth,
 to∣wards the Point of the Cape, therefore somewhat Inaccessible by Land: here is excellent Timber for Shipping; then 
Yarmouth, Rehoboth, Bridgwater, Warwick, Taunton, Eastham,
 by the 
Indians
 called 
Namset.


The first Town Northwest from 
Green
 Harbour, is 
Sittuate,
 in the Jurisdiction of the 
Massachusets
 Colony; more Northward of 
Sit∣tuate,
 is 
Conchusset,
 and 
Hull,
 a little Town lying open to the Sea; from thence we come to 
Merton
 Point, over against which is 
Pulling
 Point. Upon 
Mertin
 Point (which is on the Larboard side) is a Town called 
Nautascot,
 which is two Leagues from 
Boston,
 where Ships commonly come to an Anchor. 
Pulling
 Point is so called, be∣cause the Boats are haled against the Tide, which is very strong; it is the usual Channel for Boats to pass into 
Massachusets
 Bay.


There is an Island on the South-side of the Passage containing eight Acres of Ground, upon a rising Hill. Within this Island is mounted a Castle, commanding the Entrance; no stately Edifice, nor

strong, built with Brick and Stone; kept by a Captain, under whom is a Master-Gunner, and others.


The Bay is large, made by many Islands; the chief is 
Deer
-Island, which is within a flight shot of 
Pulling
 Point: Great store of Deer were wont to swim thither from the Main; then 
Bird
 Island, 
Glass
-Island, 
Slate
-Island, the 
Governours Garden,
 where the first Apple-Trees in the Country were Planted, and a Vineyard; then 
Round
-Island, and 
Noddles
-Island not far from 
Charles
-Town; most of these Islands lie on the Northside of the Bay.


The next Town to 
Nautascot,
 on the South-side of the Bay is 
Wissa∣gusset,
 a small Village, about three miles from Mount-
Wolleston;
 about this Town the Soil is very Fertile,


Within sight of this is Mount-
Wolleston,
 or 
Merry
-Mount, called 
Massachusets
 Fields; where 
Chicatabat,
 the greatest 
Sagamore
 of this Country, lived before the Plague. Here the Town of 
Braintree
 is seated, no Boat nor Ship can come near it, here is an Iron-Mill; to the Westward of this Town is 
Naponset
 River.


Six miles beyond 
Braintree,
 lieth 
Dorchester,
 a Frontier Town, plea∣santly seated, and of large Extent into the main Land, well Watered with two small Rivers; her Body and VVings fill'd somewhat well with Houses, to the number of 200 and more, beautified with rare Orchards and Gardens; having also plenty of Corn-Land, and store of Cattle, counted the greatest Town heretofore in 
New-England,
 but now gives way to 
Boston;
 it hath a Harbour to the Northward for Ships.


A mile from 
Dorchester,
 is the Town of 
Roxbury,
 a fair and hand∣some Country-Town, the Streets large, the Inhabitants Rich, reple∣nished with Orchards and Gardens, well watered with Springs and small Freshuts, a Brook runs through it, call'd 
Smelt
-River; a quar∣ter of a mile to the North-side of the Town, runs 
Stony
-River. It is seated in the bottom of a shallow Bay, but hath no Harbour for Ship∣ping, only Boats come to it; it hath store of Land and Cattle.






A Description of the Town of BOSTON.


IN the bottom of 
Massachusets
 Bay, is 
Boston,
 and is the Metropolis of 
Massachusets
 Colony, or rather of the whole Country, situated upon a Peninsula, about four miles in Compass; almost square, and invironed with the Sea, saving one small Isthmus, which gives ac∣cess by Land to other Towns: On the South-side, the Town hath two Hills of equal height, on the Frontier part thereof next the Sea; the one well Fortified on the Superficies with some Artilery mounted commanding any Ship as she Sails into the Harbour, within the still Bay: The other Hill hath a strong Battery built with whole Tim∣ber, and fill'd with Earth. At the descent of the Hill, in the extream∣est part thereof, betweeen these two strong Arms, lies a large Cove or Bay, on which the chiefest part of the Town is built; to the North∣west is a high Mountain, that out-tops all with its three rising Hills on the Summit, called 
Tramount;
 this is furnished with a Beacon, and great Guns, (as may be seen in the Prospect of the Town, hereunto Annexed:) from hence you may over-look all the Islands in the Bay, and descry such Ships as are upon the Coast. The Houses are, for the most part, raised upon the Sea-Banks, and are Wharfed out with great Industry and Cost, many of them standing upon Piles, close together on each side, as in 
London,
 and furnished with many fair Shops; their Materials are Brick, Stone, Lime, handsomly con∣trived, with three Meeting-Houses, and a Town-House built upon Pillars, where the Merchants may Confer; in the Chambers above, they keep their Monthly Courts. Their Streets are many and large, Paved with Pebble-stone; and the South-side adorned with Gardens and Orchards. The Town is Rich and very Populous, much fre∣quented by Strangers; here is the Dwelling-House of their Governour.


On the Northwest and Northeast, two constant Fairs are kept for daily Traffique thereunto: On the South there is a small but pleasant Common, where the Gallants a little before Sun-set walk with their

Marmalet Madams, (as they do here in 
Moor-fields
) till the Nine-a-Clock Bell rings them Home to their respective Habitations; when presently the Constables walk their Rounds to see good Orders kept, and to take up loose People.


Two miles from the Town, at a place called 
Muddy
 River, the Inhabitants have Farms, to which belongs rich Arrable Grounds and Meadows, where they keep their Cattle in the Summer, and bring them to 
Boston
 in the VVinter. The Harbour before the Town is filled with Ships and other Vessels, for most part of the Year.


Hingham
 is a Town situated upon the Sea-Coasts, Southeast of 
Charles
 River; there is great store of Timber, Deal-boards, Masts for Ships, white Cedar, and Fish is here to be had.


Dedham,
 an Inland Town, ten miles from 
Boston,
 in the County of 
Suffolk,
 well watered with many pleasant Streams, and abounding with Garden-Fruit; the Inhabitants are Husbandmen, more than a hundred Families, having store of Cattel and Corn.


The Town of 
Waymouth
 lies open to the Sea, on the East Rocks and Swamps, to the Southward good store of Deer, Arrable Land and Meadows.


On the North-side of 
Boston,
 flows 
Charles
-River, which is about six fathom deep; many small Islands lie to the Bay-ward, and Hills on either side of the River, a very good Harbour; here may forty Sail of Ships ride. The Passage from 
Boston
 to 
Charles
-town, is by a Ferry, worth forty or fifty Pound a year, and is a quarter of a mile over: the River 
Mistick
 runs through the North-side of the town, and by its near approach to 
Charles
 River, in one place makes a very narrow Neck, where stands most part of the town. The Market∣place not far from the Water-side, is surrounded with Houses, forth of which issue two Streets, orderly built and beautified with Orchards and Gardens; their Meeting-House stands on the North-side of the Market, having a little hill behind it; there belongs to this town 1200 Acres of good Arrable Land, 400 Head of Cattel, and as many Sheep: these also provide themselves Farms in the Country.


Higher up in 
Charles
 River Westward, is a broad Bay, two miles over, into which runs 
Stony
 River, and 
Muddy
 River.


Towards the S. W. in the middle of the Bay, is a great Oyster∣bank: towards the N VV is a Creek: upon the shore is situated

the Village of 
Medford,
 it is a mile and half from 
Charles
 Town.


At the bottom of the Bay, the River begins to be narrow, half a quarter of a mile broad; by the North-side of the River, is 
New
-Town, three miles from 
Charles
-Town by Land, a League and a half by Water, it was first intended for a City; the neatest and best compacted Town, having many fair Structures and handsome con∣trived Streets, the Inhabitants rich; they have many hundred Acres of Land paled with one common Fence, a mile and a half long, and store of Cattle: It is now called 
Cambridg,
 where is a Colledg for Students, of late; it stretcheth from 
Charles
 River to the Southern part of 
Merimach
 River.


Half a mile thence, on the same side of the River, is 
Water
 Town, built upon one of the Branches of 
Charles
 River, very fruitful and pleasant; Springs of a large extent, with many small Rivolets, the Inhabitants live scattered: Within half a mile is a great Pond, divided between the two Towns. A mile and a half from the Town is a Fall of Fresh-waters, which conveigh themselves into the Ocean through 
Charles
-River; a little below the Fall of VVaters, they have a Wair to catch Fish, wherein they take store of Bass, Shads, Alwives, Frost-fish, and Smelts; in two Tides they have gotten 100000 of these Fish. They have store of Cattel and Sheep, and near upon 2000 Acres of Arrable Land. Ships of small burden may come up to these Towns.


We will now return to 
Charles
 Town again, where the River 
Mi∣stick
 runs on the North-side of the Town, where on the N. West-side of the River is the Town of 
Mistick,
 three miles from 
Charles
 Town by Land, a League and a half by Water, a scattered Village. At the head of this River are great and spacious Ponds, full of Alwives in the Spring-time; the notedst place for this sort of Fish. On the West of this River is Merchant 
Craddocks
 Plantation, where he hath Impa∣led a Park.


Upon the same River, and on the North-side, is the Town of 
Malden.


The next Town is 
Winnisimet,
 a mile from 
Charles
 Town, the Ri∣ver only parting them; this is the last Town in the still Bay of 
Massachusets.


Without 
Pulling
-Point, six miles N. E. from 
Winnisimet,
 is 
Caw∣gust,
 or 
Sagust,
 or 
Sangut,
 now called 
Linn,
 situated at a bottom of

a Bay near a River; which upon the breaking up of Winter, with a furious Torrent, vents it self into the Sea. The Town consists of more than one hundred dwelling-Houses; their Church being built on a Level (undefended from the N. W. wind) is made with steps descending into the Earth: Their Streets are strait, and but thin of Houses; the People most Husbandmen. At the end of a sandy Beach, is a Neck of Land called 
Nahant,
 it is six miles in Circumference. 
Black William,
 an 
Indian
 Duke, out of his Generosity, gave this to the 
English.
 At the Mouth of the River runs a great Creek into a great Marsh, called 
Rumney Marsh,
 which is four miles long, and a mile broad: This Town hath the benefit of Minerals of divers kinds, Iron, Lead, one Iron-Mill, store of Cattel, Arrable Land and Meadow.


To the Northward of 
Lin,
 is 
Marvil,
 or 
Marble
 Head, a small Harbor, the shore Rocky, upon which the Town is built, consisting of a few scattered Houses: Here they have Stages for Fishermen, Orchards and Gardens; half a mile in the Land good Pastures and Arrable Land.


Four miles North of 
Marble
 Head, is situated 
New-Salem
 (whose Latitude is forty two degrees, thirty five minutes) upon a Plain, having a River on the South, and another on the North side; it hath two Harbours, 
Winter
 Harbour, and 
Summer
 Harbour, which lieth within 
Darbies
 Fort: They have store of Meadow and arrable Land. In this Town are some very rich Merchants.


Upon the Northern Cape (that is) Cape 
Ann,
 a place of Fishing, is situated the Town of 
Glocester,
 where the 
Massachusets
 Colony first set down, but 
Salem
 was the first Town built in that Colony; here is a Harbour for Ships.


To the Northward of Cape 
Ann,
 is 
Wonnasquam,
 a dangerous place to Sail by in stormy Weather, by reason of the many Rocks, and foaming Breakers.


The next Town that presents it self to view, is 
Ipswich,
 situated by a fair River, whose first rise is from a Lake of Pond, twenty miles up, breaking its course through a hideous Swamp for many miles, a Harbour for Bears; it issueth forth into a large Bay (where they fish for Whales). Due East, over against the Island of 
Shoals,
 a great place of Fishing; the Mouth of that River is barr'd; it is a good Haven-Town: Their Meeting-House, or Church, is beautifully built, store of Orchards and Gardens, Land for Husbandry and Cattel.




 
Wenham,
 is an Inland Town, very well watered; lying between 
Salem
 and 
Ipswich,
 consisteth most of Men of Judgment and Expe∣rience, in 
re Rustica;
 Well stored with Cattel. At the first rise of 
Ipswich
 River, in the highest part of the Land, near the Head-springs of many Rivers, 
Shashin
 is one of the most considerable Branches of 
Merrimach
 River. And also at the rise of 
Mistick
 River, and Ponds, full of pleasant Springs, is situated 
Wooburn,
 an Inland Town, four miles square, beginning at the end of 
Charles
-Town bounds. Six miles from 
Ipswich,
 N. E. is 
Rowley;
 most of the Inhabitants have been Clothiers.


Nine miles from 
Salem,
 to the Northward, is 
Agowamine,
 the best and most spacious place for a Plantation, being 20 Leagues to the Northward of 
New Plymouth.


Beyond 
Agowamine,
 is situated 
Hampton,
 near the Sea-Coasts, not far from 
Marrimach
-River; this Town is like a 
Flower de luce,
 having two Streets of Houses wheeling off from the main Body thereof; they have great store of Salt, Marshes, and Cattel. The Land is fertile, and full of Swamps and Rocks. Eight miles beyond 
Ago∣wamine,
 runneth the delightful River 
Merrimach,
 or 
Monnumach,
 it is Navigable for twenty miles, and well stored with Fish; upon the Banks grow stately Oaks, excellent Ship Timber, not inferiour to our 
English.


On the South-side of 
Merrimach
 River, twelve miles from 
Ipswich,
 and near upon the wide venting streams thereof, is situated 
Newbury;
 the Houses are scattering, well stored with Meadow, upland and ar∣rable, and about 400 Head of Cattel.


Over against 
Newbury,
 lies the Town of 
Salisbury,
 where a con∣stant Ferry is kept, the River being here half a mile broad, the Town scatteringly built.


Hard upon the River of 
Shashin,
 where 
Marrimach
 receives this and the other Branch into its Body, is seated 
Andover,
 stored with Land and Cattel.


Beyond this Town by the Branch of 
Merrimach
 River, called 
Shashin,
 lieth 
Haverhil,
 a Town of large extent, about ten miles in length, the Inhabitants Husbandmen; this Town is not far from 
Salisbury.


Over against 
Haverhil,
 lieth the Town of 
Malden,
 which is alrea∣dy mentioned.


In a low Level, upon a fresh River, a branch of 
Merrimach,
 is seat∣ed

Concord,
 the first Inland Town in 
Massachusets
 Patent; well stored with Fish, Salmon, Dace, Alewive, Shad, 
&c.
 abundance of fresh Marsh and Cattel; this place is subject to bitter Storms.


The next Town is 
Sudbury,
 built upon the same River where 
Con∣cord
 is, but farther up: To this Town likewise belongs great store of fresh Marshes, arable Land, and many Cattel. It lieth low by reason whereof it is much endamaged with Floods.


In the Centre of the Country, by a great Ponds side, and not far from 
Wooburn,
 is situated 
Reading,
 it hath two Mills, a Saw-Mill, and a Corn-Mill; it is well stockt with Cattel.


The Colony is divided into four Counties, the first is 
Suffolk,
 to which 
Dorchester, Roxbury, Waymouth, Hingham, Dedham, Brain∣tree, Sittuate, Hull, Nantascot, Wissaguset.
 The second County is 
Middlesex,
 to this belongs 
Charles
-Town, 
Water
-Town, 
Cambridge, Concord, Sudbury, Wooburn, Reading, Malden, Mistich, Medford Win∣nisimet,
 and 
Marble-Head.
 To the third, which is 
Essex,
 belongs 
New-Salem, Lin, Ipswich, Newbury, Rowley, Glocester, Wenham,
 and 
An∣dover.
 The fourth County is 
Norfolk,
 to this belongs 
Salisbury, Hampton,
 and 
Haverhil.


In the Year 1628. Mr. 
John Endicot,
 with a number of 
English
 Peo∣ple, set down by Cape 
Ann,
 at that place called afterwards 
Glocester,
 but their abiding place was at 
Salem,
 where they built a Town in the Year 1639. and there they gathered their first Church, consisting but of 70 Persons, but afterwards increast to 43 Churches, in joynt Communion with one another; and in those Churches were about 7750 Souls. Mr. 
Endicot
 was chosen their first Governour.


The 12th of 
July,
 1630. 
John Wenthorp,
 Esquire, and the Assistants arrived with the Patent for the 
Massachusets.
 The Passage of the Peo∣ple that came along with him in ten Vessels, came to 95000 Pound. The Swine, Goats, Sheep, Neat, Horses, cost to Transport 12000 Pound, besides the price they cost them: Getting Food for the Peo∣ple, till they could clear the Ground of Wood, amounted to 45000 Pounds. Nails, Glass, and other Iron-work for their Meeting and Dwel∣ling-Houses, 13000 Pound. Arms, Powder, Bullet and Match, toge∣ther with their Artillery, 22000 Pound; the whole Sum amounts unto One hundred ninety two thousand Pounds. They set down first upon 
Noddles
-Island, afterwards they begin to build upon the

Main, in 1637. There were not many Houses in the Town of 
Boston
 amongst which vvere tvvo Houses of Entertainment, called 
Ordina∣ries;
 into vvhich if a Stranger vvent, he vvas presently followed by one appointed to that Office, who vvould thrust himself into his company uninvited; and if he called for more Drink than the Offi∣cer thought in his judgment he could soberly bear avvay, he vvould presently countermand it, and appoint the Proportion, beyond vvhich he could not get one drop.


The Patent vvas granted to Sir 
Henry Rosewel,
 Sir 
John Young, Thomas Southcoat, John Humphrey, John Endicot,
 and 
Simon White∣comb,
 and to their Heirs, Assigns and Associates for ever: These took to them other Associates, as Sir 
Richard Saltonstal; Isaac John∣son, Samuel Aldersey John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowel, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright, Samuel Vasel, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Goff, Thomas Adams, John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vasel, William Pin∣chon,
 and 
George Foxcroft. Matthew Craddock
 vvas ordained and con∣stituted Governour by Patent, and 
Thomas Goff
 Deputy-Governour of the said Company, the rest Assistants.


That part of 
New-England
 granted to these forementioned Gentle∣men, lieth and extendeth betvveen the great River 
Merrimach,
 and the often frequented 
Charles
 River, being in a bottom of a Bay called 
Massachusets
 Bay, and also those Lands vvithin three miles to the South part of 
Massachusets
 Bay, and all those Lands vvhich lie vvithin the space of three 
English
 miles to the Northvvard of the River 
Mer∣rimach,
 or to the Northvvard of any and every part thereof, and all Lands whatsoever vvithin the Limits aforesaid, North and South in Latitude; and in Breadth and Length and Longitude of and vvithin all the Main Land there, from the 
Atlantick
 and Western Sea and O∣cean on the East part, to the South Sea on the West part; and all Lands, Grounds, Places, Soils; Woods and Groves, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Fishings, and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying within the foresaid Lands, Limits, and every Part and Parcel thereof, and also all Islands lying in 
America,
 in the Seas aforesaid, or either of them on the Western and Eastern Coasts, or part of the said Tracts of Lands. Also all Mines and Minerals, as well Royal of Gold, Silver, 


holden of the East Mannor of 
Greenwich,
 in 
Com. Kent,
 in free and common Soccage, yielding and paying to the King the fifth part of the Ore of Gold and Silver, which shall be found at any time.


This Colony of the 
Massachusets,
 is a Body Corporated and Poli∣tick in Fact, by the Name of the Governour and Company of the 
Massachusets
 Bay in 
New-England.


That there shall be one Governour, and Deputy Governour, and eighteen Assistants, of the same Company.


That the Governour, and Deputy-Governour, Assistants, and all other Officers, to be chosen from amongst the Freemen the last Wednes∣day in 
Easter
 Term yearly, in the General Court.


The Governour to take his Corporal Oath, to be true and Faithful to the Government, and to give the same Oath to the other Officers.


To hold a Court once a Month, & any seven to be a sufficient Court.


And that there shall be four General Courts kept in Term time, and one great General and Solemn Assembly, to make Laws and Ordinances; so that they be not Contrary and Repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm of 
England.


In the Year 1646, they drew up a Body of their Laws, for the well ordering their Commonwealth, as they not long since termed it.


The Military part of their Commonwealth is Governed by one Major General, and three Serjeant-Majors. To the Major General belongeth the Town of 
Boston,
 to the Serjeant-Majors belongs the four Counties, but with submission to the Major-General. The first Serjeant-Major chosen for the County of 
Suffolk
 was Major 
Gibbins;
 for the County of 
Middlsex,
 Major 
Sedgwick;
 for the County of 
Essex
 and 
Norfolk
 Major 
Dennison.












These and all other Maps, Maritime Charts, Draughts, Ma∣thematical Books and Instruments, both of Sea or Land, are to be Sold by 
John Seller,
 at his House at the Her∣mitage in 
Wapping,
 and at his Shop at the West Side of the 
Royal Exchange
 in 
LONDON.
 1682.









