Sad nevvs from the seas being a true relation of the losse of that good ship called the Merchant Royall which was cast away ten leagues from the lands end on Thursday night being the 23 of Septemb. last, 1641
Approx. 7 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 4 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A59233




Wing S258



ESTC R17137





ocm 12863291




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Sad nevvs from the seas being a true relation of the losse of that good ship called the Merchant Royall which was cast away ten leagues from the lands end on Thursday night being the 23 of Septemb. last, 1641
[6] p.   


[London? :


s.n.]


1641.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Merchant Royal (Ship)
Marine accidents --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-12
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-12
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






S258


R17137


12863291


94707












Sad Nevvs from the Seas.


Being a true relation of the losse of that good Ship called the 
Merchant Royall,
 which was cast away ten leagues from the Lands end, on Thursday night, being the 23. of Septemb. last, 1641. having in her a world of treasure, as this story follow∣ing doth truly relate.




depiction of ship




Printed in the yeare 1641.














Sad newes from the Seas.


T
Hat Sayling is an art that is not to be undervalued by any, is confest; that Kingdomes and Countries are inri∣ched thereby; that what other lands yeeld, this hath i
 by this art as well as they; that by this art gold and silver is conveyed unto us from the Indies, fine Silks and Sattins from another climate, spices and fragrant smels from an∣other climate, and this by interchange, which this art benefits both Kingdomes, Nations, and Coun∣tries, and this by that famous admired art of Sailing, and brought to passe, now let us leave this art so worthy of prayse, and looke a while on an object of sorrow, and waile our brothers losses as our owne.


The Royall Merchant (or Merchant Royall) some foure yeares since sailed out of this land as a ship hired here for the King of Spains imployment in the West India, she sayled out in company with other ships, but when come into Cales the Captain was by some opposition like to be put by, and was a while dismissed, so that giving over his hopes of the West India imployment, received fraught, and from Cales sayled into the Mediterranean unto the Island of Majorcke, one of the King of Spaines Islands: in the meane, or about the time, S. Galleons

being bound for the West India, one of the
 
 a small fire was whole burned downe with the wa∣ter, and loosed from her cables, did her selfe dis∣charge all her brasse Ordnance, and burned 3. dayes and 3. nights under Pountal, most part of the goods were ashore, not yet loaden aboord; in place of which Galleon this Royall Merchant was thought (as being a ship they might command, and of great burthen) to bee a fit vessell to take aboord the first Galleons goods or loading; a Mandate from the King of Spaine commanded this Royall Merchant from her Majorck voyage to make sayle for Cales with all expedition, and to stand in place of the bur∣ned Galleon, tooke aboord her goods, and sayled with the other 7. Galleons in company into the West or Spanish Indies: the Kings commands o∣bey'd, they proceed, and this English ship caried most of the best Spanish governours, commanders, and gentry, whereby it redounded great benefit un∣to the very meanest of the English, both in sayling thither, traffiquing there, and fraughted richly home with great numbers of rich passengers, which with rich fraught made the English a great voyage. Some dangers they past, but safely arived in Cales, where they continued afore they could prepare themselves for England at least 7. or 8. months, at end of which they disimbogu'd for England in company of Captaine 
Legend
 of Dover, in the Do∣ver Merchant, a lusty stout ship of 400. tunnes, and 28. cast peeces of Ordnance; they sayled together, the Royall Merchant in stresse of foule weather

sprung a leake in the bottome of the ship, to that the saylers were forced to tend the pumpe day and night: Captaine 
Legend
 not liking Captaine 
Lim∣bryes
 course, with joynt consent shaped another course some pount in variation, so that they did not absolutely part suddenly, but glide sidingly from each other night came on, and foule weather, they plyed their two chaine pumps, in midst of which labour both the pumpe chaines broke at once, and fell into the Wells, so that before they could any way recover and mend the chaines, they bad got 4. foot water in the hold. They labour at their pumps with great strength, but could not prevaile over what was got in, but did keepe her in that e∣state, nor more nor lesse diminishing.


They being ouerlaboured could hardly pumpe more to any purpose; some of the Sea-men to the number of 30. got into the long boat, cut her off, and called to the Captaine to save himselfe, he re∣fused it, and would have a Merchant, his passenger, to save himselfe, he answered hee had lived long in Spaine, and with great trouble got up 10000. pound, and now would stay by it, for his life hee valued not, the Captaine answered him it was all one whether he went in the boate or no, for they were in no better estate then those left aboord, having in the boat no oares, masts, sailes, or any thing to keepe the boate afar the Sea, and must needs perish undoubtedly: being thus in despaire they espied a light at which they shot off 30. piece of ordnance, it prooved to bee Captaine 
Legend


who on consideration of the Royall Merchants distresse returned to helpe them; they observing their danger and the ship sinking, sent forth then long boate, which at divers times saved the men, but durst not come neare the ship, so that the men to save their lives were faine to sling themselves in tackles, and so swing from the sinking ship into the boate, who caught hold of their cloathes with their boate hooks; the Captaine was the last, who would not forsake her untill shee was sunke even unto her Cook-roome ports, and then got into the boate: 7. men that went downe on the lower deck, (or orlope) to breake up a chest of gold, never came up the ship suncke so fast on them. This ship was 700. tuns, 36. cast peeces of ordnance, 80. seamen, besides passengers, she had in her 300000. pound in ready boloigne, 100000. pound in gold, and as much value in Iewels, besides each mans adven∣ture, and the whole Cargason, or rich lading of the ship, all which was sunke in the sea, nothing saved. The Captaine on his landing repaired to his house and family, with a hankercher about his neck, and will not be seene or spoken with (as yet) by any his griefe is so great: his name is Captaine 
Iohn Limbry
 living neere Ratcliffe Crosse.




FINIS.







